                               A 2 S ? /2 /Z /f

Zcif) /sr

       CaP^i OoCo/ne^U ~~SCc
    V

                               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                                            (as amended)
           An Act to make provision for safety at sports stadia and other sports
           grounds.

                                                        Amendments
                                                        by virtue
                                                        of Fire
                                                        Safety and      Safety of
                                                        Safety of       Sports
                                                        Places of       Grounds
                                                        Sport Act       Regulations
                                                        1987            1987

    (1)    The Secretary of State may by order designate Schedule 2
          as a sports ground requiring a certificate
          under this Act (in this Act referred to as a
          "safety certificate") any sports ground which  Schedule 2
          in his opinion has accommodation for more
^         than 10,000 spectators.

(1A) The Secretary of State may by order                 Section 20
     substitute, for the number for the time being
     specified in subsection (1) above, such other
     number as he considers appropriate; but no
     order made under this subsection shall affect
     the validity of any designation previously
     made.

(1B) An order under subsection 1(A) above may make       Section 20
     different substitutions for different classes
     of sports ground.

    (2) The Secretary of State
        (a) may estimate, by any means which he
        considers appropriate, for how many
        spectators a sports ground has accommodation,   Schedule 2
        and (b) may require any person concerned with j
        the organisation or management of a sports    j
        ground to furnish him within such reasonable    Schedule 2
        time as he may specify with such information
        as he considers necessary for the purpose of
        making such an estimate.

    (3) A safety certificate may be either
        (a) a certificate issued by the local
        authority for the area in which a sports         Schedule 2
        ground is situated in respect of the use of
        the sports ground for an activity or a number    Schedule 2
        of activities specified in the certificate
        during an indefinite period commencing with a
        date so specified; or
        (b) a certificate issued by that authority in
        respect of the use of the sports ground for      Schedule 2
        an activity or a number of activities
        specified in the certificate on an occasion
        or series of occasions so specified.

    (k)   In this Act
          "designated sports ground" means a sports      Schedule 2 j



                                               O
     ground in respect of which a designation
     order is in operation; "designation order"
     means an order under this section;
     "general safety certificate" means such a
     safety certificate as is mentioned in
     subsection (3)(a) above; and "special safety
     certificate" means such a safety certificate
     as is mentioned in subsection (3)(b) above.

 (1) A safety certificate shall contain such terms j
     and conditions as the local authority         j
     consider necessary or expedient to secure     I
     reasonable safety at the sports ground when
     it is in use for the specified activity or      Schedule 2
     activities, and the terms and conditions may
     be such as to involve alterations or
     additions to the sports ground.                 Schedule 2

  (2) In so far as an order under Section 15A         Section 19
      below so requires as respects any class of      (2)(a)
_     sports ground, a safety certificate shall
®     include such terms and conditions as may be
      provided for in the Order.

(2A) No condition of a safety certificate shall       Section 21
     require the provision of the services at the
     ground of any members of a police force
     unless the extent of the provision of their
     services is reserved for the determination of
     the chief officer of police of the force.

 (3) Without prejudice to subsection (1) above, a
     safety certificate may include a condition
     that the following records shall be kept
     (a) records of the attendance of spectators
     at the sports ground and (b) records relating    Schedule 2
     to the maintenance of safety at the sports
     ground                                           Schedule 2

^ 4 ) A general safety certificate shall contain or
V     have attached to it a plan of the sports        Schedule 2
      ground and the terms and conditions in the
      certificate, or in any special safety
      certificate issued for the sports ground
      shall be framed, where appropriate, by
      reference to that plan.

 (5) A safety certificate may include different
     terms and conditions in relation to different
     activities.

 (6) Nothing in a safety certificate shall
     derogate from any requirements imposed by
     regulations under seciton 6(2) below.

 (1) If a local authority receive an application                   Regulation 4
     for a safety certificate for the designated
     sports ground in their area, it shall be         Schedule 2
     their duty to determine whether the applicant
•    is a person likely to be in a position to
     prevent contravention of the terms and



                                            Q
         conditions of a certificate; and such a            I
         person is referred to in this Act as a              I
         "qualified person".                                 j
                                                             I
                                                             I
     (2) If a local authority determine that an              I
         applicant is a qualified person (a) where no j                   I
         general safety certificate for the sports           I Schedule 2 |
         ground is in operation, they shall issue such j
         a certificate for it to him; and                    I
         (b) where a general safety certificate for          I
         the sports ground is in operation, they may        j Schedule 2
         issue a special safety certificate for it to I
         him.                                               II
                                                             I
     (3) The  local  authority  shall  send   a  copy of an  I
         application for a safety certificate for a
         sports ground to the chief officer of police          Schedule 2                Local_
         and ^ere_ the_ local. ajJth^it^. is in_ Greater.                                Government_Act
         London or_ a_ metropolitari c o u n t t h e fire_                               1?£5_Sehedule_
              orjU:^ 2T-i_iP a2J °the.r c§£®j the building                               8
         authority for the area in which it is
         situated, ^ind shall consult them about the
         terms and conditions to be included in the
         certificate.


     (4) The local authority may by notice in writing
         require an applicant for a safety
         certificate to furnish them within such
         reasonable time as they may specify in the
         notice with such information and such plans
         as they consider necessary to enable them to
         determine the terms and conditions which
         ought to be included in any certificate
         issued in response to his application.

     (5) If an applicant for a safety certificate
         fails to comply with a requirement under
         subsection (4) above within the time
     k specified by the local authority, or within
     f such further time as they may allow, he shall
         be deemed to have withdrawn his application.

I.   (1) The local authority may, in any case in which                    Regulation 5
         it appears appropriate to them to do so
         (a) amend a safety certificate by notice in
         writing to its holder; or
         (b) replace a safety certificate.

     (2) A safety certificate may be amended or            I
         replaced either on the application of the         j
         holder or without such an application.            j

     (3) Section 2 above shall apply on the amendment      I
         or replacement of a safety certificate.           I

     W   A notice under subsection (1)(a) above
         amending a general safety certificate shall
     ^   specify the date on which the amendment to
     W   which it relates is to come into operation,
         and the date so specified may be a date later



                                                 O
    than the date of issue of the notice.

(5) If the local authority receive an application
    for the transfer of a safety certificate from
    the holder to some other person, it shall be
    their duty to determine whether that person
    is a qualified person; and if they so
    determine, they may transfer the certificate
    to him.

(6) An application under subsection (5) above may
    be made either by the holder of a safety
    certificate or by a person to whom it is
    proposed that it should be transferred.

(7) The local authority shall send a copy of an
    application for the transfer of a safety
    certificate for a sports ground to the chief I Schedule 2                     Local_
    officer of police and where_the_local_                                        Government_Ac
    authority is in. Gf®ater_        °H.sL                                        J1985_Schedule
    SfiTSPSJitSi1         the fire_ authority or^ j                               8
    ill any other case, the building authority for
    the area in which it is situated.

(8) The local authority shall consult the chief
    officer of police and where_the_local_                                        Local_
    authority is in. Greater, l^ondon or. a.                                      Government_Ac
    metropolitan c o u n t t h e fire_ autoorit^ 2Tx.                             J1985_Schedule
    in any other case, the building authority                                     8
    about any proposal to amend, replace or
    transfer a safety certificate.

(9) The holder of a safety certificate may
    surrender it to the local authority, and it
    shall thereupon cease to have effect.

(10) The local authority may cancel a safety
     certificate if the holder dies or (if a body
     corporate) is dissolved.

(1) A local authority shall serve on a person                      Regulation 6
    whom they determine not to be a qualified
    person notice in writing of their
    determination, and a person on whom such a
    notice is served may appeal against the
    determination to the Court.
                                                        (2)
 (2) An applicant for a special safety certificate
     may also appeal to the Court against a             Section
     refusal of his application on grounds other        2 2 (2 )
     than a determination that he is not a
     qualified person.

 (3) An interested party may appeal to the Court        Section
     against                                            22(3)
     (i) the inclusion of anything in, or the
     omission of anything from, a safety
     certificate; or
     (ii) the refusal of the local authority to
     amend or replace a safety certificate.
  (3A) An appeal to the Court under this Section in              jSection
       England and Wales shall be by way of                       22(3)
       complaint for an order, the making of the
       complaint shall be deemed to be the bringing
       of the appeal and the Magistrates Courts Act
       1980 shall apply to the proceedings.

  (3B) An appeal to the Court under this Section in               Section
       Scotland shall be by summary application                   22(3)
  (3C) In England and Wales any of the following                  Section
       persons may appeal to the Crown Court against              22(3)
       an Order under this Section, namely
       (a) the local authority; and
       (b) any interested party.

  (3D) In Scotland any of the following persons may               Section
       appeal against an order made in an appeal                  22(3)                       I
       under this section, namely                                                             I
       (a) the local authority; and                                                           I
       (b) any interested party.

 )      notwithstanding that that person was not
        party to the proceedings on the application.

     (4) Omitted                                                  Section
                                                                  22(4)

     (5) In this Section "interested party" includes              Section
                                                                  22(5)
        (a) the holder of a safety certificate;
        (b) any other person who is or may be
        concerned in ensuring compliance with the
        terms and conditions of a safety certificate;
        (c) the chief officer of police; and
        (d) where_ the_ local_ authoritjr. is_in_ Greater^
        London_or^ a_^ ^ £ p o l i t ^ ^ £ u n t 2 j_the_fire_
                   2Ti_ iP_s“! y _ P ^ ® r ^ § £ the building
        authority.

^ ( 6 ) Omitted                                                  jSection 22
•                                                                I (6)
    (7) Omitted                                                  jSection 22
                                                                 I (6)
     (8) Omitted                                                 iSection 22
                                                                   (6 )

     (1) The Secretary of State may by regulations                             Regulation 5
         (a) prescribe the procedure (subject to the
         provisions of this Act) for the issue,
         amendment, replacement, transfer and
         cancellation of safety certificates and the
         particulars to be given in applications for                                         I
         their issue, amendment, replacement or                                              I
         transfer;                                                                          II
         (b) authorise local authorities to determine,                         Regulation 8 j
         subject to such limits or in accordance with                                        I
         such provisions as may be prescribed by the                                         I
         regulations, the fees (if any) to be charged
         in respect of such applications; and
         (c) prescribe the time within which appeals              Section      Regulation 6
         under Section 5 above are to be brought.                 22 It)
(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations                     I
                                                                  I
    make provision for securing safety at sports                  I
                                                                  I
    grounds.                                                      I
                                                                  I

(3) Regulations under subsection (2) above may
    provide, without prejudice to its generality,                 I
                                                                  I
    that the following records shall be kept                      I
                                                                  I
    (a) records of the attendance of spectators                   I
    at sports grounds; and                                        I
    (b) records relating to the maintenance of
    safety at sports grounds.
(4) Regulations under this Section may contain
    such incidental and supplementary provisions
    as the Secretary of State thinks expedient.

(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, if a local
    authority serve a notice under Section 5(1)
    above on any applicant for a safety              Section
    certificate, he shall be deemed to have          2 2 (8 )
    withdrawn his application on the expiry of
    the period within which, by virtue of
    regulations under Section 6 above, an appeal     Section
    against the authority’s determination may be     2 2 (8 )
    brought.

(2) Subsection 1 above shall not have effect if    Section
    an appeal is brought before the expiry of the 2 2 (8 )
    period there mentioned but if the appeal is
    withdrawn or the Court upholds the
    authority’s determination, the appellant
    shall be deemed to have withdrawn his
    application on the date of the withdrawal of I                I
    his appeal or of the Court’s determination.  I                I
                                                 II               I
                                                                  I
(3) Where an appeal is brought against the       ISection         I
    inclusion of any term or condition in a      i22(8)           j
    safety certificate (whether it was included  I
    in the certificate originally or only on its I                I
    amendment or replacement), the operation of  I                I
    that term or condition shall be suspended    I                I
    until the Court has determined the appeal.   !Section         I
                                                    I 22(8)       |


(4) Omitted                                         jSection      i
                                                    I 22(8)       |

(5) Omitted                                         ISection      I
                                                    I22(8)        j

(1) If while a general safety certificate is in     I             I
    operation with respect to a sports ground it    iSchedule 2 j
    is proposed to alter or extend that sports      ISchedule 2 |
    ground or any of its installations, and the
    alteration or extension is likely to affect
    the safety of persons at the sports ground,     !Schedule 2   I
    the holder of the certificate shall, before
    the carrying out of the proposals is begun,
    give notice of the proposals to the local
    authority.
     (2) Subsection (1) above in particular requires     I
         notice when it is proposed to alter the         I
         entrances to or exits from a sports ground or   |Schedule 2
         any part of it (including any means of escape   j
         in case of fire or other emergency) or the      j
         means of access to any such entrances or        j
         exits.                                          I

9.   (1) While a general safety certificate is in
         force in relation to a sports ground, the       Schedule 2
         followng provisions shall not apply to it,     I
         that is to say (a) Section 37(1) of the
         Public Health Acts Amendment Act 1890
         (Platforms for Public Occasions);
         (b) Section 89 of the Civic Government          Schedule 2
         (Scotland) Act 1982 (which makes provision as
         to the safety of platforms, stands and other
         structures), in so far as that section
         relates to any matter in relation to which
         requirements are imposed by the terms and
         conditions of the safety certificate;
         (c) Sections_24_ and_ 7J_of. the. Building_Act                Building_Act
         J984 (exits, entrances etc in the case of                         _Section
         certain public and other buildings);                          133(1)J3chJ5
         (d) any provision of the Fire Precautions Act                 £ara_J5_
         1971 or of a fire certificate issued under
         that Act in so far as it relates to any
         matter in relation to which requirements are
         imposed by the terms and conditions of the
         safety certificate; and
         (e) any provision of a local Act in so far as
         it relates to any matter in relation to which
         requirements are imposed by those terms and
         conditions.

     (2) Where any enactment provides for the            j
         licensing of premises of any class or           i
         description and the authority responsible for   |
         licences thereunder is required or authorised   |
         to impose terms, conditions or restrictions     i
         in connection with such licences, then, so      j
         long as there is in operation with respect to   j
         the premises a safety certificate covering      |
         the use of the premises by reason of which a    j
         licence under that enactment is required, any   |
         term, condition or restriction imposed with     j
         respect to those premises in connection with    j
         any licence under that enactment shall be of    j
         no effect in so far as it relates to any        j
         matter in relation to which requirements are    |
         imposed by the terms and conditions of that     j
         certificate.                                    I

     (3) A person required by or under a local act to    |
         do anything that would involve a                i
         contravention of the terms or conditions of a   j
         safety certificate shall not be treated as      |
         having contravened that Act if he fails to do   j




                                               Q
10.   (1) If the local authority are of the opinion       Section
          that the admission of spectators to a sports    23(1)
          ground or any part of a sports ground
          involves or will involve a risk to them so
          serious that, until steps have been taken to    I
          reduce it to a reasonable level, admission of   I
          spectators to the ground or that part of the    j
          ground ought to be prohibited or restricted,    I
          the authority may serve a notice (in this Act   |
          referred to as a "prohibition notice") on       j
          such persons as are specified in subsection     j
          (6) below.                                      j

      (2) A prohibition notice shall
          (a) state that the local authority are of
          that opinion;
          (b) specify the matters which in their
          opinion give or, as the case may be, will
          give rise to that risk; and
          (c) direct that no, or no more than a
          specified number of, spectators shall be
          admitted to, or to a specified part of, the
          sports ground until the specified matters
          have been remedied.

      (3) A prohibition notice may prohibit or restrict
          the admission of spectators generally or on a
          specified occasion.

      (4) A prohibition notice may include directions
          as to the steps which will have to be taken
          to reduce the risk to a reasonable level and
          these may require alterations or additions to
          the ground or things to be done or omitted
          which would contravene the terms or
          conditions of a safety certificate for the
          ground or for any stand at the ground.

      (5) No prohibition notice shall include
          directions compliance with which would
          require the provision of the services at the
          sports ground of any members of a police
          force unless the chief officer of police of
          the force has consented to their inclusion
          and the extent of the provision of their
          services is reserved for his determination.

      (6) A prohibition notice shall be served on the
          persons specified in the following paragraphs
          in the circumstances specified in those
          paragraphs,.that.is to say
          (a) if a general safety certificate is in
          operation for the ground, on the holder of
          it;
          (b) if the prohibition or restriction applies
          to an occasion in respect of which a special
          safety certificate for the ground is in
          operation, on the holder of it;
          (c) if no safety certificate is in operation
          for the ground, on the person who appears to
          the local authority to be responsible for the
         management of the ground;
^       (d) if the prohibition or restriction applies
w       to an occasion and no safety certificate is
         in operation for the ground, on each person
         who appears to the local authority to be
         responsible for organising an activity at the
         ground on that occasion;
         (e) if a general safety certificate is in
         operation for a stand at the ground, on the
         holder of it;
         (f) if the prohibition or restriction applies
         to an occasion in respect of which a special
         safety certificate for a stand at the ground
         is in operation, on the holder of it;
         but the validity of a prohibition notice
         served on any person under any of the
         foregoing provisions shall not be affected by
         a failure to serve another person required to
         be served with such a notice under those
         provisions.

    (7) A prohibition or restriction contained in a
        prohibition notice shall take effect
        immediately it is served if the authority are
        of the opinion, and so state in the notice,
        that the risk to spectators is or, as the
        case may be, will be imminent, and in any
        other case shall take effect at the end of a
        period specified in the notice.

    (8) A copy of any prohibition notice shall be
        sent by the local authority to each of the
        following, namely
        (a) the chief officer of police; and
        (b) where the local authority is in Greater
        London or a metropolitan county, the fire
        authority, or, in any other case, the
        building authority.

    (9) The local authority who have served a
        prohibition notice may, in any case where it
        appears appropriate to them to do so, amend
        the prohibition notice by notice served on
        the persons specified in subsection (6) above
         (subject to the saving in that subsection),
        and copies shall be sent to the officer and
        authorities specified in subsection (8)
        above.

    (10) A notice under subsection (9) above amending
         a prohibition notice shall specify the date
         on which the amendment is to come into
         operation.

    (11) Where a notice has been served under
         subsection (1) or (9) above the local
         authority may withdraw the notice at any
         time.

1(^1
1<® (1) Any person aggrieved by a prohibition notice   Section 24
        may appeal to the court against the notice if j



                                         ’0
   he does so within such period as the
   Secretary of State may by regulations          I
   prescribe.                                     I
                                                  I
(2) Subsection (1) above applies to any amendment I
    of a prohibition notice as it applies to the I
    prohibition notice in its original form.      I

(3) An appeal to the court under this section in    I
    England and Wales shall be by way of            i
    complaint for an order, the making of the       I
    complaint shall be deemed to be the bringing    j
    of the appeal and the Magistrates* Courts Act   j
    1980 shall apply to the proceedings.            I
                                                    I
(4) An appeal to the court under this section in    j
    Scotland shall be by summary application.       I
(5) On an appeal under subsection (1) above, the    j
    court may either cancel or affirm the notice    I
    or, in the case of an appeal against an         I
    amendment, annul or affirm the amendment and,   I
    if it affirms the notice or the notice as       I
    amended, as the case may be, may do so either   I
    in its original form or as amended, as the      I
    case may be, or with such modifications of      I
    the notice as the court may in the              I
    circumstances think fit.                        j
                                                    i
                                                    i
(6) Where an appeal is brought under this section   I
    against a prohibition notice or an amendment    I
    of it, the bringing of the appeal shall not     I
    have the effect of suspending the operation     I
    of the notice or the notice as amended, as      I
    the case may be.                                !
                                                    I
                                                    I
(7) In England and Wales any of the following       I
    persons may appeal to the Crown Court against   I
    an order under this section, namely             I
    (a) any person aggrieved by the notice;         I
    (b)   thelocal authority;                       I
    (c)   thechief officer of police;               I
    (d) where the local authority is in Greater     |
    London or a metropolitan county, the fire       I
    authority or, in any other case, the building   j
    authority.                                      I
                                                    I
                                                    I
(8) In Scotland any of the following persons may    I
    appeal against an order made in an appeal       I
    under this section, namely                      I
    (a) any person aggrieved by the notice;         I
    (b) thelocal authority                          I
    (c) thechief officer of police; and             I
    (d) the building authority;                     j
    notwithstanding that that person was not        I
    party to the proceedings on the application.    I

(9) The persons who are, for the purposes of this   I
    section, "aggrieved" by a prohibition notice    j
    are the persons on whom, in accordance with     i
    section 10(6) of this Act, the notice is        I
    required to be served.                          I
1O.B (1) It shall be the duty of every local authority ISection 25
~^P     to enforce within their area the provisions I
         of this Act and of regulations made under it I
         and for that purpose to arrange for the       I
         periodical inspection of designated sports     I
         grounds; but nothing in this subsection shall I
         be taken to authorise a local authority in    I
         Scotland to institute proceedings for an      I
         offence.                                      I

      (2) In performing the duty imposed by subsection
          (1) above so far as it requires designated
          sports grounds in their areas to be
          inspected, local authorities shall act in
          accordance with such guidance as the
          Secretary of State may give them.

      (3) For the purposes of subsection (1) above,
          "periodical" means at least once in every
          twelve months.

11.      A person authorised by
         (a) the local authority;
         (b) the chief officer of police;
         (c) where. the_ local_ authority is_in_ Greater_
         London_or_ a_ metropolitan_?ount^ _the_fir£_
         authority or^ in_any_other_cas£j the building
         authority; or
         (d) the Secretary of State,
         may, on production if so required of his
         authority, enter a sports ground at any
         reasonable time, and make such inspection of
         it and such inquiries relating to it as he
         considers necessary for the purposes of this
         Act, and in particular may examine records of
         attendance at the ground and records relating
         to the maintenance of safety at the ground,
         and take copies of such records.

      (1) Subject to subsection (4) below, if
          (a) spectators are admitted to a designated
          sports ground after the date on which the         Schedule 2
          designation order relating to it comes into
          operation but at a time when no application
          for a general safety certificate in respect
          of it has been made or such application has
          been made but has been withdrawn, or is
          deemed to have been withdrawn; or
          (b) when a general safety certificate is in
          operation in respect of a sports ground            Schedule 2
          spectators are admitted to the sports ground
          on an occasion when it is used for an
          activity to which neither the general safety
          certificate nor a special safety certificate
          relates; or
          (c) spectators are admitted to a designated
          sports ground on an occasion when, following
          the surrender or cancellation of a safety          Schedule 2
          certificate, no safety certificate is in
          operation in respect of that sports ground;       ISchedule 2   |
   or
   (d) any term or condition of a safety
   certificate is contravened otherwise than in     ISection
   pursuance of a prohibition notice; or            I 23(2)
   (e) spectators are admitted to a sports
   ground in contravention of a prohibition         ISection
   notice under Section 10 above, any               I23(2)
   responsible person and, if a safety
   certificate is in operation, the holder of
   the certificate, shall be guilty of an
   offence.

(2) In subsection (1) above "responsible person"
    means a person who is concerned in the
    management of the sports ground in question
    or the organisation of any activity taking
    place there at the time when an offence is
    alleged to have been committed.

(3) A person guilty of an offence under
    subsection (1) above shall be liable
    (a) on summary conviction, to a fine of not
    more than the_ J^®£3£T.ibe<}_sum> or                       Magistrate^
    (b) on conviction on indictment, to                        Courts_Act
    imprisonment for not more than two years or a              J980_Section
    fine or to both.                                           3 2 (2 )

(4) Where any person is charged with an offence
    under subsection (1) above it shall be a
    defence to prove
    (a) that the spectators were admitted or the
    contravention of the certificate or
    prohibition notice in question took place       Section
    without his consent; and                        2 3 (2 )
    (b) that he took all reasonable precautions
    and exercised all due diligence to avoid the
    commission of such an offence by himself or
    any person under his control.

(5) Regulations under section 6(12) above may
    provide that a breach of the regulations
    shall be an offence punishable as provided by
    the regulations, but shall not provide that a
    person guilty of such an offence shall be
    liable to punishments greater than those
    specified in subsection (3) above.

(6) Any person who
    (a) without reasonable excuse, refuses,
    neglects or otherwise fails to comply with a
    requirement under section 1(2)(b) above
    within the time specified by the Secretary of
    State; or
    (b) in purporting to carry out such a
    requirement, or a requirement under section
    3(4) above, or for the purpose of procuring a
    safety certificate or the amendment,
    replacement or transfer of a safety
    certificate knowingly or recklessly makes a
    false statement or knowingly or recklessly
    produces, furnishes, signs or otherwise makes



                                         0
         use of a document containing a false
         statement; or
         (°) fails to give a notice required by
         section 8(1) above; or
         (d) intentionally obstructs any person in the Section
         exercise of powers under section 11 above, or 2 5 (2 )
         without reasonable excuse refuses, neglects
         or otherwise fails to answer any question
         asked by any person in the exercise of such
         powers,
         shall be guilty of an offence and liable on
         summary conviction to a fine not exceeding
         level_5_on_the_standard_scale.                           Criminal
                                                                  Justice^ Act_
      (7) Where an offence under this Act which has               1? 82_SS_38_ and_
          been committed by a body corporate is proved            46
          to have been committed with the consent or
          connivance of, or to be attributable to any
          neglect on the part of, a director, manager,
          secretary or other similar officer of the
          body corporate, or any person who was
 9        purporting to act in any such capacity, he,
          as well as the body coroporate, shall be
          guilty of that offence and be liable to be
          proceeded against and punished accordingly.

      (8) Where the affiars of a body corporate are
          managed by its members, subsection (7) above
          shall apply in relation to the acts and
          defaults of a member in connection with his
          functions of management as if he were a
          director of the body corporate.

13.      Except in so far as this Act otherwise
         expressly provides, and subject to section 33
         of the Interpretation Act 1889 (offences
         under two or more laws), the provisions of
         this Act shall not be construed as
          (a) conferring a right of action in any civil
         proceedings (other than proceedings for the
 •       recovery of a fine) in respect of any
         contravention of this Act or of any
         regulations made under this Act or of any of
         the terms or conditions of a safety
         certificate; or
          (b) affecting any requirement or restriction
         imposed by or under any other enactment
         whether contained in a public general Act or
          in a local or private Act; or
          (c) derogating from any right of action or
          other remedy (whether civil or criminal) in
          proceedings instituted otherwise than under
          this Act.

14.   (1) Any notice or other document required or
          authorised by or by virtue of this Act to be
          served on any person may be served on him
          either by delivering it to him or by leaving
          it at his proper address or by sending it by
  •       post.
       (2) Any notice or other document so required or
           authorised to be served on a body corporate
      *    or a firm shall be duly served if it is
           served on the secretary or clerk of that body
           or a partner of that firm.

      (3) For the purposes of this section, and of
          section 26 of the Interpretation Act 1889 in
          its application to this section, the proper
          address of a person, in the case of a
          secretary or clerk of a body corporate, shall
          be that of the registered or principal office
          of that body, in the case of a partner of a
          firm shall be that of the principal office of
          the firm, and in any other case shall be the
          last known address of the person to be
          served.

15.       (Ceases to have effect)                            Section 19
                                                             (2)(b)

15#(1) The Secretary of State may, as respects any           Section 19
       specified class of sports ground, by order            (2)(c)
       modify the provisions of this Act (except
       Section 1(1) above) in their application to
       sports grounds of that class.

      (2) An order under this section may
          (a) make different modifications in relation
          to different activities at the same class of
          ground; and
          (b) include such supplementary and
          transitional provision as the Secretary of
          State thinks expedient.

16.   (1) Sections 1 to 4 and 6(2) above bind the
          Crown, but shall have effect, in relation to
          premises occupied by the Crown with the
          substitution of a reference to the Secretary
          of State for any reference to the local
 •        authority.

      (2) Nothing in this Act shall be taken to
          authorise the entry of premises occupied by
          the Crown.

17.   (1) In this Act unless the context otherwise
          requires,
          ^building, authorit^'_means                                     Local
          _(a)_I?^n5 laM_^utside_Greater_London_ and. the_                Government Act
                                   PL.           the.                     1985 Sch.8
          district_Council;
          Cb)_ in_Scotlandj_the_local^ut^ritj^ithin_
          the_ meaning. of_the_Building_^Scotland)__Act
          195?i_
          "the court" means, in relation to premises in
          England or Wales, a magistrates’ court acting
          for the petty sessions area in which they are
          situated and, in relation to premises in
 •        Scotland, the sheriff within whose
          jurisdiction they are situated;
    "designated sports ground" and "designation      ISchedule 2
    order" have the meanings assigned to them by I
    section 1(4) above;                              I
    "general safety certificate" has the meaning
    assigned to it by section 1(4) above;
    ^local_authority^_ means.
    _£a)_ in_Greater^ondonj _the_London_ borough.
    Council_ or_the_Common_ Council^ of_the_Citj_ of
    London;
     Cb)_in.England^ in_the_metro£olitan.counties,
    the_ dist^i ct_council_j_
          i?^r^^^_outside_Greater_London_ and.
    the. metropolitan_c°unties, or_in_ W§leSj_the
    county councilj
    _(d_)_in_Scotland_ the_ regional_or_ island^,
    councilj
    "means of access" includes means of access
    from a highway;
    "qualified person" has the meaning assigned
    to it by seciton 3(1) above;
    "prohibition notice" has the meaning assigned ISection 23
    to it by section 10(1);                          II I I
    "safety" does not include safety from danger I   I
    inherent in participation in a sporting or       I
    competitive activity;                            I
                                                     I
    "safety certificate" except with reference       ISection 23
    to a stand at a sports ground has the meaning I ( 2)
    assigned to it by section 1(1) above and,
    where it refers to a stand, means a safety        Section 23
    certificate (whether general or special)           (2)
    under Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety
    of Places of Sport Act 1987;
    "special safety certificate" has the meaning
    assigned to it by section 1(4) above;
    "spectator" means any person occupying
    accommodation provided for spectators at a
    sports ground;
     "sports ground" means any place where sports
    or other competitive activities take place in
    the open air and where accommodation has been
    provided for spectators, consisting of
    artificial structures or of natural
    structures artificially modified for the
    purpose.

(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment is
    a reference to it as amended, and includes a
    reference to it as applied by or under any
    other enactment, including this Act.

(1) Any power to   make an order or regulations
    conferred on   the Secretary of State by any
    provision of   this Act shall be exerciseable
    by statutory   instrument.


(1A) Regulations under any provision of this Act     Section 19
     may make different provision for different      (2)(d)
     provision for different classes of sports
     ground.
(2) Any power to make an order conferred by any
    provision of this Act shall include power to
    make an order varying our revoking any order
    previously made under that provision.

(3) Orders and regulations under this Act (except
    an order under Section 19(6) below) shall be
    subject to annulment in pursuance of a
    resolution of either House of Parliament.

(4) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of
    State, before making an order or regulations
    under any of the preceding provisions of this
    Act, to consult with such persons or bodies
    of persons as appear to him requisite.

(1) This Act may be cited as the Safety of Sports
    Grounds Act 1975.

(2) This Act does not extend to Northern Ireland.

(3) Except as provided by an order under this
    section, this Act does not extend to the
    Isles of Scilly.

(4) The Secretary of State may by order direct
    that this Act shall, subject to such
    exceptions, adaptations and modifications as
    may be specified in the order, extend to the
    Isles of Scilly.

(5) An order made under subsection (4) above may
    contain such incidental and consequential
    provisions, including provisions conferring
    powers or imposing duties on the Council of
    the Isles of Scilly, as the Secretary of
    State thinks necessary.

(6) This Act shall come into force on such day as
    the Secretary of State may by order appoint,
    and different days may be so appointed for
    different provisions and for different
    purposes.
                                         '-• .J   H O M E office
                                         Qucen^Anne’s Gate L ondon SW1H 9 AT
                                             7 " Direct line: 01-213
                                                Switchboard: 01-213 3000

<—      --------


 Your reference:                                              25 November 1987
        Chief Executives - County Councils +
                           Metropolitan District Councils
                           London Boroughs
                           Common Council of the City of London



                                                                            2 6 NOV 1987
        HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987
        FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987:-
        IMPLEMENTATION OF PART II (SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS)            i        i   \

        Introduction
        1.    As foreshadowed by HOC No 42/1987 the Secretary of State has
        now made a commencement order under section 50(2) of the Fire
        Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act)
        bringing in Part II of the 1987 Act with effect from 1 January
        1988.
        2.   This circular, together with Annex A, introduces the
        provisions of Part II of the 1987 Act and gives advice on the
        effects and operation of them. Advice on those provisions of
        Part I of the 1987 Act (fire safety) which are to be brought into
        force by the first commencement order is the subject of Fire
        Precautions Act Circular, 14/1987.
                                    •*

        Implementation of Part II (Safety of Sports Grounds)
        3.   Part II of the 1987 Act, consisting of sections 19 - 25,
        amends the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) in
        line with the Government's proposals contained in the
        Consultative Document published in June 1986 in response to the
        safety recommendations of the Popplewell Inquiry set up following
        the fire tragedy at Valley Parade on 11 May 1985. The', main
        changes effected by Part II are as follows
        Section 19:- removes the distinction between sports "ground" and
        sports "stadium" with consequential modifications to section 2(2)
        of the 1975 Act dealing with the contents of safety certificates.

        Section 20:- empowers the Secretary of State to vary the
        designation threshold of 10,000 under section 1 of the 1975 Act.




                                    □
Section 21:- precludes conditions in safety certificates
relating to police presence unless the extent of the presence is
reserved for the Chief Officer of Police.

Section 22:-   directs appeals under section 5 of the 1975 Act to
the courts.
Sections 23 and 24:- replaces the existing emergency procedure
under section 10 by introducing prohibition notices in the case
of serious risks to spectators; and provision to appeal against
them.
Section 25:- places a duty on local authorities to enforce the
1975 Act and to arrange for annual inspections of designated
sports grounds in accordance with guidance from the Secretary of
State.
4.   Annexes A and B to Home Office circular No 7/1986 which
gives advice on the 1975 Act should be noted as necessary and
cross referenced to this circular. Particular attention is drawn
to the latest guidance on the new procedure for the issue of
prohibition notices to deal with serious risks to spectators.
Local authorities are asked to copy all such notices to the Home
Office for information until further notice. To assist local
authorities to draw up a prohibition notice a suggested format is
reproduced at Annex B to this circular.
Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987
5.   A copy of the revised regulations is also enclosed with this
circular. The regulations reflect the changes brought about by
sections 22 and 24 of the 1987 Act and lay down time limits for
appeals. Provisions on procedures for applications for safety
certificates, their issue, amendment, transfer and replacement
are incorporated in the regulations which also authorise the
determination of fees to be charged in respect of applications
for the issue, amendment, transfer and replacement of safety
certificates.
Transitional
6.   Under the provisions of Schedule 5 of the 1987 Act any
existing court order made under section 10 of the 1975 Act
remains in force. Similarly any appeal lodged prior to 1 January
1988 and still extant on that date will remain subject to the
appeal procedures of the Safety of Sportr. Grounds Regulations
1976 (SI 1976/1263).

Resource and manpower implications
7.   The contents of this circular do not result in any cost or
manpower implications other than those arising from the
inspections to be carried out on designated sports grounds under
section 10B(1) as introduced by section 25 of the 1987 Act.
Circulation of Statutory Guidance under section 10B(2) of the
1975 Act on these inspections together with any supplementary
Section 21:- precludes conditions in safety certificates
relating to police presence unless the extent of the presence is
reserved for the Chief Officer of Police.

Section 22:-   directs appeals Under section 5 of the 1975 Act to
the courts.
Sections 23 and 24:- replaces the existing emergency procedure
under section 10 by introducing prohibition notices in the case
of serious risks to spectators; and provision to appeal against
them.
Section 25:- places a duty on local authorities to enforce the
1975 Act and to arrange for annual inspections of designated
sports grounds in accordance with guidance from the Secretary of
State.
4.   Annexes A and B to Home Office circular No 7/1986 which
gives advice on the 1975 Act should be noted as necessary and
cross referenced to this circular. Particular attention is drawn
to the latest guidance on the new procedure for the issue of
prohibition notices to deal with serious risks to spectators.
Local authorities are asked to copy all such notices to the Home
Office for information until further notice. To assist local
authorities to draw up a prohibition notice a suggested format is
reproduced at Annex B to this circular.
Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987
5.   A copy of the revised regulations is also enclosed with this
circular. The regulations reflect the changes brought about by
sections 22 and 24 of the 1987 Act and lay down time limits for
appeals. Provisions on procedures for applications for safety
certificates, their issue, amendment, transfer and replacement
are incorporated in the regulations which also authorise the
determination of fees to be charged in respect of applications
for the issue, amendment, transfer and replacement of safety
certificates.
Transitional
6.   Under the provisions of Schedule 5 of the 1987 Act any
existing court order made under section 10 of the 1975 Act
remains in force. Similarly any appeal lodged prior to 1 January
1988 and still extant on that date will remain subject to the
appeal procedures of the Safety of Sportn Grounds Regulations
1976 (SI 1976/1263).

Resource and manpower implications
7.   The contents of this circular do not result in any cost or
manpower implications other than those arising from the
inspections to be carried out on designated sports grounds under
section 10B(1) as introduced by section 25 of the 1987 Act.
Circulation of Statutory Guidance under section 10B(2) of the
1975 Act on these inspections together with any supplementary
advice is being done separately and will cover, as necessary, any
resource implications arising therefrom.

Supplementary
8.   The information and advice in this circular and in Annex A
on the 1987 Act are given in good faith but it should be
understood that ultimately only the courts can rule
authoritatively on points of law.
9.   Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should be
directed to Mr D Macnamara 01-213 7338.
                                           Yours faithfully




                                           P CANOVAN




 enclosures     1) Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations
                2) Commencement No 1 Order
copies for information to:-
ACC
AMA
LBA
ADC
ACPO
*Clerks to Police Authorities
+Clerks to Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
Chief Officers of Police
Magistrates Association
Justices Clerks Society
Sports Council

♦without enclosures
+without enclosure (2)
                                                         ANNEX A

ANNEX A TO HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 71/1987
FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987
Advice note by the Home Office on Part II of The Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (The 1987 Act) amending The
Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 (The 1975 Act)

Introduction
1.   The general background to the 1975 Act together with a
summary of local authority powers and functions under that Act,
and procedures for the issue of safety certificates is set out in
Annexes A - D of Home Office Circular 7/1986 issued 7 February
1986 (taken from earlier Home Office circulars 150/1975, 130/1976
and 187/1976). This guidance should therefore be read in
conjunction with Annexes A - D of Home Office Circular 7/1986
which will need to be cross-referenced.
2.   The Popplewell Inquiry set up after the fire tragedy at
Valley Parade concluded that the 1975 Act had worked
satisfactorily at designated grounds but recommended changes to
improve its operation. The Government's response was contained
in a consultative document published in June 1986.^ Parts II and
III of the 1987 Act implement these proposals and introduction of
Part II as from 1 January 1988 is the first phase of this
implementation.
3.   The main mechanism for securing safety at sports grounds
remains the safety certificate. Guidance on safety standards is
contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (The Green
Guide) revised in October 1986. Local authorities are reminded
of the advice contained in paragraph 5 of Annex B to Home Office
Circular 7/1986 highlighting the need to maintain flexibility in
order to take account of the different circumstances at
individual grounds.
SUBSTANCE OF THE AMENDMENTS EFFECTED BY PART II OF THE 1987 ACT
Section 19: Application of the 1975 Act to all sports grounds
4.   Section 19, together with the textual amendments of Schedule
2 to the 1987 Act removes the distinction in the 1975 Act between
a sports "ground" and a sports "stadium". As amended the
provisions of the 1975 Act apply to all sports grounds as defined
in section 17(1) of that Act. The Secretary of State may thus
designate any category of sports groand without first having to
make an order extending the provisions of the Act to that
particular class of ground.
5.   In consequence of this wider power, section 2 of the 1975
Act (originally formulated with "stadia" in mind, particularly
football stadia) has also had to be amended, by section 19 (2) of
the 1987 Act, so that safety certificates are no longer required
to contain certain obligatory terms and conditions. The
Secretary of State is however empowered to stipulate by order the
contents of a safety certificate for any class of sports ground.




                              ED
 In this way those grounds of a particular type, or grounds used
 for a particular sport need not be subject to requirements which
 would be inappropriate to them.

6.   As there are no present plans to extend designation to other
classes of sports ground it is not envisaged that an order under
this new power will be necessary. The discretion given to local
authorities under section 2(1) of the 1975 Act means that with
the possible exception of clauses in safety certificates relating
to police presence (see paragraph 9 below) the contents of safety
certificates will not automatically require amendment as a result
of the removal of the obligatory terms of section 2 of the 1975
Act. Safety certificates should continue to specify maximum
spectators; include terms and conditions as to size, situation
of entrances/exits to and from the ground and parts of it
(including means of escape in the case of fire or other
emergency) plus means of access to any such entrances and exits;
terms and conditions should continue to require those entrances,
exits and means of access to be properly maintained and kept free
from obstruction* and terms and conditions should continue to
deal with the number, strength and situation of any crush
barriers.

7.   Section 19(2) also widens the regulation powers given to
the Secretary of State by insertion of a new subsection (1A) to
section 18 of the 1975 Act thereby enabling regulations to make
different provision for different classes of sports grounds.
Section 20:   Designation of grounds - variation in qualifying
              spectator capacity

8.   Section 20 inserts subsections (1A) and (IB) in section 1 of
the 1975 Act to give the Secretary of State power to vary by
order the numerical threshold above which grounds may be
designated as requiring a safety certificate. The threshold is
at present set at 10,000 by the Act.

Section 21:   Safety certificates — police presence
9.   Section 21 adds subsection (2A) to section 2 of the 1975
Act. Where the local authority includes in a safety certificate
a provision which requires the presence of the police, the
subsection requires that determination of their number is to be
left to the Chief Officer of Police. This is already the usual
if not invariable practice and this provision does no more than
give statutory force to existing arrangements. Safety
certificate conditions which do noc comply with this provision
     however be void and local authorities are advised to ensure
that any such conditions comply with the new provisions.
Section 22:   Safety certificates - appeals
10. Section 22 of the 1987 Act directs appeals under section 5
of the 1975 Act to the courts instead of to the Secretary of
State as hitherto. Such an appeal is to the Magistrates Court by
way of making a complaint (new subsection (3A) of section 5).
There is also provision for an appeal to the Crown Court against
 In this way those grounds of a particular type, or grounds used
 for a particular sport need not be subject to requirements which
 would be inappropriate to them,

 6.   As there are no present plans to extend designation to other
classes of sports ground it is not envisaged that an order under
this new power will be necessary. The discretion given to local
authorities under section 2(1) of the 1975 Act means that with
the possible exception of clauses in safety certificates relating
to police presence (see paragraph 9 below) the contents of safety
certificates will not automatically require amendment as a result
of the removal of the obligatory terms of section 2 of the 1975
Act. Safety certificates should continue to specify maximum
spectators; include terms and conditions as to size, situation
of entrances/exits to and from the ground and parts of it
 (including means of escape in the case of fire or other
emergency) plus means of access to any such entrances and exits;
teras and conditions should continue to require those entrances,
exits and means of access to be properly maintained and kept free
from obstruction; and terms and conditions should continue to
deal with the number, strength and situation of any crush
barriers.

7.   Section 19(2) also widens the regulation powers given to
the Secretary of State by insertion of a new subsection (1A) to
section 18 of the 1975 Act thereby enabling regulations to make
different provision for different classes of sports grounds.
Section 20:   Designation of grounds - variation in qualifying
              spectator capacity

8.   Section 20 inserts subsections (1A) and (IB) in section 1 of
the 1975 Act to give the Secretary of State power to vary by
order the numerical threshold above which grounds may be
designated as requiring a safety certificate. The threshold is
at present set at 10,000 by the Act.

Section 21:   Safety certificates - police presence
9.   Section 21 adds subsection (2A) to section 2 of the 1975
Act. Where the local authority includes in a safety certificate
a provision which requires the presence of the police, the
subsection requires that determination of their number is to be
left to the Chief Officer of Police. This is already the usual
if not invariable practice and this provision does no more than
give statutory force to existing arrangements. Safety
certificate conditions which do noc comply with this provision
will however be void and local authorities are advised to ensure
that any such conditions comply with the new provisions.
Section 22:   Safety certificates - appeals

10. Section 22 of the 1987 Act directs appeals under section 5
of the 1975 Act to the courts instead of to the Secretary of
State as hitherto. Such an appeal is to the Magistrates Court by
way of making a complaint (new subsection (3A) of section 5).
There is also provision for an appeal to the Crown Court against



                              G)
an order made by a Magistrates Court on determining a complaint.
Such an appeal may be made by the local authority or by any
"interested party" as defined in section 5 of the 1975 Act.
11. Subsections (4), (6), (7) and (8) of section 5 are repealed
in consequence of the removal of the Secretary of State's
functions in respect of appeals. However the Secretary of State
is given the power to prescribe by regulation the time within
which appeals under section 5 of the 1975 Act are to be brought.
These regulations will also come into effect as from 1 January
1988. There is however transitional provision contained in
paragraph 6 of Schedule 5 to the 1987 Act to preserve the
existing appeal procedures/powers in respect of appeals made to
the Secretary of State before 1 January 1988 and which are still
extant on that date.
12. Section 22(8) of the 1987 Act makes a number of
consequential amendments to section 7 of the 1975 Act
(determinations and appeals/supplementary). Subsection (8)(a)
amends section 7(1) of the 1975 Act so that it provides for an
application to be deemed to be withdrawn if the local authority
serve a notice under section 5(1) that an applicant is not
qualified for the issue of a certificate, once the time limit for
an appeal has expired. It also removes from the 1975 Act section
7(1)(b) which misleadingly implies that the local authority can
determine without an application having been made that an
existing holder of a safety certificate no longer qualifies to
hold it.   Subsection (8)(b) amends section 7(2) to make
provision to suspend the effect of the local authority decision
that an applicant is not a qualified person if an appeal is made
in the prescribed time limits. This suspension has effect until
the appeal is either withdrawn or determined by the court in
favour of the authority. Subsection 8(c) amends section 7(3) of
the 1975 Act and subsection (8)(d) repeals the provision in
section 7 of the 1975 Act by which a court could, on the
application of the local authority, give immediate effect to a
term or condition of a safety certificate which had been
suspended as a result of an appeal.
Section 23s Special procedure in case of serious risk -
prohibition notices: and
Section 24: Prohibition Notices: appeals
13. Section 23 of the 1987 Act replaces the existing section 10
of the 1975 Act with provision for a system of prohibition
notices. Sectidn 24 of the 1987 Act provides for appeals against
a prohibition notice.
14. A prohibition notice may be served in respect of any sports
ground as defined in section 17(1) of the 1975 Act or part of
such a sports ground. The criteria for issuing a prohibition
notice are set out in the new section 10(1) and local authorities
should not feel inhibited from using the new powers when
necessary. These powers are nonetheless potentially far reaching
(see also paragraph 20 below) and local authorities are therefore
asked to ensure that they are used with due discretion. In
practice/ the considerations leading to the issuing of a
prohibition notice are likely to be comparable to those which now
  SSiLf         « 29    C°^lrt^order' and Prohibition notices should i #
  general be used as a last rather than a first resort, after
  consultations with the ground operator have failed to secure
                saf®ty improvements and amendment of a safety
  certificate (where issued) is not considered to be an effective
  way of dealing with the risk(s). it is, of course n o M t tSf.«
  e f ? S ^ nt for local authorities to ensure that they have an
                         f°r *** issue of such a notice urgently
  C°?hidi? d;1 ® ^ t S g S?o a^imited^umber ^ s J n i o ? off£ce?s the
 containing directions?*1*1^ °f **” °°UnCil and is8ue 8uoh a n°tice

 15. Prohibition notices must contain the information specified
 inclSdeSin the iotiie ^°caf .auth°rities are also encouraged to
              4. ? notice directions under new section 1 0 (4 )
 detailing the required remedial measures. A notice can aDniv
 generally or to a specific occasion (new section 1 0 (3 )). a
 SS«i‘Se>.lnay<not J*owever include directions compliance with which
        require the provision of police unless the Chief Officer o f ®
 IZliZt nfS4.w°nS      f 4 1° their inclusion (new section 10(5    The
 extent of the provision is also reserved for his determination.       y
 16. A prohibition notice and any amendment to it should be
 I S f t L 0? thS PerS°?S sPecified in new section 1 0 (6 ?? She?e it
 applies to an occasion for which a special safetv certificate
 in force, notice should be served on both the holder of toe
                                        and ,
                                            t he holder
validity of *the notice?                 S°     "   "0t h°WeVer affect the

tike effectCi i S L t ^ 7i pf°vifes that a prohibition notice can
            ~         iaJ®ly if the risk to spectators is imminent or
whe^      JvL                  ®nd of the P®riod specified in the notice'
S a ? e S a t ntoeC? i f i t 0      i ^ ^ e effect, the notice mSst
state that the local authority are of the opinion that the risk
to spectators is or, as the case may be, will be i m m ? L £ ?

must                   Prohibition notice and any amendment to it
            ?      S     officer and authorities named in new section
10(8).      In most cases these authorities are likely to be
co!?sS“ 2de?n“ d“ L e ? fety **“              and *“    U k e l y to havs b“ "                }

    « 2 S L ,!0ti<? 10(91 a Prohibition notice may be amended and
           ?   J?   specify the date on which it is to come into
operation (section 10(10)). Under section 10(11) a prohibition
sectiSn“l2 5              +-S?Cii°n 23(2) of the 1987 Act amends
        I                ct (°ffenc©s) to take account of the
« c ? ? o n S ( “ 0o f0Sh“ i 97i eI r t ? n 2 3 ‘3> * " * t 0 th e a * f i n l t i o -   °f
Appeals

iq4r         w 4 °f *he 1987 Act introduces new section 10A to the
         which provides for a system of appeals against
prohibition notices issued under new section 10 as inserted bv
section 23 of the 1987 Act. The bringing of an appeal does not     %
    « S i L ? ° K ! eekiS9 a co?rt °rder» and prohibition notices should in
    lonenfi k?           j JJ !».    rather than a first resort, after
    S S f ! 0118/ }          j    ground operator have failed to secure
                  f safety improvements and amendment of a safety
    £1? ♦ 2           <wheff1_issued) is not considered to be an effective
    way of dealing with the risk(s). It is, of course, nonetheless
                    for local authorities to ensure that they have an
                   m    iner? for the issue of such a notice urgently
    should the need arise. Authorities may therefore wish to
    consider delegating to a limited number of senior officers the
    containing directions?*141* °f      °0Un0il a"d lssue suoh a noti«



 d«ta???noI14-i?1* notice directions under new section 1 0 (4 )
 detailing the required remedial measures. A notice can
 generally or to a specific occasion (new section 10(3))        a
 ™       may not however include directions compliance with which
 22?}’2-rSqU e the.Provision of police unless the Chief Officer of
 Police has consented to their inclusion (new section             fpvia
 extent of the provision is also reserved f « h!fdrte^lnition *

        s r ^ biti0n notice and any amendment to it should be
 served on the persons specified in new section 10(6). Where it
 applies to an occasion for which a special safety certificate is
 in force, notice should be served on both the holder of the
         sJfety certificate and the holder of the general safety
Isa^-thTSSS .?0do 80do“ not                             a«ecTih.safety
take                    pfovides that a prohibition notice can
in             S
            immediately, if the risk to spectators is imminent or
            J?' a?      end of the Period specified in the notice.'
Sate       Shf6?    i   t;ke immediate effect, the notice must
to
to spectatoS  is°or
   spectators is      a * the
                 or, as   ^ rity are
                              case   °fwthe
                                   may      °Pinion
                                       be, will     that the risk
                                                be imminent.

1?'+                  pr°i}b iti°n notice and any amendment to it             >
1              0       officer and authorities named in new section
10(8).     In most cases these authorities are likely to be
c*nsu“ S d *L 1ad“ nce?£ety             “ “ U k e ly to have b8«"         )
19. Under section 10(9) a prohibition notice may be amended and
any amendment must specify the date on which it is to come into
operation (section 10(10)). Under section 10(11) a prohibition
sentfon” ? ? b ;
           l
                              section 23{2) of   the   1987
                           Act (offences) to take account of the
« “ ?“     ^ ( l ? Oo£°tte0i97feIct?n 23(3) addS te toe d#£lnitions of
Appeals
                                                        V   ••




     ? ??*£? ?4 of     1987 Act introduces new section 10A to the
         whl°h provides for a system of appeals against
prohibition notices issued under new section 10 as inserted by
section 23 of the 1987 Act. The bringing of an appeal does not



                                  ©
suspend the operation of the notice or of any amendment to it
(section 10A(6)) so, particularly if the notice is to apply to a
"one-off" fixture, it is important that it is served, wherever
possible, well in advance so as to enable the recipient to
exercise effectively his right of appeal. The appeal procedure
is by way of complaint to a Magistrates Court. On appeal the
court may cancel the notice or affirm the notice, either in its
original form or as amended, or with such modifications as the
court thinks fit. There is provision for a further right of
appeal to the Crown Court against the decision of the Magistrates
Court. Persons entitled to make such an appeal are listed in new
section 10A(7). "An aggrieved person" referred to in sub-section
(7)(a) is defined in sub-section (9).
Section 25:   Enforcement : Inspections and offence of obstruction
21. Section 25(1) of the 1987 Act adds a new section 10B to the
1975 Act which provides for local authorities to enforce the
Act's provisions and, for that purpose, to arrange for the
inspection of designated grounds at least once every twelve
months in accordance with any guidance from the Secretary of
State.
22. Section 25(2) updates section 12(6)(d) of the 1975 Act by
amending the term "wilfully" to "intentionally".




G2 Division
Fire & Emergency Planning Department
                                                 HOC 71/1987    ANNEX B


[Name and address of local authority]

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
PROHIBITION NOTICE

Name (a)
Address (b)
     being -      *the holder of a general safety certificate for (c)
              -   *the holder of a special safety certificate for     (c)
              -    *the person who appears to the (e) council to be
                  responsible for the management of (c)
              - *a person who appears to the (e) council to be
                responsible for organising an activity at (c)

     on    (d)

Notice is hereby given that (e) Council are of the opinion that
the admission of spectators to *[the (c) sports ground]*[parts of
the (c) sports ground which are] specified in the Schedule to
this notice * [involves]*[will involve] a risk to them so serious
that until steps have been taken to reduce it to a reasonable
level the admission of spectators to *[the ground] *[that part of
the ground] ought to be * [prohibited] *[restricted].
The matters which in the council's opinion *[give] *[will give]
rise to that risk are as follows . . . .




The (e) Council hereby direct that *[no spectators]*[no more than
the number of spectators specified in the schedule which forms
part of this notice] shall be admitted to *[that sports ground]
*[the parts of that sports ground specified in the schedule]
until those matters detailed above have been remedied.
*The (e) Council is of the opinion that the risk to spectators
*[is]*[will be] imminent, and the * [prohibition] * [restriction]
is to take effect immediately.




                                  m
The * [ p r o h ib itio n ] * [ r e s t r i c t i o n ] i s t o t i k e e f f e c t a f t e r /19
, and r e l a t e s t o th e adm ission o f s p e c ta to r s * [g e n e ra lly ] *[on
th e o c c a s io n (s ) s p e c if ie d in th e s c h e d u le ].
*The (e) C ouncil f u r t h e r d i r e c t t h a t th e s te p s s p e c if ie d in th e
sch ed u le which forms p a r t o f t h i s n o tic e w i l l have t o be ta k e n to
red u ce th e r i s k t o a re a s o n a b le le v e l.




S ig n a tu re                                                             Date
(Block C a p ita ls )
P o s itio n h e ld in C ouncil           ..........................
[Being a p erso n a u th o r is e d by (e) C ouncil under s e c tio n 101 of
th e Local Government Act 1972 t o is s u e such a n o tic e ]
(a)    Name o f p e rso n on whom th e n o tic e i s b e in g serv ed
(b)    A ddress a t which i t i s in te n d e d t o se rv e th e n o tic e
(c)    Name o f s p o r ts ground
(d)    Date o f e v e n t covered by a s p e c ia l s a f e ty c e r t i f i c a t e to
       which th e n o tic e a p p lie s
(e)    Name o f th e lo c a l a u th o r ity



♦ d e l e t e a s a p p r o p r ia te .
The * [prohibition] * [restriction] is to take effect after  /19
, and relates to the admission of spectators *[generally] *[on
the occasion(s) specified in the schedule].
♦T he (e) C o u n cil f u r t h e r d i r e c t t h a t t h e s t e p s s p e c i f i e d i n th e
s c h e d u le w hich form s p a r t o f t h i s n o t i c e w i l l have t o be ta k e n t o
re d u c e t h e r i s k t o a r e a s o n a b le l e v e l .




S ig n a tu r e                                                               D ate
(B lock C a p ita ls )
P o s i t i o n h e ld i n C o u n cil .............................
 [B eing a p e rs o n a u th o r is e d by (e) C o uncil u n d e r s e c t i o n 101 o f
t h e L ocal Government A ct 1972 t o is s u e such a n o tic e ]
(a)    Name o f p e rs o n on whom t h e n o t i c e i s b e in g s e rv e d
(b)    A ddress a t which i t i s in te n d e d t o s e rv e t h e n o t i c e
(c)    Name o f s p o r t s ground
(d)    D ate o f e v e n t co v e re d by a s p e c i a l s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e t o
       w hich t h e n o t i c e a p p l i e s
(e)    Name o f t h e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y



♦d e l e t e as a p p ro p ria te .
Schedule
1.* No more th a n t h e fo llo w in g numbers o f s p e c ta to r s may be
a d m itte d t o th e g ro u n d /th e p a r t s o f th e ground s p e c if ie d below*

2 .* The fo llo w in g s te p s must be ta k e n t o red u ce th e r i s k t o
s p e c ta to r s t o a re a s o n a b le l e v e l :

3 .* The p r o h i b i t i o n / r e s t r i c t i o n * a p p lie s t o th e ad m ission o f
s p e c ta to r s on th e fo llo w in g o c c a sio n s:


♦ d e l e t e a s a p p r o p r ia te
           THESE NOTES SHOULD BE PRINTED ON '.TIE BACK OF THE
                          PROHIBITION NOTICE
NOTES
Offences
1.        C o n trav en tio n o f any p r o h ib itio n n o tic e o r r e s t r i c t i o n
imposed by a p r o h ib itio n n o tic e i s an o ffe n c e p ro v id e d by s e c tio n
1 2 ( 1 ) (e) o f th e S a fe ty o f S p o rts Grounds Act 1975 (th e 1975 Act)
a s amended by th e F ir e S a fe ty and S a fe ty o f P la c e s o f S p o rt Act
1987 (th e 1987 Act) and re n d e rs th e o ffe n d e r l i a b l e , on summary
c o n v ic tio n , t o a f in e n o t exceeding th e s t a t u t o r y maximum
( c u r r e n tly £2,000) o r , on c o n v ic tio n on in d ic tm e n t, t o an
u n lim ite d f i n e , o r im prisonm ent f o r n o t more th a n two y e a r s , o r
b o th .
2.       Where any p erso n i s charged w ith an o ffe n c e under s e c tio n
1 2 ( 1 ) (e) o f th e 1975 Act i t s h a l l be a defence t o prove
(a)    t h a t th e adm ission o f s p e c ta to r s in c o n tra v e n tio n o f th e
       n o tic e was w ith o u t h i s c o n se n t; and
(b)    t h a t he to o k a l l re a so n a b le p re c a u tio n s and e x e rc is e d a l l
       due d ilig e n c e t o avoid th e commission o f such an o ffe n c e by
       h im se lf o r any o th e r p erso n under h i s c o n tr o l.
3.       S e c tio n 12(7) o f th e 1975 Act p ro v id e s t h a t where an o ffe n c e
under t h a t A ct which has been committed by a body c o rp o ra te i s
proved t o have been committed w ith th e c o n sen t o r connivance o f,
o r t o be a t t r i b u t a b l e t o any n e g le c t on th e p a r t o f , a d i r e c t o r ,
manager, s e c r e ta r y o r o th e r s i m i l a r . o f f i c e r o f th e body
c o rp o r a te , o r any p erso n who was p u rp o rtin g t o a c t in any such
c a p a c ity , h e , as w e ll as th e body c o r p o ra te , s h a l l be g u i l t y o f
t h a t o ffe n c e and be l i a b l e t o be proceeded a g a in s t and punished
a c c o r d in g ly .
4.       Where th e a f f a i r s o f a body c o rp o ra te a r e managed by i t s
members, s e c tio n 12(7) o f th e 1975 Act s h a l l ap p ly in r e l a t i o n to
th e a c t s , and d e f a u l t s o f a member in c o n n ectio n w ith h is
f u n c tio n s o f management as i f he were a d i r e c t o r o f th e body
c o rp o ra te .
5.       The v a l i d i t y o f a p r o h ib itio n n o tic e se rv e d on any p erson
s h a l l n o t be a f f e c t e d by a f a i l u r e t o s e rv e a n o th e r p erso n
r e q u ir e d t o be se rv e d w ith such a n o tic e .

Appeals
6.     Your a t t e n t i o n i s drawn t o th e p r o v is io n f o r ap p eal t o a
m a g is tr a te s ' c o u r t a g a in s t t h i s n o tic e in s e c tio n 10A o f th e 1975
Act a s in s e r te d by th e 1987 A ct.
R eg u la tio n s made under s e c tio n 10A(1) o f th e 1975 Act s t i p u l a t e
t h a t a p erso n on whom a p r o h ib itio n n o tic e i s se rv e d may appeal
t o th e c o u r t w ith in 21 days a f t e r th e day on which th e n o tic e i s
serv ed on him.
Where an a p p e a l i s b ro u g h t u n d e r t h i s s e c t i o n a g a i n s t a
p r o h i b i t i o n n o t i c e o r an amendment o f i t , t h e b r in g in g o f th e
a p p e a l does n o t have t h e e f f e c t o f su sp e n d in g th e o p e r a tio n o f
th e n o t i c e .




                                                                                                  >

                                                                                              y
                                             1987 No. 1941

      SPORTS G R O U N D S A N D SPORTING EVENTS

          The Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987
                       M ade -                                         16th November 1987
                       L aid before Parliament                         25th November 1987
                       Coming into force             -                    1st January 1988



Inexerciseofthepowersconferredupon me bysections6(1)and (4)and 10A(1)and (2)of
theSafetyofSportsGrounds Act 1975(a),and aftersuch consultationasismentioned in
section 18(4)ofthatAct, Ihereby make thefollowingRegulations:
Citation,commencement andextent
   1— (1) These Regulations may be cited asthe Safety ofSports Grounds Regulations
1987and shallcome intoforceon 1stJanuary 1988.
  (2) These Regulationsdo not extendto theIslesofScilly.
Revocation
  2. The Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976(b), the Safety of Sports Grounds
(Scotland) Regulations 1976(c) and the Safety of Sports Grounds (Amendment)
Regulations 1986(d) arehereby revoked, except forthepurposes ofany appealtowhich
paragraph 6 of Schedule 5 to the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
(transitionalprovisionsasrespectsappeals about safetycertificates)(e)applies.

Interpretation
  3. For thepurposes oftheseRegulations“the 1975 Act” means theSafetyofSports
Grounds Act 1975.
Applications
  4.— (1) An application for a safety certificate shall be in the form contained in the
ScheduletotheseRegulationsora form to thelikeeffect.
   (2) An application for the amendment, replacement or transferofa safetycertificate
shallbemade inwritingand any suchapplicationshallsetoutthenames and addressesof
any persons who to the applicant’s knowledge will or may be concerned in ensuring
compliancewiththetermsand conditionsofthesafetycertificateasamended, replacedor
transferred.
Noticesby localauthority
  5.— (1) As soon aspracticableaftera localauthorityhave decided—
     (a) toissuea safetycertificate(includingan issueby way ofreplacement ofa safety
          certificate);or
     (b) toamend a safetycertificate;or
     (c) torefusetoamend orreplacea safetycertificate,
(a)1975 c.52; section 6(1) (c) was substituted by section 22(7) o f the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
    (c.27) and, section 10A was inserted by section 24 o f that Act.
(b) S.I. 1976/1263.     (c) S.I. 1976/1300.    (d) S.I. 1986/1045.       (e) 1987 c.27.
 theyshallserveon everyinterestedpartynoticeinwritingoftheirdecisionsettingout the
 informationreferredtoinparagraph(4)below,together,inthecaseofarefusal,withtheir
 reasons forit.
   (2) Where on an application for a special safety certificate a local authority have
 determinedtorefusethatapplicationon groundsotherthan theone referredtoinsection
 5(1) of the 1975 Act, they shall as soon as practicable after that refusal serve on the
 applicantnoticeinwritingoftheirdecision,togetherwith theirreasons forit.
    (3) Where on an application forthetransferofa safetycertificatea localauthority—
      (a) determinethatthepersontowhom itisproposed totransferthecertificateisnot
          a qualifiedperson, theyshall,inadditiontothenoticereferredtoinsection 5(1)
          ofthe 1975 Act,serveon theholderofthecertificatea copy ofthatnotice;
      (b) determine that theperson towhom itisproposed to transferthecertificateisa
          qualifiedperson butdecidenottotransferthecertificate,theyshallserveon that
          personand theholderofthecertificatenoticeinwritingoftheirdecisiontogether
          withtheirreasonsforit.
    (4) A notice served under paragraph (1) above shall state that a copy of the safety
 certificateand a copy ofanyapplicationinrespectofwhich thelocalauthority’sdecision
 was takenisavailableforinspectionata placeand atthetimesspecifiedinthenotice.
  (5) A soon as may be afterthedecision referred to inparagraph (1)above, the local
authorityshallcausetobepublishedinanewspapercirculatinginthelocalityofthesports
ground to which the safety certificate relates a notice setting out that decision and the
informationreferredtoinparagraph (4)above.
    (6) Inthisregulation “interestedparty” means—
      (a) theholderofasafetycertificatewhoseapplicationtohaveitamended orreplaced
          has been refused;
      (b) any otherperson known tothelocalauthoritytobeor likelyto beconcerned in
          ensuringcompliancewith thetermsand conditionsofthesafetycertificate;
      (c) thechiefofficerofpolice;and
      (d) where thelocalauthorityisinGreaterLondon orametropolitancounty, thefire
          authorityor,inany othercase,thebuildingauthority.


Appealsundersection5 ofthe1975Act
   6.— (1) An appeal under section 5 ofthe 1975 Act(a)shallbe brought (inaccordance
withsubsection(3A)or,asthecasemay be,subsection(3B)ofsection5 ofthatAct(b))in
thecaseofan appealinrespectof—
     (a) a generalsafetycertificate,notlaterthan twenty-eightdays,and
     (b) a specialsafetycertificate,notlaterthan sevendays,
aftertherelevantdate.
   (2) Inparagraph (1)above “relevantdate” means—
      (a) inthecaseofa persontowhom asafetycertificateisissued,thedateofthereceipt
          by him ofthatcertificate;
      (b) inthecaseofa personon whom anoticeisservedundersection4(1)(a)or5(1)of
          the 1975 Act or regulation5(1), (2)or(3)above,thedate ofthereceiptbyhim of
          thatnotice;and
      (c) inthecaseofany otherperson,thedateofthepublicationofthenoticerequired
          by regulation 5(5)above.
(a) Section 5 was amended by paragraph 7(1) of Schedule 8 to the Local Government Act 1985 (c.51) and by section
    22 o f the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987.
(b)Subsections (3A) and (3B) o f section 5 were inserted by section 22(3) o f the Fire Safety and Safety of Places o f Sport
    Act 1987.
 theyshallserveon everyinterestedpartynoticeinwritingoftheirdecisionsettingout the
 informationreferredtoinparagraph(4)below,together,inthecaseofa refusal,withtheir
 reasons forit.
   (2) Where on an application for a special safety certificate a local authority have
 determined torefusethatapplicationon grounds otherthan theone referredtoinsection
 5(1) of the 1975 Act, they shall as soon as practicable after that refusal serve on the
 applicantnoticeinwritingoftheirdecision,togetherwith theirreasons forit.
    (3) Where on an applicationforthetransferofa safetycertificatea localauthority—
      (a) determine thattheperson towhom itisproposed totransferthecertificateisnot
          a qualifiedperson, they shall,inaddition to thenoticereferred toinsection 5(1)
          ofthe 1975Act, serveon theholderofthecertificatea copy ofthatnotice;
      (b) determine that the person to whom itisproposed to transfer thecertificateisa
          qualifiedperson butdecidenot totransferthecertificate,theyshallserveon that
          personand theholderofthecertificatenoticeinwritingoftheirdecisiontogether
          with theirreasonsforit.
   (4) A notice served under paragraph (1) above shall state that a copy of the safety
certificateand a copy ofany applicationinrespectofwhich thelocalauthority’sdecision
was taken isavailableforinspectionata placeand atthetimes specifiedinthe notice.
  (5) A soon as may be after the decision referred to in paragraph (1) above, the local
authorityshallcausetobepublishedinanewspapercirculatinginthelocalityofthesports
ground to which the safety certificate relates a notice setting out that decision and the
information referredto inparagraph (4)above.
    (6) In thisregulation “interestedparty” means—
      (a) theholderofa safetycertificatewhose applicationtohaveitamended orreplaced
          has been refused;
      (b) any otherperson known to thelocalauthorityto be or likelyto be concerned in
          ensuringcompliance with thetermsand conditionsofthesafetycertificate;
      (c) thechiefofficerofpolice;and
      (d) where thelocalauthorityisinGreaterLondon ora metropolitancounty, thefire
          authorityor,inany othercase,thebuildingauthority.


Appealsundersection5 ofthe 1975 Act
   6.— (1) An appeal under section 5 ofthe 1975 Act(a) shallbe brought (inaccordance
with subsection(3A) or,asthecasemay be,subsection(3B)ofsection 5ofthatAct(b))in
thecaseofan appeal in respectof—
     (a) a generalsafetycertificate,not laterthan twenty-eightdays,and
     (b) a specialsafetycertificate,not laterthan sevendays,
afterthe relevantdate.
   (2) In paragraph (1)above “relevantdate” means—
     (a) inthecaseofa person*owhom asafetycertificateisissued,thedateofthereceipt
         by him ofthatcertificate;
     (b) inthecaseofa personon whom a noticeisservedunder section4(1)(a)or 5(1)of
         the 1975 Act or regulation5(1),(2)or(3)above, thedate ofthereceiptby him of
         thatnotice;and
     (c) inthecaseofany otherperson,thedateofthepublicationofthenoticerequired
         by regulation 5(5)above.
(*) Section 5 was amended by paragraph 7( 1) o f Schedule 8 to the Local Government Act 1985 (c.51) and by section
    22 o f the Fire Safety and Safety of Places o f Sport Act 1987.
(b) Subsections (3A) and (3B) o f section 5 were inserted by section 22(3) o f the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport
    Act 1987.
Appealsundersection10A ofthe1975Act
    — (1) An appeal by an aggrieved person against a prohibition notice under section
lW(l) ofthe 1975 Act(a) shall be brought (inaccordance with subsection (3)or,asthe
casemay be,subsection(4)ofsection10AofthatAct)notlaterthantwenty-onedaysafter
theday on whichthenoticewas servedon him undersection 10(1)ofthe 1975 Act(b).
  (2) An appeal by an aggrieved person againstan amendment to a prohibition notice
undersection 10A(1)ofthe 1975Act (asextendedby section 10A(2)ofthatAct)shallbe
brought(inaccordancewithsubsection(3)or,asthecasemay be,subsection(4)ofsection
10A ofthatAct)notlaterthantwenty-onedaysafterthedayonwhichthenoticeamending
theprohibitionnoticewas servedon him undersection 10(9)ofthe 1975 Act.
Fees
  8. A localauthoritymay determinethefeeto becharged inrespectofan application
fortheissue,amendment, replacementortransferofasafetycertificatebutsuchafeeshall
notexceedanamountcommensuratewiththework actuallyandreasonablydonebyoron
behalfofthelocalauthorityinrespectoftheapplication.


Home Office                                                                                       DouglasHurd
   November 1987                                                 One ofHer Majesty’sPrincipalSecretariesofState



                                                               SCHEDULE                                                          Regulation 4(1)

                              SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                            APPLICATION FOR A SAFETY CERTIFICATE
When completed, this form should be sent to the Chief Executive of:
   (a) the county council where the sports ground is situated in a non-metropolitan county in England
       or Wales; or
   (b) the borough council where the sports ground is situated in Greater London; or
   (c) the district council where the sports ground is situated in a metropolitan county in England; or
   (d) the regional/islands council where the sports ground is situated in Scotland.

To be completed in all cases


•
I hereby apply for a ‘ [general] [special] safety certificate in respect of the sports ground described
below to be issued to .......................................................................................................................


I make the application *[on behalf of] [as] .....................................................................................
o f t ....................................................................................................................................................



Date       .....................................                                Signed..............................................................

Address ........................................................
                    .................................................                 Tel.No........................................................
* Delete as appropriate
t I f applying on behalf o f a sports club, company or some other person, insert status (e.g. secretary).

  Under the provisions of section 3 (1) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, a local authority
receiving an application for a safety certificate have to determine whether the person to whom the
certificate may be issued is likely to be in a position to prevent contravention of the terms and
conditions of the certificate. The applicant should therefore furnish below the information required
so as to enable the local authority to make such a determination. Under section 3(4) of the Act the
local authority may also require the applicant to submit plans and further information.
    Secl:tion 10A was inserted by section 24 o f the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987.

f   Section
    Seci      10 was substituted by section 23(1) of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places o f Sport Act 1987.
  1. (a) Name and address of sports ground


                         " f :

       (b) Name of the occupier............
          Name and address of the owner


       (c) Names and addresses of any persons other than the proposed holder of the certificate who
          to his knowledge will or may be concerned in ensuring compliance with the terms and
          conditions of the safety certificate for which this application is being made.




Complete Part I onlyfo r an applicationfo r a general safety certificate ( to cover activities held over an
indefinite period).
Complete Part II onlyfor an applicationfor a special safety certificate ( to cover one occasion or a series
o f occasions).



PART I: GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES
  2.     List activities to be covered by general safety certificate




  3.     Give the approximate date of the construction of the spectator accommodation on the sports
ground and details of any subsequent extension, major alteration or re-construction of the spectator
accommodation on the sports ground, together with relevant dates.




  4. Giveparticularsofcurrentfirecertificatescoveringanypremiseson any partofthesports
ground:
    (a)name ofissuingfireauthority...............................
       (b)name ofholderoffirecertificate..............................
       (c)dateofissueoffirecertificate...............................
       (d)descriptionofpremisescoveredbythefirecertificate..................

  5. Giveparticularsofanycurrentstatutorylicencesgrantedinrespectofthesportsgroundor
partsofit:
    (a)name ofissuinglicensingauthority............................
       (b)name oflicensee......................................
       (c) type of licence (liquor, gaming etc.)   .......................................................................................

       (d)dateofexpiry............................ ...........
       (e)descriptionofthepartorpartsofthesportsgroundcoveredbythelicence ......
  1. (a) Name and address of sports ground



     (b) Name oftheoccupier....
         Name andaddressoftheowner


     (c) Names andaddressesofanypersonsotherthantheproposedholderofthecertificatewho
        to hisknowledge will ormay be concerned inensuring compliance with the terms and
        conditionsofthesafetycertificateforwhichthisapplicationisbeingmade.




Complete Part I only fo r an application fo r a general safety certificate ( to cover activities held over an
mdefinite period).
Complete Part II onlyfor an applicationfor a special safety certificate (to cover one occasion or a series
o f occasions).



PART I: GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES
 2. Listactivitiestobecoveredbygeneralsafetycertificate



  3.    Givetheapproximatedateoftheconstructionofthespectatoraccommodationonthesports
groundanddetailsofanysubsequentextension,majoralterationorre-constructionofthespectator
accommodation onthesportsground,togetherwithrelevantdates.




  4. Give particularsofcurrentfirecertificatescoveringany premiseson any partofthesports
ground:
    (a)name ofissuingfireauthority................................
     (b)name ofholderoffirecertificate..............................
     (c) dateofissueoffirecertificate................................
     (d)descriptionofpremisescoveredbythefirecertificate...................

  5. Giveparticularsofanycurrentstatutorylicencesgrantedinrespectofthesportsground or
partsofit:
    (a)name ofissuinglicensingauthority.............................
     (b)name oflicensee.......................................
                   *
     (c)typeoflicence(liquor,gamingetc.) ............................
     (d)dateofexpiry..................................... .
     (e)descriptionofthepartorpartsofthesportsgroundcoveredbythelicence ......
                                                                                                                            ....   JL%    2



  6. (1) state maximum capacity for which spectator accommodation at the sports ground is
intended:         ■
     (a) seated spectators..                 ............................. ............................................
                                                     •
      (b) standing spectators ..

  (2) State any restrictions on that capacity:
      (a) seated spectators...............• • . ...............................................................

      (b) standing spectators.........................................................................................

  7     Set out separately for each of the last three years the total number of seated spectators and


shouldbe named, together ’with the number of occasions on which each activity took place during
each of those years.




 the activity taking place.

 PART II: SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES
   9,      Name event for which special safety certificate is required



    10. Give date(s) of event

   11.    Give the number of occasions on which this special event has taken place at the sports
 ground during the last three years ...................................................................................................
    o         out separately the total number of seated spectators and the total number of standing
  spectators at any similar event held within the last three years at the sports ground, giving the name
  of the event and the date on which it was held.




                                                 EXPLANATORY NOTE
                                         (T his note is not part o f the Regulations)
      These Reeulations which apply throughout Great Britain (exceptthe IslesofSdlly),
                                Grounds Regulations 1976(“the 1976Regulations” andthe
   SafetyofSportsGrounds (A m endm ent) Regulations 1986 (which apply^ Eng^ndand
   Wales,excepttheIslesofStilly)and theSafetyo f SportsGrounds (Scotland)Regulations
   1976 (“the 1976ScottishR egulations ” )•
      Reeulations8to13ofthe1976Regulationsandregulations9and 10ofthe1976Scottish
   Regulations made provision for the procedure for appeals to the Secretary State in
   respectofsafetycertificatesundersection5oftheSafetyo‘Sports»GroungyA*                   1f
    1975 Act”).When theamendments made by section22 ofthe FireSafetyandbaiety o
   PlacesofSDortAct 1987 (“the 1987Act”)come intoforce,thoseappealswillbemade to
                       in England and Wales and by summaryRationm Scotland a*d
    regulations8to 13ofthe 1976 Regulationsand regulations9 and 10ofthe 1976 Scottish
    « £ £ £ . ' £ no longer* nJLfy.«,(virtuect
    r»fSnortAct 1987( C o m m e n c e m e n t No. 1)Order 1987(S.I.1987/1762),ran 11oime i v o
    Act(inwhichsection22iscontained)comesintoforceon 1stJanuary 1988,thesame date
                                                                            5

                                                                      m
asthecoming intoforceofthese Regulations.Accordingly, these Regulationsno longer
include provision corresponding to regulations 8 to 13 of the 1976 Regulations and
regulations9 and 10ofthe 1976ScottishRegulations(theenablingpower forwhichis,in
anyevent,replacedbysection22(7)ofthe 1987Act)butprovideinstead(inreflation6)
forthetimewithinwhichanappealmustbebroughtbeforeamagistrates’courtinEngland
and Wales or by summary applicationinScotland.
  These Regulations also differ from the 1976 Regulations and the 1976 Scottish
Regulations inthattheyno longerprescribea minimum time beforetheevent forwhich
theapplicationismade forthesubmission ofanapplicationforaspecialsafetycertificate.
They also do not require the local authority to have made decisions in respect of such
applications by specifiedperiods.
   Regulation 5 of these Regulations requires certain notices to be given to interested
parties (as defined) and a newspaper notice to be published. Regulation 8 of these
Regulations differsfrom regulation 14 ofthe 1976 Regulations and regulation 11 ofthe
1976 Scottish Regulations in that itallows localauthorities to charge feesin respect of
applications for the replacement and transfer of safety certificates as well as for
applicationsfortheirissueand amendment.
  These Regulations also differfrom the 1976 Regulations (asamended) and the 1976
Scottish Regulationsinthatthey referonly tosportsgrounds and not tosportsstadiain
consequenceoftheamendments made tothe 1975Actby section 19of,and Schedule2 to,
the 1987Act (whichprovisionsalsocome intoforceon 1stJanuary 1988 by virtueofthe
Commencement Order referredtoabove).
   Regulation7oftheseRegulationsisa new provisionwhichprescribestheperiodwithin
which appealsinrespectofprohibitionnotices(andamendments tothosenotices)issued
undersection 10ofthe 1975Act (assubstitutedby section23(1)ofthe 1987Act)must be
broughtundersection 10A (1)and (2)ofthe 1975Act(asinsertedby section24ofthe 1987
Act).




                                             £1 -30 net
                                 ISBN 0 11 077941                    X

                     Printed in the United Kingdom by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
                                    790/W01734 C13 11/87 3174871
asthecoming intoforceofthese Regulations. Accordingly, these Regulations no longer
include provision corresponding to regulations 8 to 13 of the 1976 Regulations and
regulations9 and 10ofthe 1976ScottishRegulations{theenablingpower forwhichis,in
anyevent,replacedby section22(7)ofthe 1987Act)butprovideinstead(inregulation6)
forthetimewithinwhichanappealmustbebroughtbeforeamagistrates’courtinEngland
and Wales or by summary applicationin Scotland.
  These Regulations also differ from the 1976 Regulations and the 1976 Scottish
Regulations in thattheyno longerprescribea minimum time before the event forwhich
theapplicationismade forthesubmission ofan applicationforaspecialsafetycertificate.
They also do not require the local authority to have made decisions in respect of such
applications by specifiedperiods.
   Regulation 5 of these Regulations requires certain notices to be given to interested
parties (as defined) and a newspaper notice to be published. Regulation 8 of these
Regulations differsfrom regulation 14 of the 1976 Regulations and regulation 11 ofthe
1976 Scottish Regulations in that itallows local authorities to charge fees in respect of
applications for the replacement and transfer of safety certificates as well as for
applicationsfortheirissueand amendment.
  These Regulations also differfrom the 1976 Regulations (as amended) and the 1976
ScottishRegulations inthatthey referonly tosportsgrounds and not tosportsstadiain
consequenceoftheamendmentsmade tothe 1975Act by section 19of,and Schedule2 to,
the 1987 Act (whichprovisionsalsocome intoforceon 1stJanuary 1988 by virtueofthe
Commencement Orderreferredtoabove).
   Regulation7oftheseRegulationsisa new provisionwhichprescribestheperiodwithin
which appealsinrespectofprohibitionnotices(andamendments tothosenotices)issued
under section 10ofthe 1975 Act (assubstitutedby section23(1)ofthe 1987 Act) must be
broughtundersection 10A (1)and (2)ofthe 1975Act(asinsertedby section24ofthe 1987
Act).




                                              £1-30 net
                                  ISBN (                 177941         X

                     Printed in the United K in A u * i|A e r Majesty's Stationery Office
                                   790/W01734 C13 11/87 3174871
                                                          H O M E OFFICE
                                                  Queen Anne’s Gate L o n d o n SW1H 9AT
                                                            Direct line: 01-213
                                                        Switchboard: 01-213 3000

Our reference:       *EP/87 6/233/14
Your reference:
                                                                       25 November 1987
        The C h ief E x ec u tiv e s
                                       County C ouncils
                                       M e tro p o lita n D i s t r i c t C ouncils
                                       London Borough C ouncils
                                       Common C ouncil o f th e C ity o f London

        Dear S i r
        HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 72/1987
        FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 :
        IMPLEMENTATION OF PART I I (SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS)                      SECTION 25

        INSPECTIONS UNDER SECTION 10B OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT
        1975



        I n tr o d u c tio n
        F u rth e r t o HOC/71/87 g iv in g a d v ic e ab o u t th e e f f e c t s o f changes
        b ro u g h t abo ut by im plem entation o f P a r t I I o f th e F ir e S a fe ty and
        S a fe ty o f P la c e s o f S p o rt Act 1987 (th e 1987 Act) t h i s c i r c u l a r
        in tro d u c e s S ta tu to r y Guidance giv en by th e S e c r e ta r y o f S ta te on
        in s p e c tio n s o f d e s ig n a te d s p o r ts grounds under s e c tio n 10B o f th e
        S a fe ty o f S p o rts Grounds Act 1975 (th e 1975 Act) a s in s e r t e d by
        s e c tio n 25 o f th e 1987 A ct.
        G eneral
        The S ta tu to r y Guidance, drawn up fo llo w in g c o n s u lta tio n w ith th e
        l o c a l a u th o r ity a s s o c ia tio n s , has e f f e c t in r e s p e c t o f any
        in s p e c tio n c a r r i e d o u t under s e c tio n 10B o f th e 1975 A ct a f t e r 1
        Ja n u a ry 1988 when, by v i r t u e o f th e Commencement Number 1 O rder,
        P a r t I I o f t h e 1987 Act comes in to e f f e c t .
        Local a u t h o r i t i e s sh ou ld b e a r in mind th e mandatory n a tu r e o f th e
        S ta tu to r y Guidance on in s p e c tio n s c a r r ie d o u t under s e c tio n 10B
        o f th e 1975 A ct w hereas th e supplem entary, e x p la n a to ry memorandum
        e n c lo se d w ith th e S ta tu to r y Guidance i s n o t b in d in g .
Resource Implications
W h ilst i t i s n o t in te n d e d t o r e s t r i c t th e tim e l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s
may f e e l sh o u ld be d ev oted t o t h i s t a s k , in s p e c tio n s und er
s e c tio n 10B (when ta k e n w ith e x i s t i n g commitments t o in s p e c t
d e s ig n a te d s p o r ts grounds) sh o u ld n o t r e s u l t i n s i g n i f i c a n t
re s o u rc e im p lic a tio n s . The scope o f in s p e c tio n s und er p a ra g rap h s
3 and 4 o f th e S ta tu to r y G uidance, to g e th e r w ith a s s o c ia te d
r e p o r t work, a re n o t in te n d e d t o be as d e t a i l e d o r e x te n s iv e a s
t h a t o f te n r e q u ir e d o f th e h o ld e r o f a s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e , o r
t h a t which may sometimes be n e c e s s a ry p r i o r t o th e is s u e o f a
s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e . In g e n e r a l, in s p e c tio n s a r e n o t ex p ected to
ta k e more th a n about 2 man days p e r ground on a v e ra g e .
To a s s i s t lo c a l a u t h o r i t i e s p re p a re a r e p o r t and re c o rd o f
in s p e c tio n s a su g g e ste d b a s ic form at which can be a d a p te d
a c c o rd in g t o p r e f e re n c e i s e n c lo se d a t Annex A.
Supplem entary
Any e n q u ir ie s about t h i s c i r c u l a r o r th e S ta tu to r y Guidance
sh ou ld be d ir e c te d t o Mr Macnamara 01“
                                                             Yours f a i t h f u l l y




                                                             P CANOVAN
Copies f o r in fo rm a tio n s e n t t o : -
ACC, AMA, LBA, ADC, ACPO
C le rk s t o F ir e and C iv il Defence A u th o r itie s
C hief O f f ic e r s o f P o lic e
C le rk s t o P o lic e A u th o r itie s
S p o rts C ouncil
Resource Implications
W h ilst i t i s n o t in te n d e d t o r e s t r i c t t h e tim e l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s
may f e e l sh o u ld be d e v o te d t o t h i s t a s k , i n s p e c t i o n s u n d e r
s e c t i o n 10B (when ta k e n w ith e x i s t i n g commitments t o i n s p e c t
d e s ig n a te d s p o r t s groun ds) sh o u ld n o t r e s u l t i n s i g n i f i c a n t
r e s o u r c e im p l i c a t i o n s . The sco p e o f in s p e c tio n s u n d e r p a ra g ra p h s
3 and 4 o f t h e S t a t u t o r y G uidance, t o g e t h e r w ith a s s o c i a t e d
r e p o r t work, a r e n o t in te n d e d t o be a s d e t a i l e d o r e x te n s iv e a s
t h a t o f t e n r e q u ir e d o f t h e h o ld e r o f a s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e , o r
t h a t w hich may som etim es be n e c e s s a ry p r i o r t o t h e i s s u e o f a
s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e . I n g e n e r a l , in s p e c tio n s a r e n o t e x p e c te d t o
ta k e more th a n ab o u t 2 man d ay s p e r ground on a v e ra g e .
To a s s i s t l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s p r e p a r e a r e p o r t and r e c o r d o f
i n s p e c tio n s a su g g e ste d b a s i c fo rm a t w hich can be a d a p te d
a c c o rd in g t o p r e f e r e n c e i s e n c lo s e d a t Annex A.
S upplem entary
Any e n q u i r i e s a b o u t t h i s c i r c u l a r o r th e S t a t u t o r y Guidance
sh o u ld be d i r e c t e d t o Mr Macnamara                               L
                                                                Yours f a i t h f u l l y




                                                                P CANOVAN
C opies f o r in f o rm a tio n s e n t t o : ~
ACC, AMA, LBA, ADC, ACPO
C le rk s t o F ir e and C i v i l D efence A u t h o r i t i e s
C h ie f O f f i c e r s o f P o lic e
C le rk s t o P o lic e A u t h o r i t i e s
S p o rts C o uncil




                                                      m
HOC 72/1987

STATUTORY GUIDANCE TO I0CAL AUTHORITIES ON INSPECTIONS TO BE
CARRIED OUT UNDER SECTION 10B OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT
1975


The fo llo w in g guidance i s g iv e n by th e S e c r e ta r y o f S ta te in
pursuance o f s e c tio n 10B(2) o f t h e S a fe ty o f S p o rts Ground Act
1975 (a s i n s e r t e d by s e c t i o n 25(1) o f t h e F i r e S a fe ty and S a fe ty
o f P la c e s o f S p o rt Act 1987).


G eneral
1.       The lo c a l a u th o r ity should be s a t i s f i e d t h a t in s p e c tio n s
under t h i s guidance a r e c a r r i e d o u t by a p e rso n o r p erso n s
q u a l i f i e d f o r t h a t p u rp o se.
Scope o f in s p e c tio n
2.          I n s p e c tio n o f th e ground sh o u ld , where p r a c t i c a b l e , in c lu d e
in s p e c tio n o f th e fo llo w in g c e r t i f i c a t e s o f t e s t i n g and re c o rd s
as re q u ir e d under th e term s and c o n d itio n s o f th e s a f e ty
c e r t i f i c a t e t o be k e p t by th e h o ld e r a n d /o r su b m itte d t o th e
lo c a l a u t h o r i t y .
(a)     any c e r t i f i c a t e c o v e rin g t e s t i n g o f
(i) s tr e n g th /lo a d in g t e s t s c a r r i e d o u t on c ru sh b a r r i e r s , guard
r a i l s , hand r a i l s , b a l u s t r a d i n g , w a lls o r fe n c e s ;
( i i ) s t r e n g t h , s t a b i l i t y o f b u ild in g s o r o th e r s tr u c tu r e s ?
( i i i ) in s p e c tio n s and c o n d itio n o f e l e c t r i c a l i n s t a l l a t i o n s .

(b)     re c o rd s o f th e f o llo w in g :-
(i)     s p e c ta to r a tte n d a n c e s ;
( i i ) a c c id e n ts in v o lv in g s p e c ta to r s ;
( i i i ) m aintenance and o th e r in s p e c tio n s o f b u ild in g s , components
         and. i n s t a l l a t i o n s , to g e th e r w ith i d e n t i f i e d d e f i c i e n c i e s and
         re c o rd e d rem ed ial m easures ta k e n ;
(iv ) t e s t s and checks on emergency l i g h t i n g , p u b lic ad d re ss
      system , f i r e f ig h t i n g equipm ent, f i r e w arning system ( i f
      in s ta lle d );
(v)    emergency e v a c u a tio n p ro c ed u res and stew ard t r a i n i n g
       s e s s io n s .
3.      The in s p e c tio n o f th e ground sh ould norm ally in c lu d e
in s p e c tio n o f th e fo llo w in g ite m s : -
 (a) any p a r t o f th e ground where an a c c id e n t o r in c id e n t
r e s u l t i n g i n s e r io u s in j u r y t o s p e c t a t o r s h as o c c u rre d s in c e th e
l a s t in s p e c tio n ;
 (b) any re c o rd e d d e f e c t o r d e f ic ie n c y which h as a r i s e n s in c e th e
l a s t in s p e c tio n and w hich, in th e o p in io n o f th e in s p e c tin g
o f f i c e r would be l i k e l y t o le a d t o an a c c id e n t which could r e s u l t
in s e r io u s i n j u r y t o s p e c t a t o r s ;
(c) m ajor re m e d ial work c a r r i e d o u t s in c e th e d a te o f th e l a s t
in s p e c tio n t o a s c e r t a i n t h a t i t has been s a t i s f a c t o r i l y c a r r ie d
o u t;
(d) a l l p u b lic s ta irw a y s f o r t h e i r g e n e ra l c o n d itio n , s l i p
r e s i s t a n c e , c o n d itio n o f h a n d - r a i l s (see a ls o ( j) below ), t r i p
h a z a rd s e s p e c i a l l y a t th e head o f s ta ir w a y s , adequacy o f l i g h t i n g
and s t r u c t u r a l f i r e s e p a r a tio n ;
(e) a l l e g r e s s r o u te s used by th e p u b lic , in c lu d in g emergency
e x i t r o u te s , f o r o b s tr u c tio n s , o p e ra tio n o f e x i t g a te s , adequacy
o f s ig n - p o s tin g and l i g h t i n g , p re se n c e o f any u n c le a re d l i t t e r ;
(f) f i r e f i g h t i n g equipm ent and f i r e w arning system ( i f
in s ta lle d );
(g)    f o r th e p re se n c e o f any accu m u latio n o f l i t t e r ,
(h) th e emergency l i g h t i n g system in c lu d in g any g e n e ra to r o r
b a tte rie s
( i)   f i r s t - a i d f a c i l i t i e s and equipm ent;
 ( j) 10% o f any c ru sh b a r r i e r s , b a lu s tr a d in g and h a n d - r a i l s f o r
o v e r t s ig n s o f weakness which m ight s ig n a l th e need f o r f u r t h e r
t e s t i n g , re m ed ia l a c tio n o r ( a d d itio n a l) r e s t r i c t i o n on th e
number o f s p e c t a t o r s allow ed t o occupy t h a t p a r t o f th e ground;
(k) 10% o f th e t e r r a c e s o r view ing s lo p e s f o r g e n e ra l s u rfa c e
c o n d itio n , e v e n -n e ss and s l i p r e s i s t a n c e ;
(1)    anchorage and f a s te n in g o f 10% o f any fix e d s e a tin g .
(m)    any p r o v is io n f o r th e d is a b le d .
Where th e in s p e c tio n o f a sample as in p ara g rap h s ( j ) , (k) and
(1) r e v e a ls m a tte r s g iv in g r i s e t o s e r io u s concern f o r th e s a f e ty
o f s p e c t a t o r s , th e a u t h o r i t y sh o u ld go on t o in s p e c t a l l th e
c ru sh b a r r i e r s e t c , t e r r a c i n g o r s e a tin g in t h a t p a r t o f th e
ground where th e sample in d ic a te d t h a t t h e r e were d e f i c i e n c i e s .
T e s tin g o f equipm ent
4.     T e s ts sh o u ld i f p o s s ib le be c a r r i e d o u t t o confirm t h a t th e
fo llo w in g i s in w orking o r d e r : -
3.      The i n s p e c t i o n o f t h e ground sh o u ld n o rm a lly in c lu d e
in s p e c t i o n o f th e fo llo w in g i t e m s : -
 (a) any p a r t o f th e ground w here an a c c id e n t o r i n c i d e n t
r e s u l t i n g i n s e r i o u s i n j u r y t o s p e c t a t o r s h a s o c c u rre d s in c e th e
l a s t in s p e c tio n ;
 (b) any re c o rd e d d e f e c t o r d e f i c i e n c y w hich h a s a r i s e n s in c e th e
l a s t in s p e c t i o n and w hich, i n t h e o p in io n o f t h e in s p e c tin g
o f f i c e r would be l i k e l y t o le a d t o an a c c id e n t w hich co u ld r e s u l t
in s e rio u s in ju ry to s p e c ta to rs ;
(c) m ajor re m e d ia l work c a r r i e d o u t s in c e th e d a te o f th e l a s t
i n s p e c t i o n t o a s c e r t a i n t h a t i t h a s been s a t i s f a c t o r i l y c a r r i e d
o u t;
 (d) a l l p u b l i c s ta ir w a y s f o r t h e i r g e n e r a l c o n d itio n , s l i p
r e s i s t a n c e , c o n d itio n o f h a n d - r a i l s (se e a ls o ( j) b elo w ), t r i p
h a z a rd s e s p e c i a l l y a t th e head o f s ta ir w a y s , adequacy o f l i g h t i n g
and s t r u c t u r a l f i r e s e p a r a t i o n ;
(e) a l l e g r e s s r o u t e s u sed by th e p u b l i c , in c lu d in g emergency
e x i t r o u t e s , f o r o b s t r u c t i o n s , o p e r a tio n o f e x i t g a t e s , adequacy
o f s i g n - p o s t i n g and l i g h t i n g , p re s e n c e o f any u n c le a r e d l i t t e r ;
(f) f i r e f i g h t i n g equipm ent and f i r e w arning system ( i f
in s ta lle d );
(g)     f o r th e p re s e n c e o f any a c c u m u la tio n o f l i t t e r ,
(h) th e emergency l i g h t i n g sy stem in c lu d in g any g e n e r a to r o r
b a tte rie s
( i)    f i r s t - a i d f a c i l i t i e s and eq uipm ent;
 ( j) 10% o f any c ru s h b a r r i e r s , b a l u s t r a d i n g and h a n d - r a i l s f o r
o v e r t s ig n s o f w eakness which m igh t s i g n a l t h e need f o r f u r t h e r
t e s t i n g , , re m e d ia l a c t i o n o r ( a d d i t i o n a l ) r e s t r i c t i o n on th e
number o f s p e c t a t o r s allo w ed t o occupy t h a t p a r t o f th e ground;
(k) 10% o f t h e t e r r a c e s o r v ie w in g s lo p e s f o r g e n e ra l s u r f a c e
c o n d itio n , e v e n -n e s s and s l i p r e s i s t a n c e ;
(1)     an ch o rag e and f a s t e n i n g o f 10% o f any f ix e d s e a t i n g .
(m)     any p r o v is io n f o r t h e d is a b le d .
Where th e i n s p e c t i o n o f a sam ple a s i n p a ra g ra p h s ( j ) , (k) and
(1) r e v e a l s m a tte r s g iv in g r i s e t o s e r i o u s co n c e rn f o r th e s a f e t y
o f s p e c t a t o r s , t h e a u t h o r i t y sh o u ld go on t o in s p e c t a l l th e
c ru s h b a r r i e r s e t c , t e r r a c i n g o r s e a t i n g i n t h a t p a r t o f th e
ground w here t h e sam ple in d i c a t e d t h a t t h e r e were d e f i c i e n c i e s .
T e s tin g o f equipm ent
4.     T e s ts sh o u ld i f p o s s i b l e be c a r r i e d o u t t o co n firm t h a t th e
fo llo w in g i s i n w orking o r d e r : -
(a)   l i g h t i n g , p a r t i c u l a r l y on s ta irw a y s and e x i t r o u te s ;
                           ■f
(b)   emergency l i g h t i n g ;
(c) p u b lic a d d re ss system , in c lu d in g th e p ro p e r fu n c tio n in g o f
zoning where t h i s f a c i l i t y i s p a r t o f th e re q u ire m e n ts o f th e
s a fe ty c e r t i f i c a t e ;
(d)    f i r e w arning system ( i f i n s t a l l e d ) ;
(e) 10% o f any m e te rin g system f o r re c o rd in g th e adm ission o f
s p e c ta to r s t o p a r t s o f th e ground .




Home O ffic e
25 November 1987
Supplementary advic-a and explanatory notes to the Statutory
Guidance to local authorities given by the Secretary of State
under section 10B(2) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

I n tr o d u c tio n
1.      The fo llo w in g ad v ice does n o t form p a r t o f th e S ta tu to r y
Guidance giv en under s e c tio n 10B o f th e 1975 A ct. The fo llo w in g
ad v ice i s g iv en in good f a i t h b u t i t sh ould be remembered t h a t
on ly th e c o u r ts can r u l e a u t h o r i t a t i v e l y on i n t e r p r e t a t i o n o f
p o in ts o f law.
O b je c tiv e o f In s p e c tio n s
2.      The o b je c t o f th e in s p e c tio n s i s t o m o n ito r th e s u i t a b i l i t y
o f th e term s and c o n d itio n s o f th e s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e (where
issu e d ) in th e l i g h t o f any change in th e c o n d itio n o f th e ground
and se co n d ly , t o a s s i s t lo c a l a u t h o r i t i e s in e n fo rc in g com pliance
w ith th e term s and c o n d itio n s o f th e s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e o r o th e r
n o tic e serv ed on th e ground o c c u p ie r.
3.        Local a u t h o r i t i e s may w ish t o n o te t h a t th e in s p e c tio n i s
n o t in te n d ed t o s h i f t r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r s p e c t a t o r s a f e t y away
from th e h o ld e r o f any s a f e ty c e r t i f i c a t e o r ground o c c u p ie r, b u t
r a t h e r t o h e lp see t h a t he succeeds in a c h ie v in g (and
m a in ta in in g ) th e s a f e ty s ta n d a rd s in te n d e d t o be s e t by any
c e r t i f i c a t e f o r th e number o f s p e c ta to r s a u th o r is e d t o e n te r th e
ground f o r a s p e c if ie d a c t i v i t y .
G eneral
4.       As th e s i z e , age, c o n f ig u r a tio n , c o n d itio n and usage o f
d e sig n a te d s p o r ts grounds as w ell a s th e a t t i t u d e o f management
can g iv e r i s e t o d i f f e r e n t in s p e c tio n n eeds, th e d i s c r e t i o n of
lo c a l a u t h o r i t i e s t o c a r r y o u t more fre q u e n t o r more e x te n s iv e
in s p e c tio n s th a n i s l a i d down by s e c tio n 10B o f th e 1975 Act i s
n o t r e s t r i c t e d . The req u irem en ts o f th e S ta tu to r y Guidance have
been s e t a t what i s seen as th e d e s ir e d minimum l i k e l y t o ach iev e
th e o b je c tiv e d e sc rib e d above le a v in g a u t h o r i t i e s f r e e to add to
th e c o n te n t o f th e in s p e c tio n s o r in c r e a s e t h e i r frequen cy
ac co rd in g to l o c a l l y determ ined needs. In t h i s c o n te x t lo c a l
a u t h o r i t i e s may w ish to b e a r in mind t h a t in s p e c tio n s c a r r i e d o u t
under s e c tio n 10B o f th e 1975 Act a re i n a d d itio n t o , n o t a
s u b s t i t u t e f o r th o s e re q u ire d t o be c a r r i e d o u t under th e term s
and c o n d itio n s o f th e s a f e ty c e r t i f i c a t e by o r on b e h a lf o f th e
h o ld e r.
I n s p e c tio n freq u en cy
5.        As s e c tio n 10B(3) o f th e 1975 Act s t i p u l a t e s t h a t an
in s p e c tio n sh o u ld ta k e p la c e o f a " d e sig n a te d " ground a t l e a s t
once every tw elve months, t h i s frequency must be observed even i f
th e is s u e o f a s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e i s d e lay ed . Where a s a f e ty
c e r t i f i c a t e h a s n o t been is s u e d , th e in s p e c tio n s c a r r i e d o u t
p r i o r t o i t s p r e p a r a tio n and is s u e sh ould be such as t o f u l f i l
th e re q u ire m en ts o f th e S ta tu to r y Guidance. Once a s a f e ty
c e r t i f i c a t e h a s been is s u e d a t l e a s t one f u r t h e r in s p e c tio n o f
  th e ground sh ould be c a r r i e d o u t e i t h e r : -
 w ith in a y e a r o f i t s is s u e , o r
 w ith in a y e a r o f th e l a s t in s p e c tio n , w hichever i s th e e a r l i e r .
 T h e r e a f te r , in s p e c tio n s sh o u ld ta k e p la c e a t l e a s t a n n u a lly from
 th e d a te o f th e l a s t in s p e c tio n .
 Where an in s p e c tio n o f a s p o r t s ground ta k e s p la c e a t th e
 d i s c r e t i o n o f th e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y f o r some o th e r re a s o n , f o r
 example a s a r e s u l t o f proposed a l t e r a t i o n s o r an a p p lic a tio n f o r
 amendment t o th e s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e , t h a t in s p e c tio n can be
 re g a rd e d a s an in s p e c tio n c a r r i e d o u t un der s e c tio n 10B o f th e
 1975 Act p ro v id e d t h e c r i t e r i a o f th e S ta tu to r y Guidance a r e met.
 I n s p e c tio n Team
6.        The S ta tu to r y Guidance a llo w s th e lo c a l a u th o r ity to
d eterm in e how b e s t t o a rra n g e and e f f e c t in s p e c tio n s under
s e c tio n 10B o f th e 1975 A ct and does n o t s t i p u l a t e t h a t th e y
sh ould be c a r r i e d o u t by a p a r t i c u l a r p r o f e s s io n a l d i s c i p l i n e .
As i t i s n o n e th e le s s im p o rta n t t h a t in s p e c tin g o f f i c e r s a re
q u a l i f i e d f o r t h a t p u rp o se , th e gu id ance p la c e s an onus on th e
l o c a l a u t h o r i t y t o be s a t i s f i e d on t h i s a c c o u n t. (The Guide to
S a fe ty a t S p o rts Grounds (p arag rap h 36) e n v isa g e s t h a t
in s p e c tio n s a rra n g ed by ground management w i l l be c a r r ie d o u t by
someone who i s p r o f e s s i o n a l l y q u a l i f i e d . Local a u t h o r i t i e s may
w ish t o c o n s id e r w heth er in s p e c tin g o f f i c e r s should a ls o be
p ro fe s s io n a lly q u a lif ie d .)
 7.       Local a u t h o r i t i e s a r e a l s o asked t o b e a r in mind th e
p o t e n t i a l ad v an tag es o f a team approach t o in s p e c tio n s under th e
S ta tu to r y Guidance and th e r o l e o f th e f i r e a u t h o r i t y , b u ild in g
a u t h o r i t y and th e p o l i c e . Local a u t h o r i t i e s in London and
m e tro p o lita n c o u n tie s may th e r e f o r e w ish t o a rra n g e a t l e a s t one
in s p e c tio n p e r y e a r t o be c a r r i e d o u t w ith a r e p r e s e n t a ti v e o f
th e f i r e a u t h o r i t y in a tte n d a n c e . E lsew here, lo c a l a u t h o r i t i e s
w i l l no doubt w ish t o c o n s id e r in c lu s io n o f a member o f th e f i r e
s e r v ic e a s w e ll a s a r e p r e s e n t a t i v e o f th e b u ild in g a u th o r ity .
Local a u t h o r i t i e s may a ls o w ish t o c o n s u lt th e C h ief O f f ic e r of
P o lic e so t h a t th e o p p o r tu n ity can be given f o r a p o lic e o f f i c e r
t o a tte n d a t l e a s t one in s p e c tio n each y e a r.            ( I t i s n o t in te n d e d
t h a t th e s e c o n s id e r a tio n s sh ou ld i n t e r f e r e w ith any i n t e r n a l o r
l o c a l l y a g reed arran g em en ts between th e lo c a l a u t h o r i t y , f i r e
a u t h o r i t y , b u ild in g a u t h o r i t y , p o lic e and any o th e r agency w ith
an i n t e r e s t in s a f e t y a t th e ground.)
Scope o f I n s p e c tio n s
8.        Where p o s s ib le a l l th e ite m s l i s t e d in p a ra g ra p h s 3 and 4
o f th e S ta tu to r y Guidance sh o u ld be in s p e c te d and t e s t e d . I t i s
re c o g n ise d however t h a t th e r e may be o c c a sio n s when one o r more
o f th e s e elem ents c a n n o t, f o r some re a so n , be in s p e c te d . For
t h i s re a so n th e r e i s a d eg ree o f d i s c r e t i o n w ith in p ara g rap h s 2 -
  4 o f th e S ta tu to r y G uidance. In t h i s way i t i s hoped t o avoid
th e s i t u a t i o n where th e l o c a l a u th o r ity has t o pay re p e a te d
v i s i t s t o a ground i n o rd e r t o comply w ith th e S ta tu to r y
  t h e ground sh o u ld b e c a r r i e d o u t e i t h e r : -
  w ith in a y e a r o f i t s i s s u e , o r
 w ith in a y e a r o f t h e l a s t i n s p e c t i o n , w h ich ev er i s th e e a r l i e r .
 T h e r e a f t e r , i n s p e c t i o n s s h o u ld ta k e p la c e a t l e a s t a n n u a lly from
 th e d a te o f th e l a s t in s p e c tio n .
 Where an in s p e c t i o n o f a s p o r t s ground t a k e s p la c e a t th e
 d i s c r e t i o n o f t h e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y f o r some o t h e r r e a s o n , f o r
 exam ple a s a r e s u l t o f p ro p o se d a l t e r a t i o n s o r an a p p l i c a t i o n f o r
 amendment t o t h e s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e , t h a t in s p e c tio n can be
 r e g a rd e d a s an i n s p e c t i o n c a r r i e d o u t u n d e r s e c t i o n 10B o f th e
 1975 A ct p ro v id e d t h e c r i t e r i a o f th e S t a t u t o r y G uidance a r e m et.
 Inspection Team

6.         The S t a t u t o r y G uidance a llo w s th e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y t o
d e te rm in e how b e s t t o a rr a n g e and e f f e c t in s p e c tio n s u n d er
s e c t i o n 10B o f th e 1975 A ct and does n o t s t i p u l a t e t h a t th e y
sh o u ld be c a r r i e d o u t by a p a r t i c u l a r p r o f e s s i o n a l d i s c i p l i n e .
As i t i s n o n e th e le s s im p o rta n t t h a t i n s p e c tin g o f f i c e r s a r e
q u a l i f i e d f o r t h a t p u rp o s e , t h e g u id a n c e p la c e s an onus on th e
l o c a l a u t h o r i t y t o be s a t i s f i e d on t h i s a c c o u n t.    (The Guide t o
S a f e ty a t S p o rts Grounds (p a ra g ra p h 36) e n v is a g e s t h a t
in s p e c tio n s a rra n g e d by ground management w i l l be c a r r i e d o u t by
someone who i s p r o f e s s i o n a l l y q u a l i f i e d . L ocal a u t h o r i t i e s may
w ish t o c o n s id e r w h e th e r in s p e c t i n g o f f i c e r s sh o u ld a l s o be
p ro fe s s io n a lly q u a lifie d .)
 7.       L ocal a u t h o r i t i e s a r e a l s o asked t o b e a r i n mind th e
p o t e n t i a l a d v a n ta g e s o f a team approach t o in s p e c tio n s u n d er th e
S t a t u t o r y G uidance and t h e r o l e o f th e f i r e a u t h o r i t y , b u ild in g
a u t h o r i t y and th e p o l i c e . L o cal a u t h o r i t i e s i n London and
m e tr o p o lita n c o u n tie s may t h e r e f o r e w ish t o a r ra n g e a t l e a s t one
in s p e c t i o n p e r y e a r t o be c a r r i e d o u t w ith a r e p r e s e n t a t i v e o f
th e f i r e a u t h o r i t y i n a tte n d a n c e . E lsew h ere, l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s
w i l l no d o u b t w ish t o c o n s id e r i n c lu s io n o f a member o f th e f i r e
s e r v i c e a s w e ll a s a r e p r e s e n t a t i v e o f th e b u ild in g a u t h o r i t y .
L ocal a u t h o r i t i e s may a ls o w ish t o c o n s u lt th e C h ie f O f f ic e r o f
P o lic e so t h a t th e o p p o r tu n ity can be g iv e n f o r a p o l i c e o f f i c e r
t o a t t e n d a t l e a s t one i n s p e c t i o n each y e a r .           ( I t i s n o t in te n d e d
t h a t t h e s e c o n s i d e r a t i o n s sh o u ld i n t e r f e r e w ith any i n t e r n a l o r
l o c a l l y a g re e d a rra n g e m e n ts betw een th e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y , f i r e
a u t h o r i t y , b u i l d i n g a u t h o r i t y , p o l i c e and any o t h e r agency w ith
an i n t e r e s t i n s a f e t y a t th e g ro u n d .)
Scope o f I n s p e c tio n s
8.         Where p o s s i b l e a l l th e ite m s l i s t e d i n p a ra g ra p h s 3 and 4
o f t h e S t a t u t o r y G uidance s h o u ld be in s p e c te d and t e s t e d . I t i s
re c o g n is e d however t h a t t h e r e may be o c c a s io n s when one o r more
o f t h e s e e le m e n ts c a n n o t, f o r some r e a s o n , be in s p e c te d . For
t h i s re a s o n t h e r e i s a d e g re e o f d i s c r e t i o n w ith in p a ra g ra p h s 2 -
  4 o f th e S t a t u t o r y G uidance. In t h i s way i t i s hoped t o av o id
th e s i t u a t i o n where t h e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y h a s t o pay re p e a te d
v i s i t s t o a ground i n o r d e r t o comply w ith th e S t a t u t o r y

                                                 ©
Guidance.
9.        The S ta tu to r y Guidance does n o t r e q u ir e t h a t an in s p e c tio n
sh o u ld ta k e p la c e a t any p a r t i c u l a r tim e so th e lo c a l a u t h o r i t y 's
d i s c r e t i o n t o c a r r y o u t an in s p e c tio n w h ils t th e ground i s in use
i s n o t r e s t r i c t e d . An " in - u s e " o r "d u rin g perform ance"
in s p e c tio n c o u ld t h e r e f o r e c o n s t i t u t e p a r t o f th e in s p e c tio n
r e q u ir e d by s e c tio n 10B o f th e Act even though i t m ight n o t be
s u f f i c i e n t (having re g a rd t o th e re q u ire m e n ts o f th e s t a t u t o r y
Guidance) t o be an in s p e c tio n i t s e l f .
R ecords
10. Local a u t h o r i t i e s w i l l d o u b tle s s need t o keep a re c o rd o f
a l l in s p e c tio n s c a r r i e d o u t un der th e S ta tu to r y Guidance and may
w ish t o c o n s id e r w hether a copy o f any r e p o r t / r e c o r d sh ould be
s e n t t o th e h o ld e r o f th e s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e . Local a u t h o r i t i e s
a r e a l s o asked t o c o n s id e r a f f o r d in g a re a s o n a b le o p p o rtu n ity f o r
any such r e p o r t t o be made a v a ila b le f o r in s p e c tio n , i f so
re q u e s te d , by members o f th e p u b lic .




Home O ffic e
25 November 1987
                         SPORTS GROUNDS

   The Safety of Sports Grounds (Designation) Order 1978
             Made -                            28th July 1978
             Laid before Parliament          1th August 1978
             Coining into Operation          1st January 1979
In exercise of the powers conferred upon me by section 1(1) of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975fa), and after such consultation as ismentioned in
section 18(4) thereof, I hereby make the following Order:—
   1. This Order may becited as theSafety ofSports Grounds (Designation)
Order 1978 and shall come into operation on 1stJanuary 1979.
   2. The sports stadia specified in the Schedule to this Order (being stadia
each of which inthe opinion ofthe Secretary of State has accommodation for
more than 10,000 spectators) are hereby designated as stadia requiringsafety
certificates under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.



                                                     Merlyn Rees.
                                              One ofHer Majesty’sPrincipal
                                                   SecretariesofState.
Home Office.
28th July 1978.




                                SCHEDULE                           Article2.
   Addressofstadium                      Occupier of Stadium
  Burnden Park             Bolton Wanderers Football and Athletic Co. Ltd.
  Bolton
  Hillsborough             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
  Sheffield
  The Dell                 Southampton Football Club Ltd.
  Milton Road
  Southampton
                                                                           SCHEDULE

                                           S A F E T Y OF S P O R T S                    GROUNDS ACT                        19 7 5        .

                                     APPLICATION                      FOR A S A F E T Y                   CERTIFICATE

(WHEN COMPLETED, TH IS FORM SHOULD BE SENT TO THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF THE
 COUNTY COUNCIL)

                                                                                 ;
                                                                                 _____________________________
 I h e r e b y a ppl y f o r a s-pe c i-iri / g e n e r a l * s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e in r e s p e c t of t h e
sports          stadium de s c r i b e d                 bel ow t o be               issued to                                             .............................................
                                          ..
I make t h e a p p l i c a t i o n on b e h a l f of/soc
                                                            . u      1 1                   Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Ltd.
                                                                                           .............................................................................................
of       Hillsborough? Sheffield, S6 1SW ..................................... ^

Da t e      .        .       .        .        .        .         S i gn«d                ........ ................. ____________ .....................
,,.                Hillsborough, Sheffield, S6 1SW
Add r e s s ............................. .....:........................... .....................

..................................................................................... Tel No        ...

* D e l e t e as a p p r o p r i a t e                                                                                                                                 -
 / I f a p p l y i n g on b e h a l f of a s p o r t s c l u b ,                                company or some o t h e r p e r s o n ,                                    insert
s t a t u s , e.g. secretary.

Un d e r t he p r o v i s i o n s of s e c t i o n 3 ( 1 ) of t he Act , a l o c a l a u t h o r i t y r e c e T v i n g
an a p p l i c a t i o n f o r a s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e has t o d e t e r m i n e wh e t h e r t he pe r s o n
t o whom t h e c e r t i f i c a t e may be i s s u e d is l i k e l y t o be in a p o s i t i o n t o p r e v e n t
c o n t r a v e n t i o n of t he t e r ms and c o n d i t i o n s of a c e r t i f i c a t e .     The a p p l i c a n t
s h o u l d t h e r e f o r e f u r n i s h s uch i n f o r ma t ion as w i l l e n a b l e t h e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y
t o make such a d e t e r m i n a t i o n .                                                                         ,



 (T O BE COMPLETED IN ALL CASES)

  Name and p o s t a l                 a d d r e s s of t he s p o r t s                 stadi um
  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
  Hi.llsborough, Sheffield, S6 1SW

  Name of o c c u p i e r


  Name and p o s t a l                 address           of t h e owner



  Name and a d d r e s s of any p e r s o n s o t h e r t ha n t h e p r o p o s e d h o l d e r of t he
  c e r t i f i c a t e who t o h i s knowl edge w i l l or may be c o n c e r n e d in e n s u r i n g
  c o m p l i a n c e wi t h t h e t e r ms and c o n d i t i o n s of t h e s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e .
(FOR A GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE (TO COVER THE A C T IV IT IE S TO BE HELD OVER AN
(IN D E F IN IT E PERIOD): COMPLETE PART I O NLY).

(FOR A SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE (TO COVER ONE OCCASION OR A S E R IE S OF
(PARTICULAR OCCASIONS): COMPLETE PART I I O N LY).



                                         <*




PART I GENER’AL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

1.     Activities        t o be c o v e r e d by t h e g e n e r a l     safety c e r t if i c a t e .    ,

                                              Professional Football
2.     Ap p r o x i ma t e d a t e of t h e c o n s t r u c t i o n of t h e s p o r t s s t a t i u m and d e t a i l s of
any s u b s e q u e n t e x t e n s i o n , ma j o r i mpr ovement or r e - c o n s t r u c t i o n o f t h e s t a d i u m
wi t h t h e r e l e v a n t d a t e s :
1899-1900        - Ground opened at Hillsborough
   1913          - South Stand built
1947-1948        - South Stand reseated with tip up seats
1954-1955        - Floodlights erected
   1961          - North Stand built
   1966          - West Stand built
                   Electronic Scoreboard erected
                   Terrace in front of South Stand converted into seating area
                   Restaurant built alongside South Stand
'                  Gymnasium built at back of North Stand
     1967        - Standing area between North Stand and West Stand completed
     1968        - Building (now Hillsborough Suite)completed)



3.        Particulars      of c u r r e n t   f i r e c e r t i f i c a t e s c o v e r i n g any p a r t of t h e s p o r t s
s t a d i urn:

        Name of f i r e      authority        by whom i s s u e d

        Name of h o l d e r of t he f i r e c e r t i f i c a t e

        Dat e of      i s s u e of t he f i r e    certificate

        D e s c r i p t i o n of t h e p a r t or p a r t s of t h e s t a d i u m c o v e r e d by t h e f i r e
        ce r t i f i ca t e




                                                             2
 (FOR A GENERAL SAFETY C ERTIF IC A TE (TO COVER THE A C T I V I T I E S TO BE HELD OVER AN
 (IN D E F IN IT E PE RIO D ): COMPLETE PART I O N L Y).

 (FOR A SPEC IAL SAFETY C E R TIF IC A TE (TO COVER ONE OCCASION OR A S E R IE S OF
 (PARTICULAR O CCASIONS): COMPLETE PART I I O N LY).




 PART I GENER’AL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

 I.      Activities        t o be c o v e r e d by t h e g e n e r a l   safety c e r t i f i c a t e .

                                                Professional Football
ft.     A p p r o x i ma t e d a t e of t h e c o n s t r u c t i o n of t h e s p o r t s s t a t i u m and d e t a i l s o f
 any s u b s e q u e n t e x t e n s i o n , ma j o r i mpr ove me nt o r r e - c o n s t r u c t ion o f t h e s t a d i u m
 wi t h t h e r e l e v a n t d a t e s :
1899-1900         - Ground opened at Hillsborough
   1913           - South Stand built
1947-1948         - South Stand reseated with tip up seats
1954-1955         - Floodlights erected
   1961           - North Stand built
   1966           - West Stand built
                    Electronic Scoreboard erected
                    Terrace in front of South Stand converted into seating area
                    Restaurant built alongside South Stand
                    Gymnasium built at back of North Stand
      1967        - Standing area between North Stand and West Stand completed
      1968        - Building (now Hillsborough Suite) completed)



 3.       Particulars       of c u r r e n t    fire    certificates       c o v e r i n g any p a r t o f      the s p o r t s

•s t ad i um:

         Name o f f i r e     authority         by whom i s s u e d

         Name o f h o l d e r of t he          fire    certificate

         Da t e of     i s s u e o f t he f i r e     certificate

         D e s c r i p t i o n of the p a r t or p a r t s    of t h e s t a d i u m c o v e r e d   by t h e    fire
         ce r t i f i ca t e
4.        Particulars           of c u r r e n t s t a t u t o r y    licences         granted      in      respect      of    the s p o r t s
s t a d i u m or p a r t s      of i t :

        Name of          licensing authority                   by whom i s s u e d , Sheffield
        Name of          licensee                    England
        Type of          licence       ( s a l e of l i q u o r , gami ng e t c )                           Justices on-licence
                                        ^       1 . 1 2 /1 0 /7 8                                    2 « Musiklicence
        Da t e of e x p i r y                   2 . 1 7 /7 /7 9

        D e s c r i p t i o n of t h e p a r t or            par t s of the stadi um covered                      by t h e    licence

                                              Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, 6.

5.          |.      De s i gne d c a p a c i t y of t h e s t a d i u m :

                    a.     seated spectators;                            2 3 ,3 5 0
                    b.     standing spectators;                           3 1 ,6 0 0                 5 4 ,9 5 0

        2.          Current r e s t r i c t i o n s         on d e s i g n e d c a p a c i t y of t h e s t a d i u m :

                    a.     seated spectators;                            2 3 ,3 5 0
                    b.     standing spectators;                           3 1 ,6 0 0                 5 4 ,9 5 0



6.       Ave r a ge number s of s e a t e d and s t a n d i n g s p e c t a t o r s                   d u r i n g e a c h of t h e       last
t h r e e y e a r s ( R e s e r v e t eam ma t c h e s t o be e x c l u d e d ) .




                                           No. of                                                             Average At tendance
 Year             Activ ity             Occasions                     Total Attendances                      ( ie column H divided
                                     a c t i v i t y held                                                          by col umn 3)
                                                                     Seated            Stand ina           Seated              Standina

7 5 /7 6         Prof.Foot ball                26                1 3 6 ,5 3 1     2 0 1 ,3 7 2             5 ,2 5 1                7 ,7 4 5
l b / I I            do.                       28                1 8 8 ,5 8 6     2 7 6 ,0 2 8             6 ,7 3 5                9 ,8 5 8

7 7 /7 8             do.                       28                1 8 1 ,3 1 6     2 7 1 ,9 5 6             6 ,4 7 5                9 ,7 1 2




 7.      Maximum number s of s e a t e d and s t a n d i n g s p e c t a t o r s                         on any o c c a s i o n d u r i n g
 e a c h o f t he l a s t t h r e e y e a r s .



                                                                                                Total Att endance
     Year                Activ ity            Date of Event                            Seated                            Stand ing

 7 5 /7 6          Semi-Final                 3 .4 .7 6                          2 3 .3 5 0                           3 1 .6 0 0

 7 6 /7 7                do.                  2 3 .4 .7 7                        2 3 .3 5 0                           3 1 .6 0 0

 7 7 /7 8          F.L. Cup                   2 9 .1 1 .7 7                      1 5 ,8 3 9                           2 0 ,2 4 0




                                                                     m
PART I I SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE


I.     Ev e n t f o r whi c h Spec i a' L S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e   is r e q u i r e d .



2.     D a t e ( s 7 of e v e n t
                                                                              x: -

3.    Gi ve t h e number of o c c a s i o n s on whi ch t h i s s p e c i a l               e v e n t has t a k e n   place
a t the s p o r t s stadium during the l a s t three years


          Gi ve t h e maximum a t t e n d a n c e of s e a t e d and s t a n d i n g s p e c t a t o r s     on any
s i m i l a r event held a t the st adi um


                                                                              Total Attendance
                                      Date held
                                                                   Seated                              Standing
                                                                                                                                     I'   ’ i\




PART I I SPECIAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE


1.     E v e n t f o r wh i c h S p e c i a t . S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e   is r e q u i r e d .



2.     D a t e ( s J of e v e n t



3.    Gi ve t h e number o f o c c a s i o n s on whi c h t h i s s p e c i a l                   e v e n t ha s t a k e n   place
a t the s p o r t s stadium during the l a s t t h r e e years


          Gi ve t h e maximum a t t e n d a n c e of s e a t e d and s t a n d i n g s p e c t a t o r s            on any
s i m i l a r e v e n t held at the stadium


•           ---------------
                                         Date held                                  Total Att endance
         Event
                                                                        Seated                               Stand ing




                                                            4
    * -•       ^                 (                  .




                                                                                                                                                                                   SMHi




                                                                                     REPORT

                                       ZkZZ£.
                                                   mm



                                                             OUTH fTORKSH^lCOUOTf ICOUNCIL
             Nta/BdR                                                    Sill

                    ‘ ♦/'*_ /. 1*•v

                           ..   -GRQtJ^^^PAC^T¥lOFiS^FFfllSBW EDNES:fO O Sifi)T R £f^B ^ll!R                                                                                     mmmM

                                                                      ill®                                                                                                       £&»>
             Wm&SSSSmSmm                                 *JNfCONNECTION .WITH ‘APPLICATION                                                                                       mgmt.
                                mmsMlmm
                                                                                                                                                                         mmmm
ISeFi^^si'Sfl^a^i^fcMfes^fiSsSSFOR CERTIFICATE OFGrtOUND SAFETY

                                                                                                                          asaas*
                                                                                                                     m m m m m m B
                                 1 y   J '                   ' *5- .'a**if""                                                   >            j^ ^~s. »r    *-■. r    J.
                                                                                                   t'i&u-.-.:



J. if ?             ‘ ; ‘            :■*.-••
           ‘-*| ''"' V •' -                      '-\ *''*'


                                                                                                                                                                   "*K^‘A*J
                                                                                                                                                                          ''*i

                                                                                                                          r *\J
                                                                                                                               \ *' ••; -      * „i .v ;‘
                                                                                                                                                        V r "f'it'
                                                                                                                                             v m :,*;-’   -
                                  J'• !■* ^*            *, '')''
                                                        ■       v
                                                               ’~         j
              Ar-'.-;            ’t
              <■,j. >.■
m m m                                                                                 t£Mm        : .rA :'».> .; -                 E A S T W O O D :W 2 jP i« T N E R S
               'H v'':;®SS!S                                                                                          ,.wi r\/
                                                                                                                             ^fe\
                                                                                                                                f;
                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                 *
               4Swi§fe                                                                     *4 % * " /r          ~'     J-.\.&fs'*
                                                                                                                                 CO NSU LTING . ENGINEERS
                \i.■*
              _'S.v.'-i^’
                        '^,
                          ^
                          '
                          f.
                           '
                           l
                           -
                           '■
                            ^
                            '
                            ■
                            ,■              f “5^v"*' ^“ ’*
                                                *,'’I:*\v^                          *),*^/5
                                                                                          .;;fc-v'v^:                 .
                                                                                                                      •V >(;£B O W M A K E R                  HOUSE.
                       .
                             ;                                                               (■* * ^
              \»/sV*"       v    - -;           3lfe^
                            f
                            r■ JANUARY 1979                                                                                ... 2 3          KINGFIELD               ROAD
                                                SSft
                                                                                          •1                                  ^SHEFFIELD                  S 1 1 9 AS
|                  *-_ «'S^                      " '*>> rv•           y   *    , s„ '**                   ** ’ '^             ^- *£                  f    '**,,,a"*'^ ’ •*</v^-     v-' 1
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                              BOWMAKER HOUSE
               C o n s u ltin g       E n g in e e rs                                                            23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                 SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . Eastw ood            B .E n g, Ph.D ., C.Eng., F.I.C .E,                                                     Tel. : (0742) 583871
                         F .l.S tru ct.E , F.G .S* M .Cons.E.
A . A . W ood            B .E n g , Ph.D „ C.Eng., F.I.C .E.
                         F.I.Struct.E., M .I.W .E.S„ M .Con$.E.

A . G. B u rd en         G .M ., B .S c.(E ng), C.Eng., M.I.C.E.

A ssociates:
Geoffrey Spir            C .E n*.t M .I.C .E., M .I.M .ch.E.

C. S. Greaves            B .E n f., C .E n j., M .I.C .E., M .l.S tru ct.E .

R. C. A. Eastwood        B.Se., C .E n*., M .I.C .E., M .I.Struet.E .

Consuhont:                                                                                        Our R e f :    WE/KH/1610
A. L. Percy              B .Se., C .E n*.. F .I.C E .,
                         F J.S cru et.E .. F.I.M un.E., M .R .T.P.I.                              Your R e f :




                                                                                                                 17 January 1979


                                          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.
                  APPLICATION FOR A CERTIFICATE OF GROUND SAFETY UNDER
                                         THE SAFETY OF SPORTSGROUNDS ACT, 1975


                                                          REPORT ON GROUND CAPACITY                                ;
                                                                                                                       -r.



          This report sets out our thoughts on the ground capacity
   which is attainable.
         It dealsin broad terms with the necessary strengthening
  and supplementation of the crush barriers on the terraces, and
  calculations are made of the theoretical exit times.
         Calculations of exit times are also made for each of
  the stands and reference is made to the observations which were
  made at the end of the third round cup-tie on 6 January, 1979.
         The green guide has been used as a basis foi* our cal­
  culations, although as with probably all existing grounds, it
  will not be possible to satisfy all the recommendations in the
  guide.   Reasonable compromise will be needed on the part of the
  fire officer and the police.




                                                                               S3
                                                               Registered in England -   No. 1134531
                                                              SHEET    2

EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




    Standing Accommodation
    (a)    Spion Kop
                  The general layout of Spion Kop is good.     It
           has a very adequate number of gangways, with spacings
           well below the maximum laid down in the guide.    The
           slope strikes a happy balance between the requirements
           for good viewing and the requirements of safety.
                  The only questions therefore are the adequacy
           of the crush barriers to justify a high number of
           permitted spectators, and the capacity and nature of
           the exits.
                  Where the barriers are adequate in strength
           and spacing, the guide recommends that the number
                                                      2
           of spectators should not exceed 54 per 10m of plan
           area.   Disregarding the gangways the area of Spion
                                      2
           Kop is approximately 3120m which would provide
           accommodation for 16,850 spectators.
                  Crush barriers can satisfy either of two
           standards.   Category A must be able to withstand a
           test load of 6kN/metre width (400 lb/foot approximately)
           and Category B must withstand 4.3 kN/metre (290 lb/foot).
           In 1973 tests were made on all the barriers by Toft
           and Brocklebank Ltd.    Of the 101 barriers on Spion
           Kop, 21 failed to carry the test load of 400 lb and
           a further 15 carried the load but had some actual or
           incipient defect which needed attention.    Most of
           those which failed the test, failed so badly that they
           would probably not satisfy category B standard either.
           On the other hand, it was sometimes only one part of a
           long barrier which was weak. It should be emphasised
           that the general situation was satisfactory compared
           with most grounds.
                  Clearly it would be advisable to bring all the
                                                                 SHEET   3.

EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




          barriers up to a uniform category A standard.   It
          should be kept in mind that it is now five years since
          the tests and there may have been some deterioration
          due to rusting.    Most of the barriers are made from
          2§" diameter tube which only has a thickness of 0.192
          inches when new.    Rusting is now very slow in Sheffield’s
          atmosphere, but certain parts of the barriers are subject
          to more rusting than others and it is possible that
          there will be an increase in the number needing attention.
                                                        .   *

                  Provided a barrier can withstand 6kN/m, the
          maximum distance between barriers recommended ih the
          guide varies between 5m for slopes of only 5° to 2.9m
          for slopes of 30°.    These figures apply to ’peak viewing’
          areas.    Most of Spion Kop has a slope of about 17°
          for which the recommended spacing is 3.6m.      The slope of the
          upper part changes to 25° for which the spacing is
          3. lm.
                  Whilst we believe it is arguable that parts of
          Spion Kop could be considered as not being ’peak
          viewing areas’ we are prepared to accede to the police
          view and use peak viewing area standards for all barriers.
          This also applies to the stands at the west end of the
          ground.
                  We propose that the existing barriers should be
          supplemented by new ones as shown in red on the attached
          drawing 1610/1X.   The green shaded area behind each
          barrier shows the area which can then be assumed to be
                                                        2
                                                        ■
          available for spectators.   This area is 2958m which
                           2
          at 54 persons/lOm gives a capacity of 15,973.    It
                                                      A
          should be kept in mind that as many as 20,000 spectators
          have been admitted to the Kop in the past.



                                   m
                                                                     SHEET * 4.


    EASTWOOD   PARTNERS

                                                                *




                     Spion Kop has three exits, one near each
               end and one at the top.       The total width of
               these three exits at their narrowest points is 12.5m.
               The guide assumes a maximum flow rate through such
               exits of 60 persons per minute for each 550mm of
               width.    Thus the theoretical time to discharge
               16,000 spectators from Spion Kop would be Ilf minutes,
               compared with a maximum of 8 minutes indicated by the
               guide.    We do not consider this to be a serious ____)/ , o O
               matter.    Rapid evacuation (in say 8 minutei) is very
               desirable for stands where there may be a risk due to
               fire, or explosion, or structural failure.       In the
               case of terracing it is only the impatience*of.spectators
               which might create danger. We believe that for an
               interim period at least the evacuation time of’Ilf
               minutes should be acceptable.
                       The exits at each end of the terrace are
#              reasonably free from hazards, except the one at the North
               end passes under a bridge with a headroom below the
                                         C?’^ *
               recommended value of 8ft.      This defect could be
               removed by lowering the floor level, but we believe
               it is far from essential to have such a large headroom,
               and the cost of modification is not justified in an
               existing structure.
                       The exit at the back of Spion Kop would benefit
               from handrails dividing it into lanes.      Some remodelling
               of the approaches to the ramp may also be thought
               desirable.

        (b)    The West Terrace (Including Lower Level at North West Corner)
               •                    :                    ~       2
                      The west terrace has a total area of; 1480m but
               there are no gangways.   We feel that some allowance should



                                     *   0
                                                                    SHEET   5.


    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




                be made for circulation space as spectators have
                to move quite considerable horizontal distances
                to achieve good packing.   The full area would
                justify about 8000 spectators, but we suggest it would
                probably be appropriate to allow 10% as the equivalent
                of gangways giving a capacity of 7200 spectators.
                The barriers should be designed to match this figure
                approximately.   Those barriers which cannot withstand
                6kN/m should be appropriately strengthened, and extra
                ones provided where necessary.
                       The extra barriers required to achieve
                approximately 7200 capacity are shown in red on the
                attached copy of drawing 1610/2X.
                       The three exits have a total width of about
                                                         ^*             *
                11.5m which would permit about 1250 people per minute
                to leave the ground. Thus the terrace could be
                emptied in about six minutes which is very satisfactory.
#                      The guide suggests that everyone on a terrace
                should be within 12m of a gangway or exit. There are
                no gangways and some spectators will be 25m from an
                exit.   But we feel this is of no consequence as
                movement horizontally along this terrace will be easy
                and quick.
         (c)    The North West Corner Reinforced Concrete Terrace
                       This area is also illustrated in the drawing
                1610/2X.   The gross area available (there are no
                                         2
                gangways) is about 56 5 m .  Thus if the crush barriers
                were adequate and the whole area is included the number
                of spectators could be about 3,050.
                       Provided the existing crush barriers are
                brought up to standard and supplemented in red as
                                                                     SHEET g


      EASTWOOD Cr PARTNERS

1

                 shown on our drawing 1610/2X, the area which can
                 be used in calculating spectator capacity is that
                                                          2
                 shown in green.   This area is about 535m corresponding
                 to about 2900 spectators.   This would bring the total
                 standing at the Leppings Lane end to 10,100.
                        The exits serving this part of the terraces
                 are very adequate in width and there will be no
                 difficulty in emptying in eight minutes, C

          Seating Accommodation
          (a)    The North Stand
                        The form of construction of this stand is
                 such that it presents a minimum fire hazard.*   The
                 exits are numerous and spaced so that they satisfy
                 the recommendations of the guide.
                        The exits are very marginally below the „
                 recommended l*lm width, but we do not consider this
                 to be of great consequence.
                        Gangways are only 640mm wide for much of their
1 #              length (they widen round the exit).   This is well
                 below the green guide recommendation.   However, it
                 is clearly appropriate to take into account the
                 general nature of the stand, the number as well as
                 the width of the gangways, and above all the ease and
                 speed with which spectators can evacuate the stand.
                        On 6 January we counted the number of spectators
                 leaving in successive minutes after the final whistle.
                 The figures were 71, 72, 80 and 73.   Thereafter
                 the number fell off as the spectators were in no hurry.
                 This established that in an emergency the green guide
                 figure of 80 per minute (relating to a l*lm gangway)
                 can be achieved.   With 18 exits for 10,000 spectators
                                                                     SHEET   7,



      EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




                the average is 556 per exit. Thus the stand.would

I               empty in about seven minutes, which is within the
                recommended limit of eight minutes.

i                       Our observations in company with the fire
                officerte staff on 6 January showed that everyone
                had left this stand, apart from some people who were
                in no hurry, in about six minutes, although we also
                counted about 40 per exit who left before the final
                whistle.    The overall picture appears very satisfactory
                and we suggest that this stand should be accepted
                as not needing any significant modification.
         (b)    The West Stand
I
xat
                       This stand is very similar to the north stand
                in its construction.   We were not able to accurately
                assess the time taken for it to be vacated on 6
                January because there were many seats which were unsold.
                However, there is every reason to believe that there
                will be no difficulty in vacating this stand within
                eight minutes also.   There should be no need for
                significant modifications.
         (c)    The South Stand
                       The structure has been surveyed and appended
                are prints of our drawings 1610/3, 4 and 5, which
                show the plans and cross-section.   Also attached is
                a seating plan, drawing No. 1610/6.
                       The upper part of the stand (the covered area)
                has 5710 seats.   These are served by 12 exits (excluding
                those serving the directors box) so that an average
                of 476 people need to pass through each exit.   The
                count by the fire officer’s staff on 6 January showed
                an average of about 70 per minute passing through one

I               exit which corresponds to an emptying time of about
                seven minutes. Indeed there were very few people
                                                                  SHEET   8.



    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




              still trying to get out six minutes after the final
              whistle.   A few had no doubt left early and a few
              were still standing around, but the stand had
              substantially emptied in about six minutes.
                     Having left the top of the stand the spectators
              have to make their way from the first floor landing
              via one of three staircases.   Two of these are 3.6m
              wide and the other 2.4.   This is equivalent to 17|
              ’lanes’ of 550mm.   At 40 people per lane, 700 people
              pass per minute.   To discharge 5710 people (less
              those in the directors box) will therefore take almost
              exactly 8 minutes as permitted by the guide. -*...
                     At ground floor level two of the staircases lead
              almost straight to the open air, through a compartment
              which is separated from the main part of the building.
              The third staircase passes through a wide lobby' which
              will probably need three sets of self closing fire
              doors to separate it from the remainder of the building.
              The club intends to move the paint store from the
              space behind this staircase.
                     The front, open-air part of the south stand is
              well endowed with exits but these all discharge onto
              one passage.   This passage has a theoretical capacity
              of only about 150 people per minute in each direction.’
              This gives an emptying time of 11 minutes.   Because
              the stand is open to the air and there is very
              ready access to the pitch we do not think this rather
              long emptying time is of any great consequence.

       General Requirements                                ■..?
              The police and the fire officer, and possibly the

I      Building Surveyor, will no doubt wish to discuss a number of
       matters.   Prior to holding a further formal meeting they

                                   0
                                                                 SHEET



EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS




    will probably wish to study the drawings and to pay a
    further visit.   We would like to be present when any
    further inspection is made and would appreciate contact
    being made with Dr. Wood during Dr. Eastwood’s absence
    which will extend to 15 February.
           If the police would like to suggest the kind of police
    post they would like, this can be considered by the club
    and drawings prepared by us as a matter of urgency.
           A meeting to discuss all aspects of the application
    might be held around say 16 February. ,
           In the meantime Eastwood 8s Partners will be checking
    the various electrical services so that we shall be in a
    position to discuss these at the meeting.           j

    Future Ground Capacity
           Following the upgrading of the barriers and the carrying
    out of such other works as may be required it is hoped the
    ground capacity will not fall below 50,000 made up as follows :■
           Seating approximately              24,000
           Standing on Spion Kop              16,000
           Standing at Leppings Lane end
           (total including N.W. corner)      10,100
                                              50,100

           It will be recalled that in recent years agreement
    has been reached with the police that 55,000 spectators might
    be admitted to the ground.   This involved of the order of
    19.000 - 20,000 spectators being on Spion Kop.    Indeed, it
    is believed that in the days when crowds of approximately
    70.000 were accommodated in the ground, the figure on Spion
    Kop probably approached 30,000.
           It should also be emphasised that the ground has an
    excellent safety record stretching over very many years.
          SAFETY O F SPORTS G R O U N D S A C T 1975

        Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working Party
                     (Sheffield District)

New Town Hall Extension, Sheffield ; 12th February, 1979

PRESENT:      F. Davis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              H.  B. Dunstan (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              B. A. Ellis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              D. Hurst (South Yorkshire Police)
              K. Jones (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              A.  Mills (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
              D. Mullarky (South Yorkshire County Council - Architects Division)
              W.  O'Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
              D. Sherriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
              D. J. Shirtcliffe (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration
                                                                    Department)
              D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration
                                                                    Department).

L.____Purpose of Meeting

Following the Working Party's meeting with the representatives of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. on 13th December, 1978, the
Secretary of the Club had (by letter dated 22nd January, 1979) circulated a
Report, together with Plans, drawn up by Dr. W. Eastwood of Eastwood
and Partners. The Secretary had also suggested a meeting on Friday,
16th February, 1979, to discuss the documents.

The purpose of today's meeting was to consider the views which the Working
Party should put to the Club on the 16th February.

2.____Plans
(a)     Whilst the "Notes for the Guidance of Applicants" stated that detailed
plans at 1:100 scale should be supplied of all buildings and other accommodation
for spectators, some of the plans supplied were to 1:200 scale. The Fire
Service felt that the latter size were acceptable provided all of the plans were
to the same scale, and it was A G R E E D that the "Notes for the Guidance of
Applicants" should be amended to read plans to 1:200 scale.

(b)    The site plan at 1:500 scale had not been supplied as required by the
Notes, but Eastwood and Partners had undertaken to prepare this in time for
Friday's meeting. The firm had also promised that all site fixtures would be
indicated on that plan.
                                        1.
(c)    It was A G R E E D that theplanssupplied had inaccuracies and
inadequacies. In particular, they lacked indications of cross sections,
profiles, structural stability, position of handrails and balustrades, width
of stairways, etc. Where appropriate, these could, as an alternative, be
described in a Report.

(d)    The CountyCouncil's hopewas that, in view of limited resources in
the Architectural & Building Services Division, the plans supplied and finally
accepted by the Working Party could form the basis of the Certificate
Drawings.

3.     Report

(a)    General

It was recognised that the criteria set out in the Home Office "Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds (Football)" required new work or reconstruction
to be to a standard not lower than the standard set out in the Guide, and that
in existing situations the criterion was that of a reasonable degree of safety.
As the Guide stated, it would be unreasonable, even if it were practicable,
to seek the absolute safety of everyone attending a ground.

With these factors in mind, both the Fire Service and the Police felt that
the flow of spectators was the most important criteria to be adopted.
Whilst not disagreeing with this viewpoint, the Building Authority suggested
it would be useful to.know the reasoning behind the recommendation in the
Guide that gangways should not be less than 1.1 metres wide. The County
Council A G R E E D to try to find this information out, and the Fire Service
A G R E E D they‘would contact their colleagues in other areas who had been
Involved in the Certification process to ascertain how nearly the 1.1 metre
gangway recommendation had been observed in existing situations in their
respective areas.

At the request of the Fire Service, the County Council also A G R E E D to try
and find out if there was any general recommendation on reduced
admission if a ground were used at a night time instead of during the day
time.

<b)    Front Cover                                                   v
                                           f
Whilst it was probably a typing mistake, it was A G R E E D that the wording
on the Front Cover should read " R E P O R T TO_ SOUT H YORKSHIRE C O U N T Y
COUNCIL” and not " R EPOR T O F SOUTH YORKSHIRE C O U N T Y COUNCIL".
(e)    Spion Kop (pages 2,3 & 4)

The Working Party agreed with the Club's view that, with the existing three
exits, there was no way that the recommended discharge time of 8 minutes
could be met. Where thejr disagreed was that an evacuation time of I l f
minutes should be regarded as acceptable. If no more exits were to be
provided, the Working Party A G R E E D that a crowd limitation of 11,040
on the Spion Kop should be imposed.

The existing exit at the North end passed under a bridge with a headroom
below agreed by the Club to be less than the recommended value of 8ft.
As this was in fact some 6'6”, the Working Party A G R E E D that the Club
be informed that in their view it is essential that the floor be lowered to
remove this danger to spectators.

The exit at the South side would also require widening, and possibly flow
barriers would need installing.

The area at the back of the Kop would also require close attention.

If new exits were to be provided by the Club, it was A G R E E D that at least
T W O would be required. The most economical way of providing one would
be to use the gates in the existing barrier, provided these were lined up with
the gangways, with discharge onto the pitch surround, and the other would
require to be a completely new exit.

The Building Authority felt that the majority of the crush barriers would fail
the tests, and consequently any necessary re-siting would probably not be
too much of a problem. Certainly the suggested additional barriers would
require careful consideration.

For the purposes of crowd control, the Police suggested there should be some
form of lateral separation. The Working Party AGREED, and it was suggested
that three metal fences sited centrally in the blocks (as opposed to adjacent
to the gangways) should be provided, with access between each limited to a
padlocked gateway under the control of the Police.

As recent adverse weather conditions had proved, ice and snow on the Kop
could cause problems, and it was A G R E E D that Paragraph 11 (4) of the draft
Certificate should be amended so as to require the Club to take steps to
clear the Kop of ice and snow before a game was played.

The Building Authority pointed out that information was still required from
the Club on profile and step dimensions and the slope of the Kop.
 (d)     The West T errace (pages 4&5)

 In view of the lack of depth of this terrace, the Club’s offer to reduce the
 spectator limit to 7,200, and the discharge time of 6.6 minutes, the
 Working Party A G R E E D that it would be unreasonable to insist that
 gangways or additional exits must be provided.

 However, even if the existing crush barriers were to pass the tests, the
 Working Party A G R E E D that the barriers would require special attention
 in view of the apparant sharp edges, corrosion, etc.

 (e)     The North West Corner Reinforced Concrete Terrace (pages 5 & 6)

 The Working Party A G R E E D there were no real problems here, but the
 Building Authority pointed out that as well as the crush barriers, the
 existing corrugated sheeting would require to pass the appropriate tests.

 (f)     The North Stand (pages 6 & 7)

 Whilst the flow rates and discharge times were probably satisfactory (the
 construction and width of the ramps being such that they could quite properly
 be regarded as elevated roadways), the fact remained that the gangways in
 the North Stand were only 640mm wide for much of their length, compared
 with the recommended width of 1.1 metres.

 Additionally, observations had shown that two-thirds of the spectators used
 the upper exit, whilst the remainder used the lower exit. An ideal would be
,to provide additional exits at the top of the stand but, in view of its cantilever
 construction, the cost would be prohibitive.          ' -        ,

 As an alternative, the Working Party A G R E E D that consideration might be
. given to removing a row of seats from the top of the stand down each gangway
  to the upper exits, with a physical barrier across the stand below the upper
  exits to ensure more equal use of both upper and lower exits by spectators.
  If this would cause difficulties, a barrier in the gangways only below the upper
  exits might be considered.

 So far as the Wire Mesh barriers under the stand were concerned, the
 Working Party A G R E E D that these must either be removed or made of a
 permanent construction.

 (g)    The West Stand

 Whilst the exits were adequate and well spaced and the discharge times
 were acceptable in view of the type of stand, the Fire Service felt that
                                  - 4-
the means of escape were not adequate as the only means of egress was
by way of two staircases. The Working Party A G R E E D that it was essential
that another staircase be provided, and one on the south-west corner was felt
to be the most acceptable.

(h)    The South Stand (pages 7 & 8)

So far as the seating arrangements were concerned, the Working Party
felt that it was the front, open air part which caused the concern. Because
of the bad ingress/egress, the Working Party A G R E E D that two additional
exits would be required. It was suggested that the most economical way of
doing this was by means of one discharging at the Spion Kop end and the
other by breaking through the wall by the Tea Bar.

Additionally, the penning arrangements of the seating would need to be
looked at closely.

As the balustrades and handrails were constructed of timber, the Building
Authority considered they would be likely to fail the appropriate tests.
Also, as the staircase was a 24 instead of the maximum 12 riser recommended
In the Guide it was probable that this would have to be reconstructed.

Contrary to their initial reaction, the Fire Service felt that, provided that the
necessary increased Are resistance measures were carried out, the stand
would not be the problem from a combustability point of view that they had
anticipated.

The Building Authority expressed concern as to the corrosion of the steel
work of the stand, and considered that this would require investigation.

The Police expressed concern about the use of the car park behind the
Stand. Persons entitled to use this car park frequently arrived just before
the start of a match and drove through the spectators attempting to gain
access to the ground. As they left immediately afterwards, the same thing
occurred at the end of a match.. This practice had to be stopped, either by
banning the use of the car park entirely on match days or imposing some sort
of time restriction on its use before and after a match.

(h)    General Requirements

These were not discussed by the Working party at this stage.




                                 - 5-
        (1)    Future Ground Capacity

        If additional exits are not provided on the Spion Kop, this will have the
        effect of reducing the ground capacity to 45,140, made up as foilows:-

               Seating approximately                 24,000
               Standing on Spion Kop                 11,040
               Standing at Leppings Lane end
               (including N.W. Corner)               10,100

                                                     45,140




•   '




#




                                        -   6 -
                                                                                           9
             SAFETY Q F SPORTS G R O U N D S A C T 1975

          Note of a Meeting; of the Officer Working Party
                         (Sheffield District)

      Fire Service Headquarters, Sheffield: 30th March, 1979

PRESENT:       F. Davis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              H. B. Dunstan (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
               B. A. Ellis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
               D. Kurst (South Yorkshire Police)
               K. Jones (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
               D. Mullarky (South Yorkshire County Council - Architect’s
                Division)
               W. O ’Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
               D. Sherriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
               D. J. Shiricliffe (South Yorkshire County Council -
                Administration Department)
              J. H. Stenton (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
              D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration
                Department)                      ,     _                 .
              V\.C., W v ^ W c          ''(eCV^Uo-e.        ViVi.
1 . ____ Purpose of Meeting

Following the postponement of the meeting with the Club because of adverse
weather and the difficulty in agreeing a mutually convenient alternative
date, the purpose of the meeting was to review the position since 12th February,
1979, prior to the re-arranged meeting with the Club which was now to take
place on 2nd April, 1979.

2._____ Plans
The plans at 1:500 scale and indicating all site fixtures were, it was still understood,
to be supplied by Eastwood & Partners at the meeting with the Club.

3._____ Report
(a)     General

The County Council had contacted the H o m e Office, but had been given little
information additional to that contained in their various Circulars. Basically,
they had said that any new work or reconstruction had to be to a standard not
lower than that set out in the Guide. However, the maximum flexibility had
to be maintained in the case of existing structures and differences in such
matters as age, size and mode of construction had to be taken into account.

The Fire Service had contacted four other Brigades with designated grounds,
and only in one case had the recommendations of the Guide been strictly
adhered to.

                                 1.
(b)      Spion Kop (pages 2, 3 & 4)

Additional to the points mentioned on 12th February, 1979, concern was
expressed by the Building Authority as to the general maintenance of the Kop
and the loose and broken concrete at the bottom in particular. If attention
was not given to this, it was A G R E E D that it would be necessary to restrict
admission to the Kop, additional to the restriction to 11, C40 if the extra
exits are not provided.

On the question of exits, it was again A G R E E D that it was essential to line
up the gates in the existing barrier with the gangways. Of the existing two
exits, concern was expressed as to the effect of the right-angled turn on
the embankment at the exit at the rear. After discussion, it was A G R E E D
that the best compromise was to leave things as they existed, provided
handrails are provided on the stairways, taking into account the
desirability of maintaining a smooth flow.

The Fire Service queried the exact form of the lateral separation discussed
at the meeting on 12th February, 1979, as this would naturally have a
bearing on the means of escape recommendations. After discussion, it
was A G R E E D that the metal fences should not be of the climb-proof type,
that it was not intended that they should obstruct the gangways, and that
in consequence the padlocked gateway recommendation should be dropped.
However, it was A G R E E D that it was still desirable to seek 3 x 2 central
barriers but, if the Club really resisted the suggestion, 2 x 2 could
reluctantly be conceded. The Building Authority stressed that whatever
barriers were provided would have to pass the appropriate strain tests.

The fact that the height of many of the existing crush barriers was below the
recommendation in the Guide, in some cases well below, was pointed out by the
Building Authority. The corrosion point mentioned at the last meeting was
also reiterated. It was A G R E E D that these points must be drawn to the
Club’s attention, as must the condition of the Score Board Structure.

(c)      The West Terrace (pages 4 & 5)

As well as the condition of the crush barriers mentioned at the last meeting,
the Building Authority drew attention to the poor condition in places of the
terracing in small areas near to the stand. The cross-fall on the steps on
the north-west corner exit would also require attention as it tended to throw
people forward. The height of the crush barriers mentioned In regard to the
Spion Kop also applied. It was A G R E E D that all these points must be drawn
to the Club's attention.

(d)       The North West Corner Reinforced Concrete Terrace (pages 5 & 6)

Having now had the opportunity of having a closer look at the existing corrugated
sheeting, the Building Authority confirmed that it would require alteration to
meet the requirements of the Guide.
(e)      The North Stand (pa^es 6 & 7)

The removal of a row of seats from the top of the stand down each gangway
to the upper exits and the removal of four seats at those exits was
confirmed as being a reasonable compromise to put to the Club.

As the asbestos sheets at the top of the stand were protected, the Building
Authority felt that these could be accepted, and confirmed that the glassing
at the ends of the stands was not glass and so would not shatter.

(f)      The West Stand (page 7)
                       t
Consideration was given to the Building Authority's suggestion of lateral
gangways and the segregation of exits but, after discussion, it was A G R E E D
that the additional staircase agreed at the last meeting should be confirmed.
So long a3 it was of 4-unit exit width, it was A G R E E D it was not necessary
to insist it should be on the scuth-west corner. Such staircases could be
bought "off the peg" and, if not installed in the close season, it was
A G R E E D that a ^ reduction in capacity would be necessary.

(g)      The South Stand (pages 7 & 8)

As mentioned at the last meeting, the penning arrangements of the seating
and the numbers of seats in the rows caused problems. Bearing in mind the
need for reasocaoleness and to make the situation better, it was A G R E E D
that, even though not strictly in accordance with the Guide, that the best
compromise was to seek the removal of the existing barriers and their
re-alignment, together with the widening of the gangways at the position
of the wings.

The Fire Service pointed out and it was A G R E E D that Fire Resisting Doors
would be required leading to the Directors' seating, and 1 hour fire
resistance would be required for all problem areas under the stand. This
could be reduced to | hour if automatic detection equipment were to be
installed.

For their part, the Building Authority reiterated their concern as to the
corrosion of the steelwork of the stand, and also pointed out the concrete
spalling which was occurring. Again, the likelihood of the balustrading,
barriers and guardrails needing to be reinforced or replaced was mentioned.
It was A G R E E D all would need to be given attention by the Club.

(h)      General Requirements (pages 8 & 9)

As well as the Fire Service pointing out that the present temporary
structures used for police and first-aid purposes would need removal
from a means of escape point of view if the capacity of the North Stand


                                 3.
    was not to be reduced, the Police stated that they were ready to discuss
    with the Club the facilities they would require. Briefly, they envisaged
    a permanent structure almost twice as large as the existing temporary
    structure, and expected communications, detention, toilet, parade rootn,
    etc., facilities.

    So far as First-Aid was concerned, the Sheffield Area Health Authority
    had confirmed their willingness to provide advice on First-Aid and
    Medical Facilities, but the person nominated (Dr. H. Bailey - Specialist
    in Community Medicine (Social Services)) was on holiday until
    2nd April, 1979. He had been invited to the meeting, with the Club on
    2nd April, but it was recognised that possible practical difficulties might
    prevent his doing so.



#




#




                                     4.




                                           S3
                                                                                              10
                               SAFETY OF SPORTS G R O U N D S ACT, 1975

               Note of a meeting between the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)
                            and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

                           Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield: 2nd April, 1979


      PRESENT:        Representing the Club

                      Dr. W. Eastwood (Consultant)
                      E. England (Secretary)
                      H. E. McGee (Chairman)
                      R. Whitehead (Director)

                      Representing the Working Party

c #                    Dr. H. Bailey (Sheffield Area Health Authority)
                       D. Hurst (South Yorkshire Police)
                       K. Jones (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                       A. Mills (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                       W. O'Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
                       D. Sherriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                       D. J. Shirtcliffe (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration
                                                                               Department)
                       D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration
                                                                             Department)
                       H. E. Wright (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

      1.     Scope and Objectives of Discussions

      Mr. H. E. McGee welcomed the representatives, and stressed that the Club were
      ambitious and wanted to make the Stadium the best in Europe. Crowds had been
      averaging 11,000 this season and, viewed purely as a football operation, the Club
      had been losing money since 1967. Commercial ventures had made the Club
      viable, and it was hoped to expand this side of the Club’s activities. The Club’s
      eventual ambitions obviously had to be tempered by practical considerations.

      IT W A S A G R E E D -

      1.    That, whilst Designating Orders did not specify time limits for the issue of
      General Safety Certificates, it was essential to aim for the Certificate to be issued
      by the start of the 1979 /80 Season.



                                                1.
2.    That, as the Club wanted to attract representative games, the aim should
be for the Stadium to be certificated for maximum crowds.

3.    That as much work as possible should be carried out in the close season,
bearing in mind that because of the recent continuous spell of bad weather, this
will be more restricted than usual. The Annual Jehovah’s Witness Rally had
also to be borne In mind.

2.    Discussion on Standing Areas

A.    Spion Kop

IT W A S A G R E E D -

1.    That the siting and angle of the new barriers to be installed be the subject
of detailed discussions between Dr. Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.

2.   That the Club consider the installation of simple lateral barriers (not of the
climb proof type) for crowd control purposes in the blocks on either side of the
central block (but not so as to obstruct the gangways).

3.    That, in view of the clearance time of I l f minutes compared with the
8 minutes specified in the Guide, the means of escape be discussed in detail
between Dr. Eastwood and the Fire Service (including the re-siting of the gates
in the existing barriers and, possibly the widening of the existing gates and/or
an increase in their number).

4.  That the headroom at the North end under the bricfee be Increased to the
maximum possible without going to the extent of underpinning.

5.   That representative parts of the concrete wall and boundary posts and fences
be tested to the appropriate standards.

6.   That the condition of the concrete at the lower end, the height of some of the
crush barriers and the scoreboard structure be the subject of detailed discussions
between Dr. Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.

7.   That the Club’s longer term proposals for the improvement of the means of
egress be unanimously welcomed.

8.    That the maximum capacity of the Spion Kop be determined after the foregoing
points have been resolved.
B.    West Terrace

IT WAS AGREED -

1. ’ That the Club's proposals for the installation of additional barriers and the
reduction in capacity to 7,200 spectators without the need for additional gangways
should be implemented.

2.    That the question of the cross-fall on the steps on the north-west corner
exit, the height of some of the existing crush barriers, as well as their corrosion
and sharp edges in places, be the subject of detailed discussion between
Dr. Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.

C.     North West Corner Terrace

IT W A S A G R E E D -

1.    That the Clubs proposals to bring the crush barriers up to standard and
supplemented by new barriers with a consequent capacity of 2,900 spectators should
be implemented.

2.    That the improvement or replacement of the existing corrugated sheeting be
the subject of detailed discussion between Dr. Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.

3.    North Stand

IT W A S A G R E E D -

1.    That, in view of the obvious difference of opinion between the Club and the
Working Party as to the appropriate steps (if any) to be taken over the width of the
existing gangways, both sides be requested to consider all the points made, and
to re-consider the matter at the next meeting.

2.    That the question of fire protection works to the Store Room and to the Team
Room be the subject of detailed discussions between Dr. Eastwood and the
Fire Service.

3.     That the replacement (from a fire hazard point of view) of the existing Police
and First-Aid Temporary Structures under the Stand be accepted in principle, and
that the facilities required in the new permanent structures be considered later in
the Agenda.

4.    That the existing Wire Mesh barriers under the Stand be the subject of
discussions between Dr. Eastwood and the Fire Service.

5.   That the question of the provision of handrails be the subject of discussions
between Dr. Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.
4.    West Stand

IT W A S A G R E E D -

That, whilst the upper level of the Stand can be emptied In the required time,
consideration be given to reducing the congestion which may occur In the lower
level by examining the possibility of erecting an additional stairway at each
end of the Stand (possibly of the Fire Escape type for emergency use, rather
than for normal use).

5.    South Stand

IT W A S A G R E E D -

1.    That Dr. Eastwood and the Building Surveyor discuss In detail the apparent
spalllng of the concrete frame at high levels, apparent corrosion of the main
steelwork columns, removal of the timber casing at base level for Inspection (2
only as representative sample), and load testing of a representative sample of
single and double skin walls.

2.    That, to overcome the means of escape problems in the upper part of the
Stand (the covered area), the existing barriers be removed altogether, the Club
to deal with any problems about different admission charges by way of coloured
seats or some such alternative.

3.    That Dr. Eastwood and the Fire Service discuss the methods of upgrading the
fire resistance in the central area, protected escape routes, and the provision of
handrails down the stairways.

4.    That the means of escape problems in the front open air part of the stand
be dealt with on the West side by making an additional exit for emergency use only
through the Tea Bar wall to the foot of the existing stairway, and that on the east
side consideration be given to providing an addl tlonal gangway to exit on to the
derelict land adjoining the Spion Kop.

5.    That no immediate answer seemed to be available with regard to a possible
limitation on the use of the car park behind the Stand by entitled persons immediately
before a match, even though police had control of Its use after a match.

6.    Ground Exits

Dr. Eastwood apologised that the 1:500 site plan had, unknown to him, not been
already supplied some time ago. He undertook to ensure that copies were
circulated without delay.
7.    Communications

IT W A S A G R E E D That consideration would be given to the installation of an
improved public address system, with the Police having access to its control
from their Control Room, together with its use as a fire alarm system, subject
to an emergency back-up system in the event of failure.

8.    Police and First Aid Facilities

IT W A S A G R E E D -

1.    That the Club accept the principle of permanently contructed Police and
First Aid Facilities.

2.     That the Police would supply the Club Secretary with a copy of their initial
sketch plan showing the facilities they wished to see, and that Dr. Bailey would
Inspect the existing first-aid and medical facilities and then discuss future
facilities with Dr. Eastwood.

9.    Any other Topics

IT W A S A G R E E D That Dr. Eastwood and the Fire Service discuss the existing
and any proposed emergency generating and fire-fighting equipment.

10.   Future Action

The Club stressed that they wished to carry out as much work as possible before
the issue of the Certificate by the start of the 1979/80 Season. If this was to be done,
it was essential that any points for discussion between the various representatives
of the Working Party and Dr. Eastwood had to be cleared without delay.

11.   Date of Next Meeting

IT W A S A G R E E D That the next meeting should be held at 2.30 p.m. on
Wednesday, 18th April, 1979, at the Stadium.




                                         5.




                                        0
                S A F E T Y O F SPORTS G R O U N D S ACT, 1975

Note of a meeting between the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) and the
                  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

            Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield; 18th April, 1979

PRESENT:       Representing the Club

               Dr. W. Eastwood (Consultant)
               E. England (Secretary)
               H. E. McGee (Chairman)
               B. Whitehead (Director)

               Representing the Working Party

               F.   Davis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
               D.   Hurst (South Yorkshire Police)
               K.   Jones (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
               A.   Mills (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
               W.    O'Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
               D.   Sherriff(City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
               D.   J. Shirtcliffe (South Yorkshire County Council - Admin. Dept.)
               D.    I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Admin. Dept.)

Apologies for absence were received from Dr. H. Bailey (Sheffield Area Health
Authority) and H. E. Wright (South Yorkshire County Fire Service).

The Note (previously circulated) of the meeting held on 2ndApril, 1979, was considered
In conjunction with a Note (circulated at the meeting) of a meeting between Eastwood
and Partners, the South Yorkshire County Fire Service and the City of Sheffield
Metropolitan District Council Building Surveyor's Department held on 13th April, 1979.

The Note of the meeting held on 2nd April, 1979, was agreed, subject to the following
amendments and additions in the light of the further investigations and discussions

2A     Spion Kop

Paras. 1 & 2 - Revised copies of drawing no. 1610/TX were circulated at the meeting
showing the proposed new crush barrier layout, including the two lines of radial
barriers. This was A G R E E D in principle.

Para. 3 - A 16, 850 crowd capacity on the Kop as existing would mean an unacceptable
evacuation time of some 12§ minutes. Larger and re-aligned gates in the barrier
and improvement of the existing upper exit could reduce this time to some 10 minutes,
but 8 minutes could only be achieved by installing a new exit of 3 metre overall width.
This could be integrated into the proposed future scheme for enlarging and roofing the
Kop. The Club A G R E E D to give consideration to the proposals.


                                       1.
para. 4 - The exploratory work regarding the Improvement of the headroom had
still to be carried out, but was not expected to be a major item.

Para. 5 - Because of the difficulty In devising a suitable method of testing in places
(such as the top of the Kop), it was AGREED that proposals should be formulated
after further discussions between Dr. Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.

Para. 6 - The Club accepted that the concrete required attention and that the scoreboard
structure should be looked at. It was AGREED that the question of the height of some
of the crush barriers be considered again after it was seen which of them failed on
testing.

Para. 7 - The Club stressed that their proposals for the improvement of the means of
egress would hopefully be carried out in the shorter rather than the longer term future.

Para. 8 - The Club hoped that the testing of the existing crush barriers, together with
the Installation of the new crush barrier layout and alteration of the gates in the existing
barrier, could all be carried out in the close season. Their aim was to achieve a
16, 850 crowd capacity.

2B     West Terrace

Para. 2 - The Club accepted that in view of the cross-fall on the north-west corner
exit, the steps should be re-built. It was AGREED that the other matters would be
considered again after it was seen which of the crush barriers failed on testing.

2C     North West Corner Terrace

Para. 2 - Whilst accepting the need for the Improvement or replacement of the
existing corrugated sheeting, the Club felt they wished to consider whether to carry
out more extensive works so as to bring the existing unused area into use for an
additional 250/300 spectators.                                                       ^

3.     North Stand

Para. 1 - Dr. Eastwood, the Building Surveyors and the Fire Service had reached
agreement on a scheme which could be recommended to the Club. This would
Involve the removal of 10 seats from each of the 9 gangways and 4 seats from in
front of each of the 9 upper exits. The result would mean a loss of 126 seats
compared to the 225 in the original proposals. The Club AGREED to give
consideration to the proposal.

Para. 2 - The word at the end of the first line should have been ’Tea1and not 'Team'.
It was AGREED that Dr. Eastwood and the Fire Service would discuss in detail any
fire protection works considered to be necessary.
4.     West Stand     '
                                                         /
The Club AGREED that additional exits of simple steel construction should be
provided from each end of the upper stand.

5.     South Stand

Para. 1 - The bases of two stanchions had been exposed by removing floor timber.
Whilst rusting was not excessive, itwas AGREED that ail bases would be exposed for
inspection and, ifnecessary, steel plating will be welded to any corroded parts before
encasing in concrete for permanent protection. Because of the apparent accumulation
of waste paper, wood shavings and cigarette ends beneath the floor boards, the
Club also AGREED that the space beneath the timber floor should be cleaned out.

Para. 2 - Provided the penning barriers were removed entirely, It was AGREED that
It would not be necessary to remove any seats for escape purposes in the upper part
of the stand (the covered area).

Para. 3 - It was AGREED that timber handrails should be provided down each of the
outer edges of the main staircase; that the existing iron centre railing should remain,
pnH that a new handrail down the centre of each side of the stairway should be installed.
It was also AGREED that the brick staircase walls should be buttressed where crowd
surge pressure could be generated.

Para. 4 - So far as the front open air part of the stand was concerned, it was AGREED
that on the west side a new exit through a new 1.2 metre wide door adjacent to the existing
snack bar should be provided, with appropriate fire resistance measures in the
surrounding area. On the east side, consideration was given to an extension of the
footway at the front of the stand and the removal of the wall, provided the new exit was
Isolated from the Kop exit. It was AGREED that Dr. Eastwood and the Fire Service
should consider precisely what measures could be considered satisfactory so as to
avoid any loss of seats.

6.     Ground Exits

The 1:500 site plan was In the process of being circulated.

7.      Communications

The Club stressed they were thinking in terms of an upgrading of the existing public
address system. It was AGREED that the Police should have an over-ride facility
from their Police Room, and Dr. Eastwood undertook to look into the possibility of
achieving this through radio, rather than wire, means.

8.      Police and First Aid Facilities

Paras. 1 & 2 - The Police stressed that itwas essential that there was no gap in
the provision of Police Facilities when the temporary structure was replaced by
the permanent structure. With this in mind, they were happy for the safety aspects
to receive first priority and to wait for the 1980 close season for the work to be
carried out. Itwas understood that Dr. Bailey had not yet completed his investigations
into the first-aid and medical facilities.

6.    Any other Topics

The evening of the 27th April was agreed as mutually convenient to test the existing
emergency lighting equipment.

10.   Future Action

Mr. McGee stressed that it was essential for decisions to be taken urgently if the
Club were to complete their plans, both from a financial and practical point of view.

The Club were to make application for financial assistance under the Football
Association's Ground Improvement Scheme, and had to have over 50,000 crowd             (
capacity if the aim of attracting international matches was to be achieved. The latest
proposals, if implemented, appeared to give a capacity of some 50,750.

So that they could be noted and returned for agreement, the Working Party asked for
2 copies of all plans (as revised) to be supplied by Dr. Eastwood, especially to the
Fire Service and the Building Surveyor.

Mr. McGee requested that he be advised if itappeared that any undue delay was
occurring as the Club wished to ensure that the certification procedure proceeded without
delay.




                                                                                        (




                                     4.


                                      t   o
City of Sheffield           &
                            M             r M e t n / 't
                              etropolitan District

P.A. Mallett Esq.,
Chief Executive,    r- .                                                               D epartm ent o f Planning & Design
South Yorkshire County Council,                                                        Director
County Hall,                                                                           J. Winter, Dip.Arch, RIBA, Dip,TP,. FRTPI
Barnsley                                                                              Town Hall,
S70 2 TM                 i                                                            Sheffield S1 2H H         .   ~


                                    — — ---- ^— :
 For.the attention of.Mr.. Vaughan— :           --- —-- :
                                                        —                                       ---------- ----
our reference                            Our reference      B R /jN S /S C             Date       1st May, 1979


 Dear Sir,

 Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground,                                                                                          _•
 Hillsborough, Sheffield

I refer to recent meetings with regard to the improvements required at the above
ground .and now append a summary of matters, in relation to the Building Authority
requirements, which require attention and have been discussed at the various
meetings.

West Terrace

 1.      The downward slope of the exit steps to be corrected.

 2.      Limitation of numbers as agreed between Police representatives and club.

 Subject;, to these two points this area is acceptable.
                                                      \
West Stand

 Provision of additional stairways for egress purposes is required. Subject to
 this provision the slight shortfall on headroom in certain cases can be accepted.

 South Stand

 1.      Removal of divisions between areas of seating is required, and_following
         this the general arrangements of egress provisions can be appraised.

 2.      Areas of badly spalled concrete to be repaired.

 3   . _Corrosion to steel columns to be investigated and its effects assessed and
        repaired as necessary.                  , .

 4.      All balustrades and walling to be subject to test and strengthening as may
         be revealed.
                     •; r                 r                 _              ’■                   .
 5.      Additional handrails to be provided to main entrance stairs and to stairs
          from first floor to stand.

 6   .   Consider... raising height, of front wall opposite foot                                    of each gangway.

 7.      Additional egress to be provided through tea bar to                                        foot of main stairs.

                                                                                                                P.T.O.

The officer dealing with this correspondence is             Mr. Stenton                       Tel 7 3 .   . 4 X ^ 9 . . . (STD Code 0742)

                                              G. R. Adam sonip i * ■Manner.        C. J. Dorrell, Chief Civil Engineer.

         D.   Rhodes, Chief Quantity Surveyor.      J. N. S te n |^ B 0 ld in g Surveyor.     T. N. Blackmore, Group Secretary.
 South Terrace

;Provide new means of egress to South-East area as discussed in detail.        -

 North Stand

 1.      Radial gangways to be improved to 1.1 m in width for at least half.the
          gangway length above each central exit, and remove 4 No. seats immediately
         below each exit to allow for barrier erection. •.                                 ..

 2.      Replace existing wire mesh barriers by suitable substantial barriers
         complying with guide recommendations.

It is noted that there are no handrails to the stairs from the stand, but in
view of restricted width and length it is not proposed to.require,these....

North-West Terrace

 1.      Replacement of the corrugated sheeting at the rear is required.               ^

 2.      The removal of under-strength barriers and their replacement by new ones
         constructed to guide recommendations.

 Spion Kop

 1.      The arrangement for crush barriers as produced by the consultant, whilst
         not complying fully with the guide recommendations, is considered adequate
          if the other requirements are fulfilled. These other requirements include
         the 2 No. radial barriers indicated on Plan 1XA and the provision of an
         additional 3 m wide egress route to South-East area, and of gated openings
         to give access from the radial gangways to the ground perimeter.area.

 2.      Make good all broken and spalled concrete terracing. ;

 3.      Increase headroom to North-East egress route to a minimum of 2.1 m.

 4.      Check and carry out any necessary work to ensure safety of score—board
         building.

 5.      Replace corroded perimeter rails by construction complying with code
         recommendations.

 6   .   Improve egress conditions at rear by provision of balustrades, rails, etc.
         as indicated on the plan.

 General

 1.      All crush barriers, balustrade walls, fences and railings to be tested and
         replaced, or strengthened, where necessary.

 2.      Provision of handrails and suitable headroom to egress routes to be re­
          assessed after re-routing of gangways etc. has been carried out.

 3.      Fire resistance and restriction of flame spread to be improved to all areas
         as discussed; the consultant is to confirm the work proposed to be carried
         out. Arrangements to be made for the clearance of all combustible material
         from under stand areas.
With regard, to future meetings I think it is essential that all matters agreed
be recorded, as we are now approaching finality in many areas and it is necessary
that we have recorded exactly the agreed matters.

I-would also suggest that in view of the approach of certification it would,
perhaps, be advisable to hold future meetings away from the ground, and that
Mr. Vaughan, as the co-ordinator, should chair such meetings.

Yours faithfully«__________________




(building Surveyor
                       South Yorkshire County Council
                       G. E. McCoy, Q.F.S.M., F.l. Fire. E.,                                    Sheffield (West) Division
                           Chief Fire Officer.                                                  St. Peter’s House
     m                                                                                          Hartshead
                                   Divisional Commander                                         Sheffield
F. A. Mallett, LL.B.   Fire Service Department.                                                 South Yorkshire S1 2EL
(Chief Executive)                                                                               Telephone Sheffield
                                                                                                STD (0742) 731645/6/7

                       Our Ref: C2088/FP19/2         Your Ref:                                  Date:      16.5.79
           This matter is          alt with by.... S.t.g,ti.on....0.fficer..Davis.               Ext. No      5.

          For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

          Dear Sir,                                              1


          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
          Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

          With reference to the recent meetings with regard to the improvements
          required at the above ground, the Fire Service enclose for your attention
          plans numbered 1610/12, 1610/11, 1610/9A, 1610/8A, 1610/7A, 1610/6A,
          1610/4A, 1610/2XA, 1610/1XA and a recommendation of work schedule to be
          undertaken.

          Yours faithfully,




          Divisional Commander

          Enc




          South Yorkshire County Council
          Regent Street
          Barnsley
          South Yorkshire




                                  All communications to be           id to the Chief Fire Officer.
WORK SCHEDULE

Spion Kop

1.   To secure acrowd capacity of   11,040 people the following work to be undertaken.

a) Improve the width of the exit from the Southern end of the Kop to a minimum of
4.7 metres throughout. This can be donf by providing a gate through the perimeter
wall in front of the Hillsborough Suite as indicated on plan no. 1610/11.

b)   Increase the headroom of the north east exit to a minimum height of 2.1 metres.

2. To secure acrowd capacity of     16,850 people the following work to be undertaken,
in addition to item 1 .

a) Provide four gates of at least 1.1 metre wide from the radial gangways to the
perimeter track of the ground area.

b) Provide an additional exit from either the top or side of the Kop of at least 3
metres width. It should be so designed that it does not impede the egress from
any other gangway, (enclosed for your guidance is a form PS 902).

South Stand (Rear)

1. The seating arrangements indicated on the plan numbered 1610/6A is satisfactory
with the additional proviso

Provide two 600 mm exits from the directors box as indicated on the plan.

South Stand (Front)

1. To relieve congestion on the rear passage, provide an escape route from the west end
via Ahe snack bar as indicated on plan no. 1610/4A.

2. Provide an additional exit route from the east end side of at least 1.1 m wide as
indicated on the plan numbered 1610/6A.

South Stand (internal Layout)

1. The construction marked red on the plan numbered 1610/4A to be brought up to a '
nominal one hour fire resistance. The doors to be self closing with one hour nominal
fire resistance, (enclosed for your guidance is form FS 901).

2. The sliding doors leading into the direstors box to be replaced by nominal one
hour fire resisting self closing doors as indicated on plan numbered 1610/4A.

3 . Remove paint store and timber construction and provide a one hour fire resisting
door as indicated on plan numbered 1610/4A.

West Stand

1. To secure full use of the seating arrangements as indicated on plan numbered
1610/9A, provide two additional escape routes both of at least 1.1 m wide. These
escape routes to lead from either the front or side of the stand and discharge to
a place of safety.

West and North West Terrace

1.   The exit routes from these parts of the ground are satisfactory.


Cont.... -
North Stand

1. The seating arrangements as proposed on plan numbered 1610/7A is satisfactory
with the additional proviso.
Provide barriers as indicated in green on the plan, in front of the upper exits.

North Stand (Lower Level Access) ( Upper Level Access)

1. The construction marked red on theplan numbered 1610/8A to be brought up to a
nominal one hour fire resistance. Thedoors to be self closing with one hour nominal
fire resistance.

Emergency Lighting

1. The areas shaded yellow on the plan to be covered by a 3 hour minimum duration
emergency lighting system conforming to BS 5266 Part 1 1975 - 'The Saergency Lighting
of Premises'.

2. The use of a double pole switch connecting the emergency lighting system to some
essential lighting circuit e.g. bar lights is strongly recommended thereby ensuring
that the emergency lighting is always switched on.

Fire Warning System

1. The suitability and type of system to be decided when further discussions have
taken place.

Fire Extinguishers

1. Fire fighting hand appliances are to be installed where indicated by a triangle
on the attached plan. The colour of the triangle determines the type of appliance
required. (Please see attached legend). It may be that equipment is already
provided in the building, and the plan shows the final complement of appliances.

Two gallon water extinguishers to be wall mounted so that the handle*is approximately
one metre from floor level. The 51b. dry powder extinguishers and glass fibre blanket
to be wall mounted, the extinguishers being mounted at approximately light switch
level.

 General Precautions

1. All walls and ceilings inside the stands and along escape routes to be class 'O'
surface spread of flame.

2 . Provide isolating valves on the pipeline leading to the gas cookers at the point
adjacent to the escape route from the counter area.

3.  Quantities of waste paper were discovered -under the seating in the stand.   This
should be removed and placed in a satisfactory storage area.

Training of Staff

To ensure that the staff are conversant with the safety precautions they will be
expected to administer, a. meeting can be arranged with this Department, suitable
to all parties.

Notices - Exit Signs

1. These signs to have suitable sized white lettering on a green background, the size
of lettering to be agreed on site.

The position of the exit signs are indicated on the plans by a green rectangle
containing the letter 'S'.
2. If the proposed rewiring of the emergency lighting system is adopted as discussed
by Mr. Clough and Divisional Officer Jones then, with the reduced lighting output
it may be necessary to provide a number of illuminated exit boxes.

Emergency Procedure

Emergency procedure notices should be placed at strategic points throughout the ground.

Access for Emergency Vehicles

1. Adequate roads should be provided to ensure that speedy and direct access can be
obtained by emergency vehicles to all exterior parts of the stadium.

2 . Ifosure that parked vehicles will not obstruct emergency vehicles on these access
roads.

Crowd Capacity

The following numbers are considered to be satisfactory to the Fire Authority
providing that the recommended work as detailed above is carried outs

                                Spion Kop                16,850
                                South Stand Upper         5,567
                                South Stand Lower         3,310
                                West Stand                4, 465
                                West Terrace              7,200
                                North West Terrace        2,900
                                North Stand               9,882

                                Total Ground Capacity    50,174
               DV/BB/583                   EE/CB                  8th Jbne,




Dear sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 197S

I have now received the detailed comments of ail of the disciplined
represented on the Working Party.

These have been collated into the attached schedule which, together with
plans, confirm formally in writing the matters discussed by the Working
Party with the Club over the series of meetings held so far and which
the County Council feel require attention so as to secure reasonable
safety at the Ground.

They are, of course, Indlvldualrrequlrements on specific matters and are
addltlonaljto the general requirements set out In the specimen form of
General Safety Certificate forwarded to the Club with my letter of
8th December, 1978, and discussed at the meeting held on 13th December,
1978,

After the Clu|i has had the opportunity of considering the schedule, perhaps
you would let me know which of the requirements you feel will be aide to
be carried out In the close season.

Should you have any queries, Mr. D. Vaughan of my staff (ext. 422) would
be happy to discuss thejn wife you.

                                    Yours faithfully.




                                    Chief Executive


 Mr. E. England,
 Secretary,
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
 Hillsborough,
Sheffield,
 South Yorkshire.
S6 ISW
                                    OS
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

                   Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

                     Matters reqiirlng attention at the
      Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, Hillsborough, Sheffield

Spion Kop

1.       To secure a crowd capacity of 11, 040 people the following work to be
         undertaken:-

(a)      Improve the width of the exit from the Southern end of the Kop to a
         minimum of 4.7 metres throughout. This can be done by providing
         a gate through the perimeter wall in front of the Hillsborough Suite as
         indicated on plan no. 1610/11.

(b)      Increase the headroom of the north east exit to a minimum height of 2.1
          metres.

2.       To secure a crowd capacity of 16, 850 people the following work to be
         undertaken, in addition to item 1:-

(a)      Provide four gates of at least 1.1 metre wide from the radial gangways to
         the perimeter track of the ground area.

(b)      Provide an additional exit from either the top or side of the Kop of at
          least 3 metres width. It should be so designed that it does not impede
          the egress from any other gangway, (enclosed for guidance is jelform
          FS 902),

3.       The arrangement for crush barriers as produced by the consultant, whilst
          not complying fully with the guide recommendations, is considered
          adequate ifthe other requirements are fulfilled. These other requirements
          Include the 2 No. radial barriers indicated on Plan 1XA and the provision
          of an additional 3m wide egress route to South-East area, and of gated
          openings to give access from the radial gangways to the ground perimeter
          area.

4.       Make good all broken and spalled concrete terracing.

5.       Check and carry out any necessary work to ensure safety of score-board
         building.

6.       Replace corroded perimeter rails by construction complying with code
         recommendations.

7.       Improve egress conditions at rear by provision of balustrades, rails,
         etc. as indicated on the plan \\x. ilcio}\~L .
B.   North Stand

     (i)     The seating arrangements as proposed on plan numbered 1610/7A is
             satisfactory with the additional proviso :-

             Provide barriers as indicated in green on the plan, in front of the upper
             exits.

             It is noted that there are no handrails to the stairs from the stand, but
             in view of restricted width and length it is not proposed to require these.

     North Stand (Lower Level Access) (Upper Level Access)

     (ii)    The construction marked red on the plan numbered 1610/8A to be brought
             up to a nominal one hour Are resistance. The doors to be self closing
             with one hour nominal fire resistance.                                            -
                                                                                           c
C.   North-West Terrace

     1.      Replacement of the corrugated sheeting at the rear is required.

     2.      The removal of under-strength barriers and their replacement by new ,
             ones constructed to guide recommendations,
             t V>   w     G     ha   Y*' tt'VN    wo *   \C    .
D.   West Stand

     To secure full use of the seating arrangements as indicated on plan numbered
     1610/9A, provide two additional escape routes both of at least 1.1m wide.
     These escape routes to lead from either the front or side of the stand and
     discharge to a place of safety.

E.   West Terrace
                                                                                           <'■(
     1.      The downward slope of the exit steps to be corrected.

     2.      Limitation of numbers to 7,200 as agreed between Police representatives
             and club^ codt              a-vt-Ws                         uc- )lct£>|'2y>A ,

F.   South Stand (Rear)

      (i)    The seating arrangements indicated on the plan numbered 1610/6A is
             satisfactory with the additional proviso

             Provide two 600mm exits from the directors box as indicated on the plan.

      South Stand (Front)

      (ii)   To relieve congestion on the rear passage, provide an escape route from
             the west end via the snack bar as indicated on plan no. 1610/4A.

                                          2   .

                                          m
(iii)    Provide an additional exit route from the east end side of at least
         1.1m wide as indicated on the plan numbered 1610/6A.

South Stand (Internal Layout)

(iv)     The construction marked red on the plan numbered 1610/4A to be
         brought up to a nominal one hour fiieresistance. The doors to be self
         closing with one hour nominal fire resistance, (enclosed for your
         guidance is form FS 901).

(v)      The sliding doors leading into the directors box to be replaced by
         nominal one hour fire resisting self closing doors as indicated on
         plan numbered 1610/4A.

(vi)     Remove paint store and timber construction and provide a one hour
         fire resisting door as indicated on plan numbered 1610/4A.

South Stand (General)

(vii)    Areas of badly spalled concrete to be repaired.

(viii)   Corrosion to steel columns to be investigated and its effects assessed
         and repaired as necessary.
                          4



(vix)    All balustrades and walling to be subject to test and strengthening as
          may be revealed.

(x)      Additional handrails to be provided to main entrance stairs and to stairs
         from first floor to stand.

(xi)     Consider raising height of front wall opposite foot of each gangway.

General Structural Matters

1.       All crush barriers, balustrade walls, fences and railings to be tested
         and replaced, or strengthened, where necessary.

2.       Provision of handrails and suitable headroom to egress routes to be
          re-assessed after re-routing of gangways etc. has been carried out.

Emergency Lighting

1.       The areas shaded yellow on the plan to be covered by a 3 hour minimum
         duration emergency lighting system conforming to BS 5266 Part 1 1975 -
          'The Emergency Lighting of Premises'.

2.       The use of a double pole switch connecting the emergency lighting
         system to some essential lighting circuit e.g. bar lights is strongly
         recommended thereby ensuring that the emergency lighting is always
         switched on.
Fire Warning System

The suitability and type of system to be decided when further discussions have
taken place.

Fire Extinguishers

Fire fighting hand appliances are to be installed where indicated by a triangle
on the attached plan. The colour of the triangle determines the type of
appliance required. (Please see attached legend). It may be that equipment
is already provided in the building, and the plan shows the final complement
of appliances.

Two gallon water extinguishers to be wall mounted so that the handle is
approximately one metre from floor level. The 5lb. dry powder extinguishers
and glass fibre blanket to be wall mounted, the extinguishers being mounted at
approximately light switch level.

General Fire Precautions

1.    All walls and ceilings inside the stands and along escape routes to be
       class '0 ' surface spread of flame.

2.    Provide isolating valves on the pipeline leading to the gas cookers at
       the point adjacent to the escape route from the counter area.

3.    Quantities of waste paper were discovered under the seating in the
       stand. This should be removed and placed in a satisfactory storage
       area.

Training of Safety Stewards and Staff

To ensure that the Safety Stewards and Staff are conversant with the safety
precautions they will be expected to administer, a meeting should be arranged
with the Fire Service, suitable to all parties.

Notices - Exit Signs

1.     These signs to have suitable sized white lettering on a green background,
       the size of lettering to be agreed on site.

       The position of the exit signs are indicated on the plans by a green
       rectangle containing the letter 'E1.

2.     If the proposed rewiring of the emergency lighting system is adopted
        as discussed by Mr. Clough and Divisional Officer Jones then, with the
        reduced lighting output, it may be necessary to provide a number of
        illuminated exit boxes.
Emergency Procedure

Emergency procedure notices should be placed at strategic points throughout
the ground.

Access for Emergency Vehicles

1.      Adequate roads should be provided to ensure that speedy and direct
        access can be obtained by emergency vehicles to all exterior parts of
        the stadium.

2   .   Ensure that parked vehicles will not obstruct emergency vehicles on
        these access roads.

Public Address System

The existing public address system to be upgraded, with the Police having an
over-ride facility from their Police Room.

Police Facilities

A suitable permanent Police Room (with facilities as shown on the sketch plan
marked A A ) to be provided in the 1980 close season.

First Aid Facilities

(i)     Structure

        The existing facilities are considered to be below an acceptable standard
        and it is suggested the Club consider providing a more permanent
        structure which is not likely to require up-grading for a very long time.
        The internal finish, particularly of the Treatment area, should be of an
        impervious nature so that it can be easily cleaned and rendered fairly
        sterile and require no decoration. This can be achieved by the use of
        tiles or formica type finish etc....

(ii)    Waiting Area

        The Waiting Area could be arranged within corridor space to minimise
        the cost, Where sitting cases could wait for attention on chairs.

(iii)   Treatment Area

        The Treatment Area should be sufficient to accommodate two or three
        patients at any one time, and consideration should be given to the needs
        for privacy within the treatment area, bearing in mind that the three
        patients may well be lying on couches.
(iv)     Lighting

         Good lighting is essential and strip lighting would be satisfactory. The
         provision of a power point would also be a basic requirement.

(v)      Water

         A supply of hot and cold water is essential; the cold water suitable
         for drinking. A hand basin and a large Belfast type sink should also
         be provided. The Club might consider whether it would be cheaper in
         the long run to provide stainless steel basins which are not subject to
         chipping.

(vi)     Toilet Requirements

         The d u b should provide at least one male and one female toilet, for
         the use of the public, and should consider whether they should provide
         an additional toilet for the use of the staff.

(vii)    Storage

         Storage facilities are required for six stretchers, and for two sets of
         wheels for stretchers, blankets and other bed linen. This storage should
         be lockable.

(viii)   Equipment

         The following is a minimum list to provide a basic service

         Treatment couches with lift up ends, two or three in number depending
         on space available and/or number of cubicles, if the accommodation is
         cubicled.

         Six Stretchers.
         Two sets of stretcher wheels.
         20 Blankets .
         Six Pillows.
         One Minute-Man Resuscitator.

(ix)     Telephone Facilities

         A telephone facility would appear to be basic in 1979. This could be
         achieved by an extension from the main switch, or by sharing with
         police.




                                    6.

                                         Q)
(x)    Car Parking

       The Club might also consider what facilities could be extended to the
       St. John's personnel for the parking of staff cars.

Crowd Capacity

The following numbers will be considered to be satisfactory, provided that the
recommended work as detailed above is carried out:-

       Spion Kop                   16, 850
       South Stand Upper            5,567
       South Stand Lower            3, 310
       West Stand                   4,465
       West Terrace                 7,200
       North West Terrace           2, 900
       North Stand                  9,882

       Total Crowd Capacity        50,174
                   S A F E T Y O F SPORTS G R O U N D S ACT, 1975

                 Note of a Meeting of foe Officer Working Party
                               (Sheffield District)

                     Town Hall, Sheffield ? 15th August, 1979

PRESENT:           J. W. Gavins           (South Yorkshire Police)
                   D. Hurst               (South Yorkshire Police)
                   T. Johnson             (South Yorkshire Police)
                   A. Mills               (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                   W. O ’Neill            (South Yorkshire Police)
                   D. Shirtcliffe         (South Yorkshire County Council - Admin. Dept.)
                   D. I. Vaughan          (South Yorkshire County Council - Admin. Dept.)
                   H. E. Wright           (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

JL____ Sheffield United Football Ground

The Working Party considered Preliminary Drawings nos. 1917/1, 2, 3 and 4 forwarded
by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners relating to the Club’s proposals to erect a new
security fence around three sides of the pitch at Bramall Lane.

Superintendents Gavins and Johnson confirmed that the proposals followed recommendations
which they had made to the Club on security grounds.

IT W A S A G R E E D that the proposals were generally acceptable, provided that the security
gates in the fence were not regarded as means of escape and that the necessary stress
calculations were supplied and were acceptable.

As they were primarily concerned with only the Bramall Lane ground, Superintendents
Gavins and Johnson left after this item.

2.____ Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground

The Working Party considered the progress of work at the Ground since their last
meeting on 12th July.

Whilst it was agreed that the Club had done much of the outside work referred to in the
Schedule of Matters Requiring Attention (dated 8 th June), the Building Authority
expressed particular concern about the possible stresses on the extensions at each end
of the West Staircase to link with the simple steel construction emergency staircases
to be erected. It was also pointed out that, at the present time, no strengthening of the
corrugated sheeting on the North West Terrace had been carried out and that the Fire
Prevention Works and Structural and Rectification Works in the South Stand had not
yet been commenced. The urgent need to carry out the South Stand work was stressed.

It was noted that Messrs. Eastwood & Partners had by letter dated 10th August received by
the County Council yesterday sent revised drawings, calculations for the steel staircase
and cantilever slabs on the West Stand, and details of the prqposed works to upgrade fire
resistance. Comments had been requested by 3rd September.

Whilst many detailed preliminary plans had been provided by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
these were not suitable for including as part of the Certificate. The conditions and
date of issue of the Certificate \seie also discussed, as was the provision of the
First-Aid Facilities recommended by the Area Health Authority.

A letter had also been received that morning from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
requesting alterations to the previously agreed barrier arrangements in the North
Stand.

IT W A S AGREED:-

(a)    that the aim be to issue the Certificate at the beginning of December; that the      ^
       d u b be advised of this aim and asked to state their programme for the
       completion of the required works, any works not completed by that date to
       be included in a Schedule of Crowd Capacity Limitation to be incorporated in
       the Certificate;

(b)   that particular emphasis be placed on the necessity of carrying out the required
      works to the South Stand as soon as possible and that provided that it is feasible
      the Building Authority and the Fire Service be requested to let the County Council
       have their observations on the structural and fire resistance aspects for
       incorporation into a reply by 3rd September as requested by Messrs. Eastwood
       and Partners’letter dated 10th August;

(c)   that the question of plans to form part of the Certificate be re-considered when
       all the preliminary detailed plans being submitted have been agreed?

(d)   that, as with the proposed Police permanent structure, the Club be requested     (
       to provide the proposed First-Aid permanent structure in the 1980 close season,
       subject to the d u b agreeing to provide the recommended equipment immediately;

(e)   that Messrs. Eastwood and Partners be advised that the alterations to the
       previously agreed barrier arrangement Ln the North Stand set out in their letter
       dated 14th August cannot be agreed, the alternative to their suggestions being
       the retention of the 1.1 metre height (as recommended by the Guide) in line
      with the stairs but with a possible reduction in height of the returns to 1 metre;

(f)   that the following amendments be made to the Draft Certificate -

       (i)    paragraph   8   to be deleted and replaced by the following new paragraph -

             »8(1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the
                      satisfaction of the County Council a suitably equipped First Aid
                      Room. The first aid room shall be adequately signed and shall
                      be capable of being lit by the emergency power supply referred
                      to in paragraph 12 of this Part of this Schedule.
(2)    The Holder shall ensure that during every specified activity
       a Physician employed or retained by the Holder is available
       to attend at the First Aid R o o m if required and that his
       whereabouts are known to those in the Police Central Control
       Roo m at the Stadium.

(3)    The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every specified
       activity of such numbers of qualified First Aid assistants as
       the County Council shall require but without prejudice to the
       foregoing the Holder shall ensure that at every specified activity
       there is at least one First Aid assistant for every 2, 000
       spectators."

paragraph 17 to be deleted and replaced by the following new pa ragrap h -

"The Holder shall place and maintain within the Stadium legible and
unobstructed emergency procedure notices in such positions as may be
required by the Chief Fire Officer;”

paragraph 27 to be split into two parts with the following new paragraph
(i)-

"The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium fire fighting
equipment of such type and in such positions as may be required by
the Chief Fire Officer and indicated on plan no.

paragraph 29 to be re-numbered 30 and the following new paragraph
29 to be inserted -

”29.   Subject to the provisions of this Schedule the Stadium shall be
       maintained with the facilities and structure including all
       entrances, exits, means of escape and crush barriers in the
       number size position and strength existing at the date of the
       Certificate and indicated on the plans and no alteration shall
       be made thereto unless prior notice in writing is given to the
       County Council in accordance with paragraph 5.2 of this Part
       of this Schedule."
E A S T W O O D & PAR TN ER S                                                                                    BOWMAKER HOUSE           17
               C onsulting Engineers                                                                             23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                 SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . Eastwood         B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E,                                                             TellT'(0742f"583871 ••
                     F.l.Struct.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
A. A. W ood          B.Eng., Ph.D „ C.Eng,, F.I.C.E,
                     F.l.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.

A . G. B urdett      G.M., B .Sc.(Eng), C.Eng., M.I.C.E.                                                          2 1 SEP
Associates:
Geoffrey Spir        C .E n f„ M .I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.                                                         COUNTY HALL, 3A;iK.y_EY,
C. 8. Greaves        B.Eng., C,Eng.t M .I.C.E., M.I.Scrucc.E.                                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE T.70 2TM
R. C. A. Eastw ood   B.Sc., C .E n j.. M .I.C.E., M J.Scruct.E.

C onsultant:                                                                                   Our R ef:           WE/AJC/KH/1610
A. L. Percy          b.S c., c.E n * ., f .i.c .e „
                     F.I.Struct.E ., F.I.Mun.E., M .R.T.P.I.                                   Your R e f:




 South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                                   19 September 1979
 County Hall,
 Barnsley,
 South Yorkshire,
 S7Q 2TN.

 For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

 Dear Sirs,
                 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                  Emergency Lighting Installation
      Further to our discussions with Mr. K. Jones, we would
like to set down in detail our proposals for the upgrading of
the emergency lighting facilities at the above Club„
      At present there is a large central battery system
providing 240 volts D.C. which is arranged to serve the West
and South Stands, and adjacent areas.    This is achieved by an
automatic changeover on mains failure, from AC mains to the
DC battery supply for those circuits providing the essential
tungsten lighting.    For the North Stand and adjacent areas,
there is available a second YEB supply to act as a back up in
the event of a loss of the normal supply.
     We are proposing at this stage that new emergency circuits
and fittings be installed to serve the Penistone Road exits,
Spion Kop, the North Stand, the North-West Terrace,, the West
Stand, the South-West Terrace and the Leppings Lane exit.
The existing normal lighting for the West Stand will be excluded
from the battery load, and the spare battery capacity made
available will serve the new emergency installation.

                                                     Registered in E n J r * l .* lN o . 1134531
                                                                    SHEET   2.



    EASTWOOD £r PARTNERS




              The duration of the battery supply will be substantially
         unchanged by this redistribution of load, and will give more
         than adequate time for clearing the ground.    As these are
         existing grounds, we would not recommend to the Club that
         their installations should comply in all respects with the
         standards set for new premises, especially as the 3-hour
£       duration recommended for emergency battery capacity is quite
         inappropriate to the particular needs of safety.
              We are not proposing at this stage to recommend improvements
         to the South Stand emergency lighting.    Subject to approval,
         we would suggest that the system be reviewed when the time
         comes for replacement of the central battery.    At thjdkTtime
         the load reduction which could be achieved with a new emergency
         lighting layout would permit a considerable saving in the battery
         replacement cost, and this would offset the cost to the Club of
         the new emergency lighting installation.
              We are enclosing a set of drawings corresponding to
         these proposals (1610/101 to 106) for which we are now seeking
    ^   tenders.    We would look forward to your comments and suggest
/
L       that it may be appropriate to arrange a meeting with the Fire
         Prevention Officers concerned if further discussions are required.
              We would also wish to have their comments on the proposed
         locations for the Fire Alarm call points shown on the drawings.

                                          Yours faithfully,




        c.c.   South Yorkshire Fire
               Service
                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975


      Note of a meeting between the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)
                 and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited


                Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield: 12th November, 1979

PRESENT:

Representing the Club
R. Whitehead (Director)
E.. England (Secretary)
        ®'a s^w00^ ) M essrs. Eastwood and Partners
A. J. Clough       )
J. Strange         )

Representing the Working Party
F. Davis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
K. Jones (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
A. Mills (City of Sheffield Metropolitan D istrict Council)
W. O'Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
D. Sherriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
D. J. Shirtcliffe (South Yorkshire County Council -'"Administration Department)
W. Stark (South Yorkshire Police)
D. I, Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration Department)


Mr. Whitehead welcomed the representatives and explained that delays caused primarily
by the wet weather, had meant that all of the required work had not been completed by
today’s meeting as the Club had originally envisaged.

The Schedule of Matters requiring attention (dated 8th June, 1979) was considered, with
the following results (after site inspection where necessary):-

A.         Spion Kop

\          Work carried out.
& (b)

2 (a)      Work carried out.
     (b)   The additional exit from the top of the Kop was well under construction and
           should be completed by the end of the month.

3.         Work carried out.

4.         Except for one or two areas on the steps, all of the concrete terracing had been
           made good.
The future of the score-board building was still undecided but, if a decision
to be made shortly was to retain it, supporting calculations would be forwarded
to the Building Authority.

Work c arried out. T est report to be forwarded to the Building Authority.

Work c arried Out.

North Stand

Work carried out.

North Stand (Lower Level Access) (Upper Level Access)

Work in hand. Should be completed in next few days.

North West Terrace

To prevent local damage to the sheeting, particularly at the joints and to
spread the anticipated load over a larg er area than a t present, it was agreed
that a continuous horizontal timber member should be fixed to the front of the
sheets a t a height about one metre from terrace level.

Work carried out.

West Stand

  It was agreed that, whilst the only positive way of proving the adequacy of the
■ joint between the new and existing construction was by means of a test load,
  the calculations provided would be regarded as acceptable.

West Terrace

Work carried out.

Work carried out.

South Stand (Rear)

It was agreed that, provided seat no. 26 was replaced by a flush fitting type
without arm s, the two additional exits from the directors box would not be
insisted upon.

South Stand Front)

Work c arried out.

Work carried out.


      p       -S
         South Stand

(vii)    Work mainly carried out.

(viii)   The steel columns had been opened up for inspection and agreem ent on
         necessary remedial work.

(ix)     It was agreed that a test load of 200 lb/ft would be applied along the
         whole length.

(x)      Work in. hand.

(xi)     It was agreed that a metal rail extending 10" above the wall should be installed at
          the foot of each gangway.

G .____ General Structural Matters

1.       Work mainly carried out.

2.       R e-assessm ent to be carried out      sh o rty .

H.____ Emergency Lighting

1&        It was obvious that there was a difference of opinion as to what could be
2        regarded as acceptable as regards the emergency 'Lighting in the South
         Stand. It was agreed that a trial should be conducted during the hours of
          darkness attended by representatives of the Club and the Fire Service so
          as to identify the danger areas. Consideration would then be given to
          possibly installing an extra battery and additional wiring to those particular
          areas not covered by the emergency lighting covering other parts of the
          ground.

L____ Fire Warning System

         The problems with the public address system seem ed to be mainly ones of
         diction and co rrect volume level. It was agreed that the police would monitor the
         position at the next home match and; pending the new police control post being
         erected, would arrange for an officer to sit alongside the. Disc Jockey in the
         meantime.

         It was also agreed that the monitoring point for the fire detection equipment
         should be in the tower between the South and West Stands, and would proceed
         once the electrical work was completed.

J_.____ Fi re Extim^uishers

         The fire extinguishers had been delivered and were to be fitted shortly as
         shown on the plan. The F ire Service undertook to clear any doubtful points.
       General Fire Precautions

1.     Work in hand.

2 ..   Work to be carried out shortly.

3.     Waste paper cleared a t bottom - other areas to be cleared shortly.

L.____ Training of Safety Stewards and Staff

        To be done shortly in consultation with F ire Service.

M.     Notices - Exit Signs

1.     To be erected after decorations complete.

2.     Will be put in hand once agreement reached on emergency lighting.

N.     Emergency Procedure

       It was agreed that the Fire Service would supply the Clubwith    details of the
       necessary wording.

0.     Access for Emergency Vehicles

1.     It was agreed that whilst no real problems had occurred in the past, the Club
        would (in consultation with the Fire Service and the Police) mark out a lane
        from the main gate to the South Stand in which parking would not be allowed.
        It was also agreed that the hydrant outside the South Stand would have to be
       kept c lear.

P.____ Public Address System

       Already discussed under "Fire Warning System"

Q.____ Police Facilites and R. F ir s t Aid Facilities

       As agreed, a suitable permanent Police Room would be provided in the 1980
       closed season.

       The Club explained that it would be preferable from a building point of view
       for boththe police and first aid facilities to be in the same overall building
       although physically separated. The police representatives reserved their
       position on this point, pending the outcome of detailed discussions with the
       Club.

       The question of parking for both police and St. John's personnel purposes
       would also need to be looked at in detail.

£>_.____ Ground Capacity

        Provided the outstanding points were satisfactorily resolved, it was agreed
        that the crowd capacity would be as shown, i .e . a total of 50,174.


                                       GO
T.      Issue of Certificate

 The Club were anxious that the Certificate should be in force by the derby game
 with Sheffield United on. Boxing Day morning, and they were assured that providing
 the outstanding points were satisfactorily resolved, it was still the intention to
 issue the Certificate at the beginning of December,




.From bottom of Page 2.

South Stand (Internal Layout)

(iv)   Work in hand - query size ofrebate.

(v)    Work in hand.

(vi)   Work carried out.

With regard to the ventilation to open areas of the P re s s Box, Bar and Luncheon
Room, it was agreed that honeycomb ventilators v/ould be regarded as acceptable,
providing

(a)    that the existing purely wooden furniture in the P re ss Box was not replaced
        by modern plastic/foam type,

(b)    that a member of staff was present in the Bar throughout all of the period
        it was open to the public and also whilst a match was being played, and

(c)    that the use of the luncheon room was confined as at present to use over
        the lunch-time period on other than match days and was kept locked at all
        other tim es.




                                CEE)
                                               South Yorkshire County Council



     SiB5nBm9




                              S A F E T Y O F SPORTS G R O U N D S ACT. 1975
                                      G E N E R A L SAF ET Y CERTIFICATE

Address of premises for which                                          The Hillsborough,Stadium,
this Certificate is issued                                             Penistone Road, Sheffield.

Occupier of the premises                                               Sheffield Wednesday Football
         and                                                           Club Ltd.
Holder of this Certificate

Use of the premises in respect                                         Football matches.
of which this Certificate is issued                                    Religious Conventions.

1.              This Certificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council in respect of
                the premises described above, being a Sports Stadium designated by Order
                under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as a stadium
                requiring a Safety Certificate.

2.              The terms and conditions set out in the Schedules attached hereto are hereby
                imposed.

3.              The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which the South Yorkshire
                County Council consider necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety at
                the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in respect of which this
                Certificate is issued.

4.              The words used in this Certificate and the Schedules attached hereto have
                the meaning assigned to them by Schedule 1 to this Certificate and
                Section 17 of the Act.

5.              The Schedules and Plans attached hereto all form part of this Certificate.

6.              This Certificate commences on the twenty first day of December, One
                thousand nine hundred and seventy nine for an indefinite period.


                j-jate   21st December, 1979                     Signed      V ”•     ^
                                                                           Chief Executive on behalf
                                                                          of and duly authorised by
                                                                          the South Yorkshire County
                                                                           Council.




                                          ca
                         SCHEDULE         1

                         Interpretation

The Act                        means the Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975.

Authorised Person              means a person authorised in accordance with
                               Section 11 of the Act.
The Building Authority         means the Sheffield City Council.
The Chief Constable            means the Chief Constable for the time being
                               of the South Yorkshire Police or, as the case
                               may require, the Police Officer having charge
                               of the Stadium on the occasion of a Specified
                               Activity.
The Chief Fire Officer          means the Chief Fire Officer for the time being
                                of the South Yorkshire County Fire Service or
                                his designated representative.
The Certificate                 means the written General Safety Certificate of
                                which the Schedules and Plans form part.
The County Council              means the South Yorkshire County Council.
The Guide                       means the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds”
                                as from time to time amended, issued by the
                                Home Office, or such other code of practice as
                                may be so issued.
The Holder                      means the applicant for and person to whom the
                                General Safety Certificate has been issued and who
                                is a ’qualified person’ for the purposes of the Act.

Invalid Carriage                means a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled
                                or not, constructed or adapted for use for the
                                carriage of one person, being a person suffering
                                from some physical defect or disability.

The Plans                       means the document or documents attached to and
                                forming part of the General Safety Certificate and
                                signed by the person signing the Certificate and/
                                or any other document or documents which may
                                be added to or substituted for such document or
                                documents and signed on behalf of the County
                                Council.

Specified Activity              means a football match or a Religious Convention.


Spectator                       means any person occupying accommodation
                                provided for spectators at the stadium.

 The Stadium                     means the Hillsborough Stadium, Penistone Road,
                                 Sheffield.
 Structural Parts                includes structures, components, installations,
                                 fabric and associated parts of the Stadium.

 Vehicles                        includes invalid carriages.
                                      SCHEDULE 2

                             General Terms and Conditions

            (1)    The Holder’s nominee for the time being approved in writing by the
                   County Council shall be present whenever the Stadium is used for a
                   Specified Activity and he shall on behalf of the Holder ensure that
                   the terms and conditions of the Certificate are complied with at
                   the Specified Activity.

            (2)    The appointment by the Holder of a nominee to attend each Specified
                   Activity shall not absolve the Holder and any responsible person (as
                   defined in section 12(2) of the Act) from their obligation to take all
                   reasonable precautions and exercise all due diligence to avoid the
                   contravention of any term or condition of the Certificate.

            The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium unless a
f •   2 -
            Specified Activity is taking place.

      3.    The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the several areas of
            spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
            specified in Parti of Schedule 3.

      4.    Subject to the terms and conditions hereof and to the statutory controls relating
            thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified Activity for one or
            more of the following

            (a)    the playing of music or singing;

            (b)    the provision of news or comment associated with football;

            (c)    the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities, programmes, new-sheets
                   and souvenirs;
c•          (d)    the sale and consumption of refreshments;

            (e)    any other use ancillary to a Specified Activity which has the prior approval
                    in writing of the County Council.

             (1)   Where the prior written approval of the County Council is required under
                   the terms and conditions hereof, an application for that approval shall
                    be made by the Holder to the County Council at least 21 days before the
                    occurrence in respect of which it is required.

             (2)   If whilst the Certificate is in operation it is proposed to alter or extend the
                    Stadium or any of its installations in a manner mentioned in Section 8
                    of the Act the Holder shall at least 21 days before the carrying out of the
                    proposal is begun give notice in writing of the proposal to the County
                    Council.
(1)    The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at least 21 days
       (Or such shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent)
       prior to every Specified Activity the methods of admission to be
       employed in connection with the Specified Activity and (in relation
       to a Football Match) the methods to be used for the segregation of
       home and visiting supporters.
(2)    The Holder shall refuse admission to, or evacuate spectators from,
       the Stadium or any part thereof at any time before or during a
       Specified Activity upon receiving instructions so to do from the
        Chief Constable.

The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at every
Specified Activity of an adequate number of police officers to secure the
orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators and the number of police
officers required at each Specified Activity shall be agreed between the
Chief Constable and the Holder at least 21 days (or such shorter time to
which the Chief Constable may consent) before a Specified Activity takes
place.
(1)    Subject to such interim arrangements as may be agreed by the County Council,
        the Holder shall provide and maintain atthe Stadtumto the satisfaction
        of the County Council a suitably equipped First Aid Room. The first
        aid room shall be adequately signed and shall be capable of being lit
        by the emergency power supply referred to in paragraph 1 2 of this
        Schedule.

(2)    The Holder shall ensure that during every Specified Activity a
       physician employed or retained by the Holder is available to attend
       at the First Aid Room if required and that his whereabouts are known
       to those in the Police Central Control Room at the Stadium.

(3)    The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity
       of such numbers of qualified First Aid assistants as the County Council
       shall require but without prejudice to the foregoing the Holder shall
       ensure that at every specified activity there is at least one First Aid    ^
       assistant for every 2 ,0 0 0 spectators.

The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity of such
number of Safety Stewards as may be required by Part 2 of Schedule 3, and
shall ensure that the Safety Stewards shall be (a) fit and capable to carry out
their duties (b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by dress (d)
provided with written instructions as to their general duties in order to carry
out the following:-

 (1)    Manning of exits as indicated on the plans

 (2)    Control and direction of spectators entering using or leaving the
        Stadium

 (3)    Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency including
         raising an alarm and extinguishing any small fire.
Training exercises relating to the action to be taken in the event of an
emergency shall be held for Safety Stewards and Staff employed at the
Stadium at least once every three months.

The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked on the Plans,
all doors and gates which form an egress route between any spectator
accommodation and the public highway, or other open space outside the
stadium, shall be so secured as to open immediately and easily from the inside
and shall be manned at all times by at least the number of stewards required
by Part 2 of Schedule 3. All such doors or gates shall be opened by the
stewards responsible and secured in the fully open position at a time before
the end of a Specified Activity agreed between the Holder and the Chief
Constable and at any other time on evacuation of the Stadium or a part
thereof on being ordered so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the
sounding of the alarm.

(1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief
       Fire Officer exit signs comprising white letters on a green background
       over all exits from the Stadium and all exits from spectator
       accommodation therein and shall ensure that such exit signs may be
       illuminated by both the main and emergency lighting systems. Such
       supplementary illuminated signs in such locations as the Chief Fire
       Officer may require shall also be provided by the Holder.

(2)    The Holder shall ensure that the corridors, gangways and staircases
       indicated on the Plans may be illuminated when required during a
       Specified Activity by both the main and emergency lighting systems.

(3)    The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be
       illuminated whenever adequate natural light is deficient during a
       Specified Activity or as directed by the Chief Constable.

(4)    All means of ingress to and egress from the Stadium and to and from
        any Spectator Accommodation therein shall be maintained free from
        obstruction and with non-slip and even surfaces and in particular
        stair coverings shall be secured and maintained so that they do not
        constitute a source of danger.
 (1)   Subject to such interim arrangements as may be agreed by the Chief Fire Officer,
        the Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief
        Fire Officer a separate emergency power supply for providing
        electricity sufficient to light all emergency lighting throughout the
        Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the communication systems
        within the Stadium, such emergency power supply to be operable
        independently of the main power supply and to come into automatic
        operation within ten seconds of the failure of the latter and to be
        capable of maintaining the necessary power output for a minimum of
        three hours from the failure of the main power supply.

 (2)   At least once in each period of 12 months the Holder shall supply to
        the Chief Fire Officer a report as to the condition of the emergency




                                  cm
       Power Supply certified by an independent Electrical Engineer.

(3)    On the day of a Specified Activity and not less than 3 hours prior to
       its commencement the emergency power supply shall be tested for
       a period of 30 minutes. Any defect revealed in this test shall be
       rectified before the commencement of the Specified Activity.

(4)    A competent electrician employed or retained by the Holder shall be
       present during a Specified Activity.

(1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
       of the Chief Fire Officer a fire warning system.

(2)    The fire warning system shall be tested periodically to the satisfaction
       of the Chief Fire Officer.
Sibject to such interim arrangements as may be agreed by the Chief Constable,
the Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction of the
Chief Constable

(1)    A Police Central Control Room which shall be provided with such
        ancillary equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

(2)    Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention room
        and for administrative purposes.

(3)    A public address system audible in all parts of the Stadium. The Police
        shall have the right to use the public address system for police purposes
        in priority to Lfcs use for any other purpose.

(1)    The Holder shall at all times maintain all structural parts of the stadium
        in sound order and to the appropriate and relevant standards in the Guide
        and in all cases to the satisfaction of the Council.

(2)    The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance, repair and
        renewal to the Stadium as may be required from time to time by the
        County Council.

The Holder shall at all times maintain all operational parts of the Stadium
(including the electrical and communications installations) and all emergency
equipment in good and efficient working order to the satisfaction of the County
Council and shall undertake such maintenance repair or renewal as may from
time to time be necessary to maintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.

The Holder shall place within the Stadium, at such positions as may be specified
by the Chief Fire Officer, emergency procedure notices which shall be
maintained legible and unobstructed in those positions.

 (1)   The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium shall be
        restricted to those areas indicated on the Plans unless otherwise
        approved for emergency purposes by a Police Officer in uniform.
(2)       The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the
          satisfaction of the County Council the acoess routes for emergency
          vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that members of the Press, T.V. and radio services
having access to the public and playing areas of the Stadium are identifiable
as such.

Television cameras and portable equipment shall be placed only in such
positions as may be agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable.

(1)       Liquid refreshments may be sold or distributed at the Stadium only in
           containers constructed from soft plastic or other soft material, or as
           allowed by the Licensing Justices.

(2)       No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other materials which
           in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use as missiles
           shall be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium to which
           spectators have access.

No accumulation of flammable rubbish, dirt, surplus material or goods shall
be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium except in a place and quantity
approved in writing by the Chief Fire Officer.

No flammable gases or liquids shall be stored or used in any part of the
Stadium without the prior written approval of the Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified
 Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a representative of the
County Council within 7 months of the date of the Certificate and at least once in each
period of 12 months thereafter and the Holder shall as soon as possible after
each inspection supply to the County Council a Certificate by the said
 Chartered Engineer as to the current compliance or non-compliance with good
engineering and building practices and with the relevant British Standard
 Specifications and Codes of Practice and with the appropriate provisions and
 recommendations of the Guide of all structural parts of the Stadium excluding the
 crush barriers and handrails.

(1)        The Holder shall arrange for all crush barriers and handrails within the
           Stadium to be tested in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
           Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil)
           in the presence of a representative of the County Council within 2 months
           of the date of this Certificate and for the results thereof to be notified
           in writing to the County Council as soon as possible thereafter.

 (2)(i)    The Holder shall ensure that not more than 7 months after the date of this
           Certificate and thereafter not less than once in each period of 12 months
           a representative sample of crush barriers and handrails amounting to not
           less than 2 0 % of the total number of such barriers and rails is tested in




                                   QD
       accordance with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
       (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a representative of the County
       Council and the results thereof notified in writing to the County Council
       as soon as possible thereafter.
(ii)   a record shall be kept of those crush barriers and handrails tested in
        accordance with sub-paragraph (2)(1) alone and a barrier so tested shall
        not be tested again within a period of 4^ years thereafter.

The Holder shall within 7 months of the date of this certificate and thereafter
not less than once in each period of 12 months supply to the Chief Fire Officer
the certificate of an independent Electrical Engineer as to the current
compliance or non-compliance of the electrical installation within the Stadium
with Section E of the I.E.E. Regulations or other sections or Regulations for
the time being in force relating to the Electrical Equipment of Buildings.

(i)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium fire fighting
        equipment of such type and in such positions as may be required by the
       Chief Fire Officer.

(ii)   The Holder shall arrange for all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and
        other water supply within the Stadium to be inspected and tested as
        appropriate at least once in each period of 12 months by a competent
        person to the satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be made
available for inspection at all reasonable time to Authorised Persons:

(1)    A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the Stadium during
        a Specified Activity and to each area of Spectator Accommodation
        therein mentioned in Part 1 of Schedule 3.

(2)    A record of any accident or incident occurring whilst the Stadium is in
       use for a Specified Activity which causes injury to a spectator, such
       record to include the name, address, and age of the spectator
       injured, the nature of the injury and how it was caused, as far as can
       be ascertained by diligent inquiry, and the location of the incident.
       The Holder shall provide a written report to the County Council within
       48 hours of all such accidents or incidents.

(3)    A record of the training and instruction given and the exercises held in
       accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 9 of this Schedule such
       record to include the date and time and duration of the instruction or
       exercise, the name of the person giving instruction, the nature of the
       instruction or exercise, and the name(s) of the person(s) instructed.

(4)    A record of all inspections, tests, maintenance, repairs and renewals
       carried out at the Stadium.




                                SXD
The Stadium shall be maintained with the facilities and structures including
all crush barriers, entrances, exits and means of access to the entrances
and exits in the number, size, position and strength existing at the date
of the Certificate and indicated on the plans and no alteration shall be made
thereto unless prior notice in writing is given to the County Council in
accordance with paragraph 5(2) of this Schedule.

No spectators shall be allowed to use the Stadium in conditions of extreme
wind and/or snow loadings acting singular or in combination and in
particular:-

(1)    No spectators shall be allowed to use the stadium in wind
        speeds in excess of 100 Km. p. h. at 10m above ground level
        and this prohibition shall be effective when more than one gust of
        this speed of at least 3 seconds duration is recorded in the area of
        the stadium in the 30 minutes immediately prior to the time of the
        enquiry mentioned in (2 ) to the local meteorological office.

(2)    The wind speed in (1) shall be ascertained by the Holder by enquiry
        to the local meteorological office by telephone not more than 30
        minutes before the admission of spectators to the stadium and
        the wind speed given shall be recorded at once in a book kept
        for the purpose.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council shall
have the right at any time to require the Holder at his own expense to arrange
for the conduct of any inspection or test which the County Council may consider
to be necessary in the interests of securing reasonable safety at the
Stadium when it is in use for a Specified Activity.
                          SCHEDULE 3

                            PART 1
                          Crowd Capacity

The number of spectators admitted to the stadium and to the various areas
of spectator accommodation within the stadium shall not exceed the following
figures

Spion Kop                            16,850
South Stand Upper                     5*56.7
South Stand Lower                     3,310
West Stand                            4,465
West Terrace                          7,200
North West Terrace                    2,900
North Stand                           9, 882

      Total Crowd Capacity           50,174


                            PART 2

                          Safety Stewards

The minimum number of Safety Stewards required for each function shall
be as follows: -
                                                        28     Stewards (2.per main
(1)      Manning of exists
(2)      Control and direction of spectators                                 exit)
                                                        33     Stewards (1 per vomitory)
           entering or leaving the Stadium
(3)      Patrolling the Stadium and dealing
           with any emergency including raising
           an alarm and extinguishing any small fire           Stewards        South
                                                                           Stand)
The Stewards shall be distributed as follows: -

Section of Stadium                     Number required for each function
                                            1          2         3

  Each Alain. Exit (12)
  South b'tand                                          12

  West Stand                                               3
  North Stand                                           13
  I nder South stand




                             KK3
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT, 1975

           Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,
                  Sheffield on 11th August, 1983

PRESENT:    Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC

           Dr. W. Eastwood (Eastwood & Partners)
           E. England (Secretary)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

           Ms*    Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
           C. W. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
           J. Miles (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           A. Roberts (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1 .______ Purpose   of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was primarily to carry out the "simmer"
inspection of the Ground in accordance with the policy of twice yearly
visits to Football League grounds in South Yorkshire by the appropriate
Officer Working Party.

In particular, the Officer Working Party wished to see the position with
regard to the effect of the carrying out of the improvements at the
Penis tone Road end of the Ground (considered by the Officer Working Party
on 28th June, 1983 and agreed subject to certain reservations contained in
a letter to the Club dated 29th June). Reports being received from the
Building Authority had indicated extensive movement of existing retained ear
material, apparently of sufficient magnitude to impair the stability of the
adjacent access ramp and associated perimeter walls and barrier rails.

2 ._____ Ground Inspection

A.      Electronic Score and Message Board

It was noted that, since the agreement indicated at the "winter" inspection
of the Stadium on 21st February, 1983, the electronic score and message
board had been erected between the South and West Stands. Evidently, it
was proving to be a most welcome feature.

B.      West Stand and Terrace

The Club’s intentions with regard to the brick built former A.R.P. building
at the rear of the Stand and adjacent to the boundary wall (now used as a
store) were again discussed in view of its condition.

The condition of the crack in the brickwork at the rear corner of the Stand
(nearest to the North West Terrace) raised at the last meeting was inspected

Dr. Eastwood reported that the crush barriers on the Terrace had been tested
completing the first cycle of crush barrier testing at the Stadium. One had
failed and been replaced.




                                     03
  IT WAS AGREED -
  (i)      That, if the Club intend   to continue to use the former A.R.P. buildi-g
  adjacent to the boundary wall, the lintel over the door would require attention
  in particular,' as would the general maintenance of the building.
  (ii)    That the condition of the crack in the non load bearing brickwork, at
  the rear corner of the Stand (nea-ast to the North West Terrace) should continue
  to be monitored.
  (iii)   That the Club would give attention during normal maintenance to the
  loose concrete rendering apparent in places.
  C.      North West Terrace
  As the Terrace and the West Stand were separate structures, the Club were of
  the opinion that there would continue to be movement between the structures
  caused by changes in weather conditions, thus making it difficult if not
  impossible to achieve a seal sufficient to permanently prevent the seepage of
  water between the two.
  IT WAS AGREED that this was not a matter of safety and that the Club would
  continue to monitor the position.
   .      North Stand
  The Club reported that the further attention to the crack at the expansion
  joint adjacent to Stand entrance "R" requested at the last meeting was in hand
  as a matter of maintenance.
  E.      Spion Kop
  As requested at the last meeting, the Club had investigated the spalled concrete
  and corrosion of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Spion Kop (towards the
  North Stand end). ActLon would be taken shortly to cut off the front (and
  worst affected) portion of the roof, which would also have the effect of
  increasing the headroom.
  Whilst certain remedial work had already been undertaken by the contractor to
  stabalise the banking at the rear of the Spion Kop following digging out
  to provide new refreshment and toilet facilities, the Officer Working Party
  were of the firm opinion that further work was essential. Measurements had
  shown that in places there had been as much as four to five inches of
  movement. Simple visual inspection showed that there was a lack of the
   :ormer retained earth material underneath the access ramp in places, and
tjbonsequently there had also to be doubts about the stability of the foundations
  of the existing barrier rails. The Club would have to look to the contractor
   (or his insurers) to meet the cost of the remedial work to the existing access
  ramp and barrier rails.
  As pointed out in the letter to the Club dated 29th June, measures would
  require to be taken to prevent the public gaining access to the roofs of the
  new facilities (as they were not load bearing) . Barriers would have to be
  provided or other measures taken to enable the new facilities to withstand
  crowd pressures where these Were capable of being generated (as also pointed
  out in the letter of 29th June).
  IT WAS AGREED
  (i)     That the Club’s proposals for dealing with the spalled concrete and
  corrosion of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Spion Kop be supported in
  principle.




                                     09
(ii)    That as soon as possible, and certainly prior to the first home
match on 3rd September, the condition of the existing ramp and barrier
rails must be stabilised (possibly by drilling holes at intervals and
inserting grouting under pressure) and the resultant success or otherwise
of the measures tested by test loading the barrier rails (or a representative
sample) to the Green Guide requirements.

(iii)   Also prior to the first home match on 3rd September, measures must
be taken (a) to prevent access by the public to the roofs of the new
facilities and (b) to enable the new facilities to withstand crowd pressures
where these are capable of being generated.

(iv)    That the new buttresses to the existing boundary wall in connection
with the new turnstiles and exit gate must be sited so ds not to reduce the
support to the wall, and that the need for pointing of the wall externally
in places must also not be overlooked.

F.     "Stands" Club

It was noted that there was spalling of the concrete surrounds to the steel
beams underneath the "Stands" club. It was understood that the premises
were leased on a full repairing basis to Mansfield Breweries Ltd.

It was also noted that there was a certain amount of deflection in the brick
built screening wall in front of the Male toilets underneath the Club if
pressure was applied to the top of the wall.

IT WAS AGREED:-

(i)     That the Club would request Mansfield Breweries Ltd. to give
attention to the spalling of the concrete surrounds to the steel beams
under the "Stands" Club in accordance with the terms of their lease.

(ii)    That the brick built screening wall in front of the Male toilets
should be test loaded to the Green Guide requirements.

G.     South Stand

It was noted that some of the loose coping stones on the top of the
dividing wall between the South Stand and the Spion Kop had been removed,
and that a certain amount of pointing of the wall had been undertaken.

It was also noted that there was severe corrosion at the bottom of both
steel supports to the sides of the concertina-type exit gate from the
Stand (nearest to the Spion Kop).

IT WAS AGREED

(i)     That the Club would remove theremaining coping    stones andarrange
for the remainder of thepointing to the upper level    of the wall to be
undertaken as a matter of maintenance.

(ii)    That the Club would shortly consider a scheme to be prepared by
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners for replacement of both steel supports to
the exit gate from the Stand (nearest to the Spion Kop).
H.      Ground Fitness Certificate

Dr. Eastwood pointed out that many of the matters discussed at the meeting
were contained in his Annual Ground Fitness Certificate. However, he had
delayed submitting this to the County Council, as required by the General
Safety Certificate, in view of the situation on the Penistone Road end of
the Stadium.

IT WAS AGREED that Dr. Eastwood would submit his Ground Fitness Certificate
to the County Council, excluding the Penistone Road end of the Stadium at
the present time.
                                                  Copy to Mr. D. Vaughan - County Council                                          21


                         FP1Q/2/4A MJ/HC                                                                             7th October, 1933

                                                         Divisional Officer Johnson                                      41



            Hr. E. E > v :ie n c ,
            The S e c r e t » r " ,
            Sheffield                        F.C.,

            Sheffield,
            S o u th l o ^ r
            SS 1SW.



            Dear                                                          '                        •                 •■-.v

            SAFETi A. or’Oftii GiiOUNDS ACT 1975

            ■followin?: 3 t«st aria -appraisal of the esergeney procedure a t t n e Sheffield
            Wednesca? - r o ^ d , . h e ld j u s t p r i o r to the coamenceraent of z h t i h l k Jup H a te *
            o n T u e s d a y 4 : ; . O c to o e y ', 1983, please find fey o b s e r v a t i o n s s > w lc k i-

            1*    On t h i s o c c a s i o n «u p r i o f . . warning was given oy t h e f i r e S e r v i c e
                  o f t h e - i n t e n u o h t o t e s t t h e e m e rg e n c y p r o c e d u r e .     I n i s ’ was cone
                  in o r o tr              s t a f f r e a c t i o n s c o u l d b e o b s e r v e d w hen t h e y t h o u g h t
                  that they v ^ r e r e s p o n d i n g ' t o a g e n u in e e m e r g e n c y . ■

            2.    prot&cure was initiated oy the announcement, -over tne -public
                 T he
              addrs       ^ ■= oein o i the     s s .jtj^e Wi 11 ^^r. Deresv ^nlfi»ht»     ^■ tw v e
         .’ Secret ary^s- affice'** It was cancelled approKiaately.'five'minuted
     •V
            \ later by. the announcement of “Hr. Derek Knight need not nor a-ttend
      ...
          .,' the Secretary's'Office***
           A       ...         ;:                                               ;                      ...'


            _ Hy Officers questioned a number of stewards manning the exit gates
              at both Leppings Lane and Penistone Road ends of the ground. In
              both i n s t a n c e s ' the stewards had not heard the emergency ,      p ro c e d u re
              announcement and therefore had not carried out their duties in relation
.   v..'      to the evacuation, procedure. ~

            4.   Further investigation revealed that, lit a number of.areas,. listed below*
                 the public adaress systeia was not audible. ’      • ,

                  (a)     Area between the n o p and Peni3tone Hoad exits.                                    i,:

     ^            (b)     Area between the west stand and Leppinga Lane exits.

                   (c)    Walkways at ground and upper levels to rear of North Stand.

                   (d)    Areas In South Stand*

                   (e)    Parking area.

                 There are speakers at tne rear of the west stand but these were not working
                 on the night of the test. It is possible that speakers at the Penistone
                 Road end may have been removed or are not functioning correctly because of
Sheffield Wednesday F.C.            -   2   -         7th October, 1933



     the alterations currently being carried out at that end of the ground.

5.   Because of the problem with the audibility of the public address system
     it was not possible for my Officersto assess the effectiveness of the
     emergency procedures. They did, however, report that the stewards they
     questioned would have known what to do if the message had been heard
     by them.

6. A number of stewards were not wearing identifiable dress, i.e. fluorescent
   tabards, as required by condition 9(c) of your General Safety'Certificate.

7.   My Officers also reported that staff manning refreshment bars in the
     north and south stands did not know the position of fire alarm call
     points or the position of and how to use fire extinguishers.

I have informed Mr. D. Vaughan (Secretary Officer Working Party) e:' the
problems listed above and he will oe arranging a site meeting as soon as
possible to resolve the matter of the public address system. Itea; 6 is
a matter which I think you can deal with yourself.                             {
On the subject of staff training, which is a condition placed on the Club
by the General Safety Certificate, I amprepared to make my Officers
available to instruct your stewards and staff members in the emergency
procedure and use of fire extinguishers.

Please contact Divisional Officer Johnson at the above address if you wish
to take advantage of this offer or if you require any clarification on the
contents of this letter.

Yours sincerely,


(sgd) H.E.Wright



Chief Fire Officer
]o . 'bdlMi'd




  The Chief Fire Officer,                          EE/CB
  South Yorkshire County Council,
  Fire Service Department,                         13 th October 1983
  Furnival House,
  42-46 Furnival Gate,
  Sheffield, S1 4QP




  Dear Mr. Wright,

  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

  Further to your letter of the 7th October re your visit and
  appraisal of '■.he emergency procedure at this ground on
  Tuesday, 4th October, when your Divisional Officer Johnson
  came to see me after the match and explained thatiin his
  opinion there were'dead1areas in our ground, as it appeared
  that stewards had not heard the emergency announcement, to
  say the least this surprised me, as only this last close
  season have we had the P.A. System further improved.

  I have taken the opportunity this morning to try out the
  system in all the areas that were supposedly 'deadj and
  I must report that everything that was said, was heard
  clearly and distinctly.

 I have informed Hararaerton Road police of this, and it
 has been suggested to me that perhaps it would be a
 sensible idea for one or two of your officers to come
 to the ground at say 1.00 o'clock on Saturday, 29th
 October when we play Huddersfield Town and go around the
 ground with the police and hear the broadcasts for them­
 selves.

 Yours sincerely,




 Secretary.




  c.c. South Yorkshire County Council
      Hammerton Road Police
                                                                    %


  otaniMMan




SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL                                                 I* i m
                                                                        m m n i m s M in s ®
M EM ORANDUM
                                                                                    '   ■        klm
                                          For the attention of          Your
 To           Chief Executive                                                           9 zij$       —
                                            D. \j% \x$ian               Ref.

                                          Please contact d. Binningt 3iPur
From          Chief Fire Officer          Tel. 27202 ext. 47          Ref.        FP19/2/AA DSB/IV


Subject
              Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975                                  10.11.1983
                                                                        Date
              Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC


              A specific visit was made to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
              on Saturday 29th October, 1983.

              In conjunction with the County Police, the public address system was
              checked and found to be satisfactory in all areas.

              The attached letter is a copy of the letter which has been sent to the
                                                                                                     ...   ■; •• ■
              Secretary of the Club.                                                             '                   V    .



                        s\   1
                                                                                                                     :V
           K Jones   MI Fire E
     T/




                C2088/WM/IR                                  31 October 1983
                                 ADO May                        49


The Secretary                                     Copy to:   Fire Service HQ
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
Hillsborough
SHEFFIELD
S6 1SW




Dear Six

Thank you far your letter dated 13.10.33. As you suggested, 2 Fire Prevention
Officers visited the ground before the match on Saturday 29 October to carry
cut further checks on the effectiveness! of the public address system when used
for emergency procedures.

In conjunction with the County Police/ the public address system was checked
and found to be satisfactory in all areas.

If you require any further information, please do not hesitate to contact
this Department.

Yours faithfully




DIVISIONAL COKMWIDER
REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
PURPOSES PANEL


                              Safety of Sports Ground $


With effect from 1st April 1986, the City Council will be responsible as
Licensing Authority for the administration of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1985 in place of the South Yorkshire County Council. This preliminary report is
intended to inform Members as to the basic framework of the Act and the
delegations required to carry out the Council's functions.

A detailed report will be presented to the next meeting of the Panel by which
time investigations into the current licensing system will be complete.

The Home Office have provided a useful summary of the duties of Licensing
Authorities and a summary of the Act itself; both these documents are attached
to this Report for members to consider.

Following the Bradford disaster, the importance of the provision of a sufficient
level of safety at sports grounds has been highlighted; the responsibility of
the Council in this regard should not be underestimated.

Members will probably be aware that the Report of the Committee of Inquiry into
Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Ground (the Popplewell Report) was recently
published and a copy of its recommendations are attached to this Report for
information.

Summary and recommendations

A more detailed report will be submitted to the Panel as soon as possible but
in the meantime it is recommended that the following delegations be approved

(a)   All the powers and duties of the Council under the Safety of Sports Ground
      Act 1975 be delegated to the General Purposes Panel;

(b)   The emergency procedure pcwers under Section 10 of the 197 5 Act be
      delegated to the Head of Administration and Legal Department in
      consultation with Chairman or Deputy Chairman of this Panel or of the
      Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee as
      appropriate.

(c)   The power to authorise Officers under Section 11 of the Act be delegated     to
       the Head of Administration and Legal Department.




                                      Roger Pensam,
                                      Head of Administration and Legal Department

Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD.

March 1986
                                City of Sheffield
                       Administration and Legal Department


                         C O M M I T T E E       R E P O R T
                               F R O N T      S H E E T




REPORT TO:    General Purposes Panel


DATE OF COMMITTEE:      6 th May, 1986


SUBJECT:      Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975




ORIGINATING OFFICER:     Mr- D - M - Bownes


LIST OF BACKGROUND PAPERS (As applicable and unless confidential/exempt*):

       1. Report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department to
       the General Purposes Panel on 3rd March, 1986.

       2.    Home Office Circular 7/1986.




                 * Full details of what constitutes confidential/
                    exempt information are available on request
REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
PURPOSES PANEL

                          Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

Introduction

The Panel will recall that a report was submitted to the March 1986 Meeting

covering the general safety of sports grounds legislation as it affects the City

Council.   This follow-up report aims to deal in detail with the current

situation in Sheffield as inherited from the South Yorkshire County Council.

There are 2 sports grounds currently subject to the legislation - Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club and Sheffield United Football Club; the Owlerton Sports

Stadium is likely to be made subject to the legislation shortly.

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club - Hillsborough

The Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited was designated as requiring a

Safety Certificate in August 1978 and such a Certificate was issued by the

County Council on 21st December, 1979.   The Stadium is currently undergoing

major works which, when complete, will form a roof over the Spion Kop and thus

substantially improve the accommodation for spectators.

Sheffield United Football Club, Bramall Lane

The Club was designated as requiring a certificate in August 1984 but to date

a certificate has not been issued as there are outstanding works to be

completed. The County Council took the view that the certificate should only be

issued as and when the Ground was up to the appropriate safety standard and not

before.    This procedure effectively insured that the terms of the Safety

Certificate were not breached as soon as it was issued.       It is hoped that the

Council will be in a position to issue a certificate before the start of the

1986/87 season.

Owlerton Sports Stadium

It is understood that the Home Secretary will shortly be designating the Stadium

as requiring a Safety Certificate in accordance with the Popplewell Report

recommendations.    It will, therefore, be necessary to arrange for a full

inspection of the Stadium in the next few weeks to find out what works are
going to be required to raise the standard of the Stadium to appropriate levels.

The Panel is probably aware that the Stadium is Council owned but is currently

leased to the Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited.   This Lease will expire on 1st

November, 1987.

Safety Certificate Standard Conditions

At the moment the Safety Conditions attached to Safety Certificates are

standardised throughout South Yorkshire and both the Police and the Fire Service

have indicated that they would wish this situation to continue for reasons of

administrative simplicity.   The Conditions do, however, give some cause for

concern, as they appear to be inadequate or inappropriate in some areas.    The

drafting of these Conditions is of particular importance as it is a serious

criminal offence to contravene any of them punishable by the Statutory Maximum

Fine (Currently £2,000) or 2 years imprisonment or both.


It is proposed to re-draft the Certificate conditions, where appropriate, and to

submit them to the Panel for approval.   The Sheffield Wednesday Certificate

would then be replaced in accordance with Section 4 (1) (b) of the Act.    The

Sheffield United Certificate could then be issued with the new conditions before

the start of the 1986/87 season.    The re-drafted conditions would, of course, be

submitted to the Fire Service, the Police and Building Surveyor for comment;

other authoritiesin South Yorkshire could also be involved in this process.

Existing Administrative Arrangements

The County Council system for administering the Act is based on 2 main

components - (a) bi-annual inspections of the Stadium; and (b) meetings of an

officer working party.   The bi-annual inspections consist of representatives

from all the interested authorities and involve thorough inspections of the

Stadia and the identifying of any defects.    These defects are at the time of the

visit brought to the attention of the certificate holder and its technical

representative if one is present.    Depending on the nature of the faults found

(if any) steps are then agreed between the Authority and the Certificate Holder
to rectify them or so arrange matters that no risk to the public occurs.       The

Working Party consists of representatives from the Police, Fire Service,

Building Surveyors and the County Council - it considers in detail various

matters (such as the Spion Kop development at Sheffield Wednesday Football

Ground) and also any outstanding items from the bi-annual inspections.       The

Working Party is effectively a co-ordinating body which attempts to ensure that

a balanced and consistent approach is maintained to current issues at the Sports

Grounds.    Any recommendations it makes are subject to approval by this Panel.

The Health and Safety Executive

Recommendation 9 of The Popplewell Committee's Interim Report read as follows

"There should be urgent consultation between the Health and Safety Executive and

the Fire Authorities and Local Authorities as to how best to co-ordinate and

communicate their inspections and reports”.    Bearing this in mind the local

office of the Health and Safety Executive was invited to participate in the

administrative system for safety at sports grounds.    This invitation was

declined.    The Executive will apparently take no direct part in the

Certification system.

In view of this problem the Home Office was contacted and the position

explained; it appears that negotiations are under way between the Home Office

and the HSE about Popplewell's recommendation but as yet there has been no

useful outcome.

In these circumstances the Council could keep the Health and Safety Executive

informed of all developments in Sheffield and to invite their comments on them.

It would then be the responsibility of the Executive to decide whether or not to

respond.

Fees

The basis on which fees may be charged is set out in Regulation 14 of the Safety

of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976 which states ”14.    A local authority may

determine the fees to be charged in respect of applications for the issue or
amendment of safety certificates but such fees shall not in a particular case

exceed an amount commensurate with the work actually and reasonably done."     The

South Yorkshire County Council did not fix any fees under the Regulation

apparently as a matter of policy and the Panel is therefore asked to decide

which of the following options to adopt:- (a) state as a matter of policy that

no fees will be charged in respect of Safety of Sports Grounds legislation or

(b) decide in principle to fix fees and to ask for a report back on the costs

to the Council.

Conclusion

The Panel is asked to:-

(a)   Note the broad outlines of the administrative system organised by the

      County Council and authorise its continuation for the time being;

(b)   Note the position of the Health and Safety Executive and request the Head

      of Administration and Legal Department to keep the Executive informed of

      all matters relating to sports ground safety;

(c)   Request the Head of Administration and Legal Department to draft new

      safety certificate conditions in consultation with the appropriate

      authorities approval by the Council;

(d)   Either resolve that no fees will be charged under the legislation or

      request the Head of Administration and Legal Department to report on the

      Council's costs in this respect.

                                                      Roger Pensam,
                                                      Head of Administration
                                                      and Legal Department
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD.
May, 1986
      REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
: Y   PURPOSES PANEL                                     ”

      SAFETY OF   SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - THE CURRENT    SITUATION AND PROPOSALS FOR THE
      FUTURE ADMINISTRATION OF THE COUNCIL'SCERTIFICATION FUNCTION

      Introduction

      The Panel will recall that on 1st April 1986 the City Council inherited from the
      South Yorkshire County Council the role of certificating Authority under the
      1975 Act.    The Act itself is basically aimed at ensuring adequate standards of
      safety at   designated stadia; there are three of these in Sheffield at the moment
      - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Sheffield United Football. Club., and the
      Owlerton Sports Stadium. A detailed report on the Act and its application in
      Sheffield was submitted to the Panel on 6th May 1986.

      The Current Situation

      The Panel at its meeting in May 1986 identified several main areas for further
      investigation.

^     Firstly it was accepted at the time that the broad outlines of the
      administrative system organised by the County Council should be continued for
      the time being.  This system has now been reviewed and the proposed
      reorganisation is detailed later in this report.

      The Panel also asked that the Health and Safety Executive be kept informed of
      all matters relating to sports ground safety and that the Association of
      Metropolitan Authorities also be asked about the HSE's involvement. As far as
      keeping the HSE informed of safety developments at the stadia the Executive made
      it fairly plain that they would not make any comments.  The practice was
      therefore discontinued. The involvement of the AMA in the HSE issue has been
      somewhat forestalled by action at central Government level to review the HSE's
      relationship with local authorities; this review was announced in the
      Government's reply to the Popplewell Report but no results of that review have
      yet been received.  Fortunately, however, the Council's Director of Health and
      Consumer Services has permitted his Officer's to provide ahealth and safety
      input into the decision making process in relation to safety of sports grounds.
      This substitution, therefore, temporarily covers the absence of an input from
      the HSE.

      The Panel also made reference to consultation on the safety of sports grounds
      policy with the other District Councils in South Yorkshire.  Unfortunately,
      attempts at arranging consultation meetings have been unsuccessful to date.   It
      is proposed to try again to organise some consultations in the fairly near
      future, perhaps when the Certification system has settled down in each area.

      The drafting of new safety certificate conditions in consultation with the
      Council's advisers has been progressing steadily and new draft conditions are
      currently under consideration by those advisers.  It is hoped that the new
      conditions will be submitted to the Panel at its meeting in October for final
      approval;^

      As to the question of charging fees under the 1975 legislation, it should be
      be made clear Chat such fees are only payable on the grant of a Certificate.
      It is anticipated that if the Panel approves the new Certificate conditions a
      Certificate will then be issued to Sheffield United and at that time it is
      proposed to deal with the question of fees.
Future Administration of the Council*s Certificating Function

Following a thorough review of the legislation it has become clear that a
detailed administrative system needs to be established in connection'with the
Council's Certificating function. Discussions on this matter have been underway
for some time with the Police, the Fire Service, the Council's Building
Surveyor and the Director of Health and Consumer Services on the establishment
of such a system.

Accepting that the Council as the Certificating Authority will act on the basis
of advice from experts (such as the Fire Service) the question arises as to how
that advice may be best formulated.  In the past, the County Council organised
as Officer Working Party which was apparently used as a forum for discussion
between Officers prior to the final formulation of advice to the Council. That
particular working party also appeared to have had some decision making powers.

As it is essential that meetings take place due to the potential overlap of
requirements in many areas, all the Authorities and Officers have now agreed
that it would be appropriate to establish a revised form of the working party to ^
perform a similar function for the City Council. It is recommended that the
“Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group" (which would consist of
representatives from the Police, the Fire Service, the Building Surveyor's
Division and the Department of Health and Consumer Services), would function as
a forum for discussion between Officers; its most regular use would probably be
the discussion of items of advice to the Council before they are finally
formulated by the appropriate Authority. Meetings of the Group would be held at
the request of one or more Authorities and on receipt of a request the Head of
Administration and Legal Department would arrange a meeting and despatch a list
a£ items to be discussed. At the conclusion of the meeting a further list of
items would be prepared and the details of action agreed to be taken by each
Authority would be noted. It is then anticipated that detailed written advice
would be provided by each discipline and be acted upon as appropriate.

In addition the Head of Administration and Legal Department will keep copies of
all relevant correspondence which will be available to all participants in the
Group. . ■■

Under the old County Council administrative structure the different Authorities
^represented in their working party had fairly clearly defined roles within which
to operate. Although it can be seen that there is some merit in this idea the
areas of potential overlap of responsibility are quite extensive in dealing with
sports grounds. However it appears that the various Authorities and Officers
wish for some definition of roles and the following have been agreed:-

Authority                                       Area of Responsibility

Hie Building Surveyor                   All matters relating to the structure of
            ..y-                        stadia including crush barriers, walls,


South Yorkshire   County Fire Service    Fire precautions, fire alarms, means of
    '‘'                                  escape, emergency lighting, stadium
           "                            capacity.

South Yorkshire Police                  Stadium policing,   evacuation procedures ,
                                        aci-sss o:j eserger.c” vehicles anc
     ..V            .. . y:


                                                                                                     -   3   -


         It is anticipated that the Health and Consumer Services Department would have an
         input to the Advisory Group on (a) aspects of general safety; (b) the general
         safety management of stadia; (c) various special items such as first aid
         requirements-. It will be appreciated that these areas of responsibility are not
         exhaustive but it is anticipated that any areas of doubt will be dealt with by
         discussions at advisory group meetings.
                                                                                                                                                               *
         Inspections

         Moving on to a matter of more general policy it has been suggested that one
         large scale inspection per stadium should be carried out by the Group backed up
         by a series of inspections which will take place actually during events.
         This proposal is in line with both the Popplewell Report and with licensing
         practice in other areas.

         Delegations

         There is also a further question to be dealt with at this stage and that relates
         to the day to day decision making required for the running of the Certification
         System. At the moment decision making powers rest with the Panel but this, is a
         highly impractical arrangement which needs to be reviewed urgently. It seems •
         that as an interim measure all routine matters could be delegated to Head of
         Administration and Legal Department with other matters remaining at the
         discretion of the Panel. It is proposed that when the revisedCertificate
         Conditions are in force then the delegation will be much more closely defined.
         Unfortunately this is not possible at the moment with the current Certificate of
         Conditions.

         Recommendations

         The panel is recommended to:-

         (a)                  Note the current situation;

         (b)                  Approve the revised administrative system detailed in this report including
                              the establishment of the "Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group".

         (c)                  Delegate to the Head of Administraton and Legal Department authority to
                              deal with all routine matters in connection with the Administrative System.

                                                                                                                     ..   '




     . . . . . ..

                                                                                                                              V■   ^-■ V: ■ ■       ■■■■■.■ ■ , .• .:    .-j-rf-..-"



Kvv/ V
                                                                                                                          Roger Pensam,
                                                                                                                     . .. Head of Administration
                                                                                                                          and Legal Department
                                            ■   ■ •..   . ■.■■■■■         ........


                                                              -     . -       .      •■■■■■ -   ■'   -
                                                                                                                 ,   „                          ■   1 •                 ■: ‘


         September 87
                                                                                                                                          27
                                                                     SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

                                                            SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP

                          MEETING TO BE HELD ON; Thursday 28th April                           AT 10.00          AM^BH

                                              AT: Health and Consumer Services Department Lecture Theatre,
                                                             Town Hall Chambers, Barkers Pool, Sheffield
                           REPRESENTATIVES AHE MVITED FROM:



       FIRE SERVICE                      POLICE             BUILDING SU&V&'fO$     HEALTH & C.S.   HALD


                          ITEMS FOR DISCUSSIOH:


IT®! NO.                   ■                                         DESCRIPTION                                 COMMENTS



   C*                                 The Safety Management Plan for The Owlerton
                                      Sports Stadiura
                                                                                                          Health and Consumer Services
                                                                                                          to Present



           2   ,                      Owlerton Sports Stadium - Should Access be
                                      Maintained Around the Whole Stadium for
                                      Spectators?:;



 ;;;/ ' 3 ;\-:y       .
                                      Owlerton Sports- Stadium Revised Draft List of                      Revised List Attached
                                      Requirements


                                                                                                   1         '
                                                                                                              ■
                                                 »'*                                               ! ;       -               .

           -4 .a:r                    Annual Inspection Date for Sheffield Wednesday               ! Proposed Date:
                                      and Sheffield United                                         I S.U.F.C.- Tues. 17/5/88 10am

      9                                                     ,
                                                                                                   | S.W.F.C.- Biurs 1^/5/88 10am
                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                    |
                                                                                                    {              \    ...... ... .. .


           5 ^                        Sheffield United — Building Surveyors Memorandum              |     Copy Attached
                                      of the



           6                          Any Other Betters
               'X .

                      vK                                                                                                                       Y;:
                      V..;> :

      K*'/.                     , v




                            •               .   ■   ■   .   .   ■'



.... y,.

                                                                                                                  * ;v. :
                                             : SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
                                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP

                  NOTES OF A M E E T I N G 2 8 t h   April, 1988      AT: 10.00



                  ATTENDANCE:     d. Moore and B. Platts (HCS); Superintendent T. Stuart (SYP);
                                  D. 0. Binnington, S. 0. Brailey and S. 0. Vickers (SYCFS);
                                  Mr. A. Butler (Building Surveyors); Mr. Bownes.




         ITEM                            ' DESCRIr1I0N                            ACTION TO Br TAKEN
         *a™6'et

                     SWFC & SPFC Inspections
                     The annual inspection dates were noted


                     Sheffield United ~ Building Surveyors Memorandum
                     of 11th April


                    The contents of the memorandum were noted and it was
                    agreed that the situation should be kept under review.


                    Owlerton Sports Stadium - Safety Management Plan

                    Mr. Moore presented the Safety Management Plan which is
                    designed to be capable of amendment in appropriate
                    circumstances.: The idea is to place a large scale plan
                    in the stadium control room. The plan itself would then
                    provide complete information as to lines of communication,
                    stewarding, fire extinguishers, etc., at a glance. It was
                    agreed tha^he plan was a most useful inovation.


                     Owlerton Sports Stadium - Access Around the Whole Stadium

                     After some discussion it was agreed that access should be
                     maintained around the whole stadium even on the top of the
                     old south terrace* This particular footpath should be
                     restored to a suitable condition.


                     Owlerton Sports Stadium - Capacity

;|j|jj|g      *
                                        the stadium was again discussed at some   The Fire
..
                              The FiteService indicated that they could not
                     give advice oti 'e x i t widths until some idea had been
                                                                                  Service- to
                                                                                  enquire
     *    '

■iiitsfl             obtained frca the Company as to its future plans foE^f./     further
                     the stadium^ The point was made that although exit           into they
                     widths could b<!R recommended for a 4,000 capacity those     capacity
                     widths would need to increase if the capacity was to be      question.
                     raised at a subsequent time. It is therefore desirable
                     to set a exit width, etc., at appropriate levels to
                     prevent the need for expensive works later on.


                      to MAY 1988
COMMENTS                                                                  MADE BY

1*0   Spion Kop

1.1   The timber ticket hut adjacent to the refreshment bar on the main
      means of escape exit route from the KOP should be removed, since
      it is causing both a high risk and a narrowing of the escape
      width.                                                              B.S.

1.2   A broken concrete post supporting the end of a crush barrier
      adjacent to the tunnel exit at the north end of the KOP to be
      removed, and the crush barrier be modified to join onto the end
      of the new steel supported barrier directly adjacent to it.         B.S.

1.3   A timber hut at ground level, under the KOP structure should be
      removed.                                                            B.S.

1.4   An additional length of crush barrier is required to be installed
      adjacent to the base of the ramped stairway from the extended
      terracing. This was agreed on site by Dr. Eastwood.                 B.S.

1.5   An area of the corrugated metal sheeting used as cladding to the
      side of the Kop is corroded and tom .                               HCS

1.6   It was noted that in some places the stair nosings serving radial
      gangways had become defective.                                      HCS

1.7   At some positions within the new development there is a
      difference in height between a terraced area and radial gangway
      of over 600mm. As such these areas require to be protected by a
      suitably constructed pedestrian guardrail.                          HCS

1.8   Some areas of the front terracing were found to be in need of
      minor repairs. It was agreed, however, that this defect would be
      adequately controlled by means of "ongoing" maintenance.            HCS

1.9   The defective rendering to the final exit gate wall requires to
      be repaired.                                                        HCS

2.0   North Stand

2.1   A broken glass panel in the west gable end should be replaced.      B.S.

2.2   The step between seats 12 and 13 on row 43 is loose and should be
      correctly bedded down.                                              B.S.

2.3   It is important to ensure that the groundman's store beneath this
      stand is not used for the storage of potentially inflammable
      fertilisers or weedkillers.                                         HCS

3.0   West Stand

3.1   Signs over the front parapet wall at the upper level are to be
      permanently secured at the following positions

      a) between seats 1 and 14
      b) between seats 20 and 28
      c) between seats 136 and 150.
       Binding wire ties are not considered to be satisfactory for this
       purpose.

       Additionally the sign brackets adjacent to seats 62 and 72 are to
       be correctly bent (or otherwise suitably checked) and secured.

3.2    Rain water drainage holes through the upper level slab should
       have a gauze inserted so as to inhibit the dropping of missiles
       onto the crowd below.                                               B.S.

3.3    It is felt that discussion should take place regarding the
       suitability of the gate fastening device at the base of the
       emergency exit stairway on the south end of this stand. The
       fastening consisting of a patent lockable barrel bolt which
       cannot easily be unfastened in the direction of travel, and is
       impossible to be unfastened from the other side.                    B.S,

4.0    Miscellaneous Points

4.1    At a number of points within the    stadium various pieces of
       abandoned builders' waste were readily available for use as
       projectiles by the crowd. Such material should be collected and
       suitably disposed of.                                               HCS

4.2     The main first aid room requires    to be supplied with adequate
       first aid equipment for the treatment of spectators should they
       become ill or injured within the sports ground.                     HCS

4.3     The provision of qualified first   aiders is being reviewed at the
       moment; it is felt that the existing arrangements require
       formalisation. The Club's views on this point are sought.          HCS




Abbreviation Used             Authority/Department and Contact Officer

B.S.                          City Council Building Surveyor
                              Mr. A. Butler - 734162

H. & C.S.                     City Council Health and Consumer Services Department
                              Mr. D. Moore - 734620




BH/7/DMB2310

hi




                              ©
            Information from; »
            SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
            COUNTY HALL, BARNSLEY; SOUTH YORKSHIRE S70 2TN
            No:                                                     Date:
                  85/185/LM                                                 lo th May 1985



 SAFETY AT SPOUTS GKODWDS I« COUTH YORKFHI^S
           ■'                                                                   ;   ■ ■■■   1   : v - - ■.

 Of the five Football League Grounds in South Yorkshire, three (Barnsley,
 Rotherham United and Sheffield Wednesday) have already been granted General
( ) e t y Certificates by the County Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds
 A c J ^ 1975, following their designation by the Secretary of State bn the
 c^Pyin g out of improvements.

The Bramall L a n e Ground of the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd, was designated
by the Secretary of State in July, 1984 on the Club's promotion to the Second
Division. The Club has already carried out a number of improvements to the
Ground, the remainder to be completed during the 1985 close season.

Only the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. remains
undesignated (the Club remaining in the Third Division), but the County Council
is continuing to work on a goodwill basis with the Club.

The County Council has also since 1979 had a policy of "winter" and "summer"
inspections of all five Football League Grounds by Officer Working Parties
(comprising representatives of the Police, the Fire Service, the County Council
and the District Council’s Building Surveyor). Such inspections have been welcomed
by the Football Clubs, who have always displayed a responsible attitude on safety
matters.
 J
N^ferally, the forthcoming ’’summer" inspections will take into account the lessons
o l ^ h e recent tragic events -at Bradford and any revised advice and requirements
which may be issued by the Home Office.




                          fo r fur thef F T jJ 3 a t io n PLEASE CONTACT
                     THE PUBLIC R E L A T l^ p p J lC E OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL
                       ON BARNSLEY (oI R J H bM I EXTNS 332,162 or165
                    \   . PV/JD/683/5                              , RC/CB             13th May,


                                                              D.   Vaughan                     422




Dear Sir,          ■

Safety
........ i«p—
                of Sporta
              l.|<nii ■>——<B>—
                                     Grounds Act, 1975.■
                               «WII» ■m—1————i■ i 11i|i i —


I attach a copy of a Press Release issued by the County Council today,
in response to requests for Information lay the media on the situation
in South Yorkshire following Saturday's trafic events at Bradford.

It is reasonable to assume that revised advice and/or requirements
will be issued by tne Home office in the near future, and naturally
this will be taken into account at the forthcoming "summer" inspections
by the Officer Working Parties.                    *■

In the meantime and recognising that the season has ended, I would
particularly stress the vital necessity for safety stewards to be fully
aware of and trained in their duties on the Banning and opening of doors
and gates on egress routes and in the use of fire fighting equipment.

                                                    Yours faithfully,




                                                    Chief Executive.




                                                                                 ■-&   —   '      '   —
                                                                             H             S 1J
                                                                                   rr» . r • tS
Mr. R. Chester,
Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield.
S6 1SW
                :
                v"• '    ; V-
                                '                            ■ yiyyy/iW-                             i :                     -ipy-yy; ytfi-ir-
                                                                                            -   ..              ■   ;.; ;:        -■        ■, ,,, ; ■ ...-V;!+., ; ;-■; - - J'. - - '
                                                                                                                                                                                                   31
                                                                                                         ,                   ..        >:              ; T -v.. ■




                                                DV/A.’   /5S3/5 X.                                   RC/C3                                               9 August 19*’5
                                                         :    ' ■•    "r '




                                                                                        p. Vaughan                                                              422

                                                                                                                                                                      yi-            .;-i/\
             Dear Sir,

             Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

             I write to'.confirm the concluding paragraph of ray letter of 13th Hay, the
             discussion which took place with all the South Yorkshire Football League

  <•         Clubs at Police Headquarters, Sheffield, and the comments made at the
             recent "summer" inspection of your Ground by the Officer Working Party.

             How that the Interim Baport of Mr. Justice Popplewell has been published w
             and advice has been received from the Hone Office, the County Council would
             draw the following initial measures to your attention:-

             (a)        evacuation procedures should be reviewed in consultation with tha
                        South Yorkshire Police and the South Yorkshire County Fire Service
                        should                         already following previous discussions;

             (b)        safety      stewards      should

                                                                                      to deal with                  any

                        (ii)                                                                     about the action to be takes in
                                                                                                               - :


                                                                                                             been so instructed and

                                                                              J physically and mentally capable
                                                                                      ctivel;
                                                                                                fUbU
r-..'- -
           ‘V'A;^V^'
                                                                                    South       Yorkshire Police

                                                                                                                                            m M M i
                                                                                                                                                                                              iii"y'^-yi-ii■'




            Secretary,                                    '■-'-y'rii'ii-.iyii;yyi
            Sheffield Wednes                     Football Club pic,
            Hilisborough,
            Sheffield.                                         ■
                                                               :y■-                                        ‘■-y -y-.-i■"i; --^ri;v^i'--y-■i
                                                                                                                                          y-'-i*-4’ .2
            S6 1SW
                                                                                                                ^ y^;yi; : ^;        y§y::yy;
                                    -   ~;.iS                                                   Vyyy-iv-y^/yii;"y:  'yiyyyife/"iiy--
                                                                                                                      1V   - '. ■'
                             :' v-
                                                                                                                  _
                       Mr. "
                           S.. Chester                                                                      - 2                                                   9 August'I^OS

                       (c) adequate first aid and first aid room facilities should be available
                           ;        - paragraph 8 of your Club's General Safatv Certificate requires
                             tfsat a suitably equipped First Aid Room must be provided and maintained,
                             ifeat such First Aid assistants as the Chief Constable may require - and
                             aot Ie®s than one such assistant for each 2 , 0 0 0 spectators — shall be
                             available, a decber er~>loyed or retained by the Club is available to
                             «Bte»d at the First Aid Room if required and that his whereabouts are
                                    to those in the Police Central Control Room, and that the First
                           :      Room is adequately signed and capable of being lit by the
                             wpergeacy power supply),

                       (d) niiftre stands cNide of combustible materials are in use, "sn smoking" signs
                            a&mld be prominently displayed and that this Should be a condition of
                          ' eacfrry. to the Ground,

                       (e)                 along with tae emergency services and aporonriate authorities, the County
                                           Gowacil have been requested to consider tne practicability and enforcement
                                              a no-parkittg, acme around the Ground.


 ~y.              '•                                                                                      Yours faithfully,
         ''5-                                    ^

                                     :C ■                                                                                                                        y-y   :-V




                                    >;/. ;■       - y. y         ^   ■

       ■ V;/       ’       ..       ■ - .                                                                 C h U f Executive                       :s-v
   .                   .    I   '   ■ ■■ .   •V                                        ’




                                                                                            l f e ¥ a » S ; M ;v.
                                                 i 'v                                       -.~ •                                    . -



        ^ \ :■■■ -r . • V .           ■
                                                           ■             -                                             I-
                                       ■     V
                                                                                                          W'V'-


:-;.




                           mmi                                                                                                                 Vf




                                                                                   rf--
                                                           ' .               ■■■■'■■




                                                                                 '                                                                       '....
                                                                                                                                      .    ■■ ■ ■■■■
                                                                                           A:W'\
                      V                                                                                                                        i COUNCIL
                                                                                                                                                   “on

                                                                                                                           -16 AUG
                                                                                                                       itRfM HALL, DAR/ISLEY


                                                        Sheffield                                                           fGMSEiSE S7Q 2TN




                                                       Wednesday
                                                                  Hillsborough, Sheffield S61SW.




                     South Yorkshire County Council,
                     Department of Administration,                                                          ,14th August 1985
                     County Hall,                                                                           Our Ref: RBC/JFC
                     Barnsley,"'                                                                            Your Ref: BW^AA083/5
                     Sth. Yorkshire. S70 2TN

                     For the attention of J.C. Harris M.A. LL.M.
                     Chief Executive StCounty Clerk


                     Dear Sir,'•

                     Many thanks for your conmunication dated 9th August 1985.
■■                  ^ ■
                     I can confirm that arrangements have been finalised with South Yeg-kshi-rg
                     Police Authorities, Hanmerton Road, for the staff concerned to Be briefed
                     on matters relating to safety/emergency procedures prior to cur first borne
                     game, Saturday 17th August 1985.

                     The written instructions are already in existence with the ampntferf "Warning^
                     message"of an emergency situation confirmed during season

                     My Head Steward and various sectional senior stewards, are kept fully
                     informed of the various matters and are responsible for advisir^ the
                     ’batch day" stafg accordingly.
                      ,            t,    ~
                      in addition the staff are supplied. with
                                                           . . ..  .   . . .
                                                               distinguishing     .
                                                                              attire*,   .
                                                                                       airfare
                                            to. perform and required to be in attendance at those
                                        the entire period.

                  With the approval of South Yorkshire Police* due to holidays and the
                ^unavailability of a full complement of staff* I have delayed tile
                  of ad evenings seminar/instructional course, by the Fire Authorities
     T        Ivx after the seasort has canmenced. v Having spoken to the Fire Authorities they have
                                               to attend
                  in abeyance*

                     Yours faithfully-^



                                                                                                      ■:.
                                                                                                       ,
     .v.r."                                                                                          u ■
              r ^.        Chester,' Secretary
                                          "
                                        e i_ a j.y               -   -
                                                                               '          ivv. .-.             v                 . '
              ■■               :                   Cftasrman^H E-McGee, Secretary: R..WIiChester, Manager: H. Wilkinson.
                   '. : i:'0irect6rs:.M. Sheppard;jP,,f.C.A. (Vice-Chairman), S. L. Speight, O.B.E., C. Woodward, K.T, Addyr E. Barren,   G K. Hultey.
                                                                         f'ie9'st®re^,n^,5fiancl^*° ®?47S
              GP/262/DMB




              15th October, 1987




The Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
The Stadium,
Pen!atone Road,
SHEFFIELD.
S6 1SW


Dear Sir,

Guide to Safety at Sporta Grounds - 1^86 Edition

I refer to the revised Guide which was recently published by H.W. Government
following the Poppelvell Report.  I would like to draw your attention to the new
Guide and particularly to Chapter 2 entitled "Management Responsibility".

This Chapter sets out in detail the sort of matters which ground management
should be responsible for and I regard it as essential that the Management of
designated stadia should be entirely familiar with it and follow its guidance.

Would you please, therefore, confirm In writing

(a) that you have obtained and Intend to retain on the prenisen a copy of the
    Guide;

(b) that your Company and its Officers are familiar with the Guide and intend
    to perform the nanagenent duties outlined in Chapter 2 of the Guide; the
    Company should also take immediate steps to appoint a Safety Officer as
    defined in Chapter 2 and confirmation of that appointment should be sent to
    the Council aa soon as possible.

Yours faithfully,




Head of Department

AF/D8                       I                       734005 - Mr. Bownes
                                                                                                                                  34



                                     Sheffield
                                   ■
                                    Wednesday
                                           - k3t                         ■
                                                                                                                       ifGAL
                                         Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.                             r
                           Telephone: (0742) 343122 Telegrams: Wednesday Shef
                                 Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 33714£, M                       r
                                                                                                B     2 6 OCT V337
                                                                                                                           i :

                   Our Ref: GHM/NL.1450                                                        GS

                   Your Ref: GP/262/DMB


                   Mr.Roger Pearson,                   23rd October,1987
                   Head of Department,
                   City of Sheffield,
                   Administration and Legal Department,
                   Town H a l l ,
                   SHEFFIELD.SI 2HH


                   Dear Mr.Pearson,

                   GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS - 1986 EDITION

                   Thank you for your letter dated 15th October,1987.

                   I confirm that I do have a copy of the Guide to

C                  Safety at Sports Grounds - 1986 edition and have had
                   such for many m on t h s .

                   With regard to the appointment of a Safety Officer,
                   my duties encompass those of the Safety Officer and
                   I would be grateful if you could amend your records
                   to note that I am responsible for all matters of
                   safety within the ground.


                   Yours sincerely.



                      TrmcKKEiJir                                                                                         rH
                   SECRETARY                                                                                             4V/*



                                                                                                                                 'I'lft'tv

                      Chairman: H. E. McGee, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A. Manager: H. Wilkinson
    niror‘tr\rc M .Qhonnarrl .ID Ff! A A/ir‘Ouf,
                                               !ha!rman\ C I CnAinht DR F C'.\A/r\rw4u/arH VC T AHrk/ C Rorrrtn   K Utillav/
                 ~          t*3"
                               SAFETY Of SPORTS GROUNDS ACT,' 1975
              Kr*>r» « „
            -»r          * “ "*■~r
             ■";' Note of a Vis^* to feTii Hilisborougli'Stadiuinl Sheffield
                                    ; on 7 th Apri 1■, 1981


    PRESENT:    Representing thefSh.effi.eld Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

                A. J. Clough (Messrs. Eastwood and Partners)
                E. England (Secretary)
                J. A. Strange (Messrs. Eastwood and Partners)

                Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

                K. Danks (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                F. Davis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                R. Herold (SouthYorkshire Police)
                A. Roberts (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                P. Ruddy (South Yorkshire Police)
                D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                D.I. Vaughan ( South Yorkshire County Council)

    1   .      Purpose of Meeting

    Bearing in mind the F.A. Cup Semi-Final which was to take place on Saturday,
    11th April, 1981, it was felt it would be desirable for the Working Party to
    visit the ground, especially as a small number of matters had arisen since the
    last visit on 10th February, 1981.

    2.         Inspection of Ground

    (a)        South Stand

    The previous comments relating to the roof structure and the exterior windows in
    the Ladies1 Toilets below the stand were still applicable.

    The L.P.G. cylinders had been removed from beneath the Stand, and the batteries
J   supplying the emergency power supply for the police address had been enclosed in
    a satisfactory fire resisting metal case. Whilst the provision of an automatic
    battery charger would be a longer term solution, in the short term arrangements
    had been made for the batteries to be charged before each game and for the public
    address system to be checked relying only on the emergency battery supply. The
    indicator for the batteries condition was presently in the Public Address Box.
    It was suggested that it would be less likely to be overlooked if the indicator
    was sited adjacent to the new metal case for the batteries.

    (b)        West Stand

    As previously agreed, the Club would round off the steel supports to the new
    emergency exit (nearest to the South Stand) as soon as a grinder was next present
    at the ground.

    The cracked brickwork at the rear of the stand which required pointing, the     -
    apparent distress on the concrete pillar supporting the steps at the. rear of the
    stand, the cracks in the concrete at the top bo both sets of stairs, as well as
    the currently slight corrosion in the base plate of the outer steel column
    (nearest to the South Stand) had all been included in the maintenance programme
    and would be undertaken shortly.
                     f the concreting had been attended to by injecting material from
                     results ■-'had?'beeh- satisfactory, except in two small areas where
                     had obviously taken place and which would receive further


        (d)    North Stand

        The expansion cracks which had appeared in the wall of the North Stand (nearest
        to the Spion Kop) had been included in the maintenance schedule and would be
        attended to shortly.

        (e)     Spion Kop

        The infilling of the step adjacent to the handrail on the left of the original
        exit at the top of the Kop would be given attention in the close season.
Q       Whilst the brick built chip shop at the bottom of the new exit from the Kop had
        been erected, it was not yet in use. It was noted that the siting of the
        chip shop had resulted in a possible danger to spectators in that a gap into
        which spectators could be pushed, or possibly stumble because of the camber, had
        been created. As regards the F.A. Gup Semi“Final,

        IT WAS AGREED -

        that a temporary barrier of scaffolding tubes should be erected between the end
        of the new Kop exit outer barriers and the concrete pillar of the lowest of the
        Kop original exit steps. In the longer term, the existing barriers would need
        extending to fill the gap and ideally, the area between the bottom of the new Kop
        exit staircase and the original Kop exit steps should be levelled off.

        3.      Ground Evacuation Procedure

        Whilst the Club had been supplied with a Schedule on "Fire Instruction and Drills
        on 9th April, 1980, consultations between the County Fire Service and the South
    I   Yorkshire Police had resulted in the production of an Emergency Evacuation
        Procedure". The Club undertook to circulate copies of the procedure to all
        Stewards who would be on duty for the F.A. Cup Semi-Final.




                                               2.


                                    JHJ
                                                                                                                                                        .   .   .   r%

                                                                                                                                   Football Club
                                                                                                                                   Limited
                                                                                                                                   Registered Office
    ■■■■- ■■                                    ■;                      ....                                                       Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW
    Chairman:                         H. E. McGEE                                             j                                    Telephone:0742-343123/4
    Manager.                          J. L CHARLTON, O.B.E.                                                                        Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6
    Secretary:                        E. ENGLAND                                   ■
                                                                                                                                   Registered No. 62478 England


                                            South Yorkshire County                                                                   R/CB
                                            County Hall,
                                            Barnsley, S70 2T N                                                                        th A p ril 1981
     ....................................... ■..................................            - r '. .
                                                                                                           i 5 f . r s |SO


                                          D e a r Sir,

                                           SEMI-FI N A L — 11TH A F R l t 19 8 1 — '

                         ,.......
                          ..    ...
                                          O n the occasion of the above match, there was an incident
                                          at the L e p p in g s L a n e end of the ground, in the standing
                                          enclosure, w h i c h resulted in injuries to spectators
                                          because of crushing.

                                        F r o m our enquiries it appears the crus h i n g was caused
                                        through T o t te n h a m supporters arriving late, due to
                                        problems on the Motorway, a n d rushing to their places
                                        after the game h a d commenced, thereby causing problems
                                        to spectators at the front of the terracing w h o h a d
                                        b e en in the gro u n d a considerable le n g t h of time.

                                       According to our turnstile readings there were 33 5 in
                                       excess o f the stipul a te d capacity for that particular
                                       area; this was the result of T o t t e n h a m fans having
)                                      pur c ha s e d tickets f ro m Wolverhampton an d on arrival
                                       at Turnstile »N», Penistone Road, w h i c h was the
                                       W o lverhampton standing area, were dire c t e d b y the
                                       police to the other e n d of the ground where the
                                       T o t t e n h a m fans were standing.

                                       I give b e l o w details o f injuries reported to me:-
                                                           30 spectators treated b y St. John*s Ambulance
                                                                        Brigade for minor ailments, etc.
                                                          T r e a t e d at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital
                                                                                   ^          A        g     e          30 years
                                                                                                                    Corby.
                                                                                       Badly cut hand - stiched*
                                                                                                                    Age 20 years
                                                                                                       I Enfield.
                                                                                       Foot inj u r y - two stitches.




                                                                                                                                   cont.
<^nth Yorkshire County Council                                  15th Apri!.1981


                                      Age 21 years
                               Walthamstow.
              Drunk and disorderly - Hospitalised
                   v           with stomach upset.

Treated at the Northern General Hospital - 5 Spectators.
As the hospital refuse to c° - ° ^ rat?oWi ^        &i n j u r S s
I can only tell you that    a   c   c to the police, xnj
                                        o   r   d   i   n   g



received were:—
                    2- Broken arms
                       1 - Broken leg
                     ' 1 - Head graze
                       1 ~ Not known"":                                           v....

The overall report of crowd behaviour, both inside and
outside the stadium, was very good indeed*.

 Yours faithfully,




 Secretary.
      -A '4&}%FSr>                                                                          * ~ *          *" «*       'f »         ' %J   •\ v*-    J** >^.j. ..**^‘*1*

                                                                                                                                                                                                 ?tm                                            :v-
                                        •-?.. /r-:/'''^-^^®#-'''-^.^--^.''-^'^'''''.-:'''■•.• .
                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                                                                                 "’
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ..■
                                            ■'
                                             ■r--■::!*•'  ■:-^!i:r'-" ■"/■:                                                                v■
                                                      .  •,**;*                                                                   '-A.?
                                                                                                                                      •
                                                           '■^'v •■•:■ :
                                                                     ;,■■■   ■ --. ■ ■ ■    ...     ■ . . , V:;



r
                                                                                                                                                     -^’■j-■
                                                          •'••*                                      •"            '
                                                                                                                            '                       • ■■,••-■'■;••• •• -   i** * - ..... .........
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              - - ■-.- -.•; '    it-.':.-
                                                            *                                                           O   -


                             DV/BB/583/5                               OPS/JPR/SM                                      22nd April, 198
                                                                                                                                                                  ■ ..:' ■■ .. ■ ■ ■          ■■. .:', ■ ■ ■■■■■ ■       ■
                                                                                                                                                                  " •• • ■ - ..:■:             .■'.:••■•. ' ■■•
                                                                                                                                                                               '- '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ;
                                                                                                                                                        '
                                                                                                                                                        •V-::'
                                                                                                                                                        '   ■:■   "             -■■■■.■                     :■ ■■. ■.:


       Safety of _r_______ _                                                                                                                                           " :                             .'         '      ■■                                      - ■
                                                                                                                                                                              .v ;        •                                                                 ■■
                                                                                                                                                                      -.v-i                   V-V-;                                                         ..v.v .
       Steffield Wednesday Football*Club
      .                        ..                                                                                  .....                                                                                                                                           ‘
      Referring to the 'phone conversation b**veen
          D* Vaughan of ay staff and Chief Inspector Ruddy
      of your Operations Division on 13th April, I attach
      copy of a letter since received from the Sheffield
      Wednesday Football Club Ltd., dated 15th April.
      As discussed, it would be appreciated if you could let
      m have a copy of your report on the incident at the
      F.A. Cup Semi-Final at the Hillsborough Stadium on
      11th April.

                                                                  Tours faithfully,




                                                                  Chief Executive

      The Chief Constable,
      South Yorkshire Police,
      Police Headquarters,
      Snig Hill,
      Sheffield,
      South Yorkshire.
      S3 8LY

?-
7-‘
  -

                                                                                                                                                                                               -* -■

                                             ...
                     V-!:.
                     \,r"    ■Vs.'' -                                                      -v   ■                       -I-     •• •:'>T        ■
                                         mmmmmmm

tatPHONE:                             mkmMttmmmmmM
SHSFHEUJC0742J7802*
                                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                              im & m                     mii ,         :v
                                              V.'VUaJfe
                                                                           SHEFFIELD S3 8LY;

J. H. BROWNLOW, Q,P.M.:';
CHIEF CONSTABLE .     ,   .v                                         3 June 1981


The Secretary (E A Croker Esq)
The Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate    %                                    1   -DeosfVKrt otft
LONDON   ............                           '
                                                •                 , to                    ..

02 3LW ■             / .1 . ..
                                                                t # rl',Htii5s*sid .aw'. .„j
Copy to Chief Executive ■
Dear Sir

FA CUP SEMI-FINAL              -   11 APRIL 1981                 "

X would refer to the FA, Cup Semi-Final match between Wolverhampton
Wanderers Football Club and Tottenham Hotspur Football Club, held at
Hillsborough Stadium, the home of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, on
Saturday 11 April 1981.

As you will no doubt be aware many similar Semi-Final matches have been
held at this ground without previous problems. The stadium is issued with
a certificate under the provisions of the Safety in Sports Grounds Act 1975.
This limits the total capacity of the ground to 50,174. The area of the
Leppings Lane enclosure has a capacity of 10,100.

Prior to the match itself, difficulties were envisaged because both sets
of supporters were obliged to use the Ml Motorway. This problem was added
to when a major road accident occurred on the Ml near to its junction with
the A38. The problem was exacerbated by a coach breaking down further along
the motorway, and by extensive road works. This set of circumstances
caused a large number of spectators, predominantly Tottenham Hotspur fans,
to be held up on the motorway for some 90 minutes. As you will appreciate
traffic jams built up and resulted in a sudden influx of large numbers of
football supporters to the area of the ground at around the time for the
start of the match when a fairly steady build up of support throughout the
afternoon could have been anticipated.

I now wish to outline an aspect of the problem which could have been avoided
and which should be anticipated for future similar occasions.

On the day before the Wolverhampton ticket allocation was put on sale to
the public, Tottenham Hotspur played Coventry City Football Club at Coventry
in a league match. Many Tottenham Hotspur supporters stayed overnight in
Coventry and travelled the short distance to Wolverhampton to obtain tickets
which were at a premium in London. Others also made the journey from London
to Wolverhampton on the Sunday. This completely defeated the spectator
policy which is put into effect at these matches and which places the largest
groups of standing supporters at_opposite ends of the ground. Neither of




                                       Em
                                                                               ilplpp
                                                                                        «IS




•the 'two participating Semi-Final clubs saw fit to inform the South. ;.. ;.
Yorkshire .Police#- Shef field.Wednesday Football Club or the Football 1;
Association-about this"situation and in that event the mixing of supporters
was not properly catered “for, . The result of this was that some 400
Tottenham fans .had to be-;removed from the-- Spion Kop, in. the interests
of general safety -and public order, and were accommodated in the Leppings
Lane end of the ground#, which had been designated for use by Spurs
supporters,, -.

The capacity at the Leppings Lane end is 10,100 and this obviously contains
a safety factor. At a previous match some 400 holders of forged tickets
gained entry into this part of the ground and were absorbed without any
apparent difficulty. However, on this date turnstile readings showed
that 1 0 , 4 3 5 people were admitted to this part of the ground.

A-policy-of packing spectators occurs at most football grounds where
large crowds are in attendance so that all the available space is utilised.
On this occasion the Tottenham Hotspur fans, who had arrived early in the
day and taken up advantageous viewing points, refused to move into the
centre of this enclosure,’ thereby creating a jamming effect at the
extremeties of it. The late arrivals caused an immediate problem upon
gaining access to the Leppings Lane area because of rushing forward
immediately upon entering after Tottenham Hotspur had scored a goal soon
after kick off. This resulted in a number of crushing injuries on this
terrace including broken arms, legs and crushed ribs. In all, some 38
fans received treatment either at hospital or from the St John Ambulance
representatives present at the game.

As a result of this the safety gates at the front ox tne j_.eppxngs Lane
enclosure were opened and spectators at the front were allowed to go
onto the playing area perimeter track to relieve the pressure within the
terrace. Due to the problems being created by crushing, my officers also
refused access to the Leppings Lane enclosure to spectators waiting to
get in. In my view no other course of action could have been adopted in
the interest of public safety.

During the half time interval my officers attempted to move the spectators
who were standing or seated within the tracks around onto the normal
spectator areas. During this manoeuvre some rather foolish youngsters
did run onto the pitch but the situation was quickly brought under control
by officers within the ground.

In conclusion I would add that there were no other incidents either
inside or outside the ground other than those caused by the circumstances
I have described. The circumstances I have outlined have been discussed
at length and will be borne in mind in the planning of future similar
events. Discussions are to take place with my officers and officials
of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club regarding suggestions for obviating
the problems caused within the Leppings Lane terrace on this occasion.

Yours faithfully




unien constacie
                                                                                                                               23 KING FI ELD ROAD
                      C o n s u l t i n g E n g in a a r a :
                                                                                                                          Wi   SHEFFIELD .S1T '.9AS.4
    W. Eastwood                      B.Engu Ph.O.» E E n a .                                                                   f e l l (0742)' 583871 :
                                   : F .I.S tru rt.6 , P.G.8 * M ,Cons.E, ';

                                      B E n g , Ph.D., C . l n * : F J.C .E . >.
    A. "A. W ood M                    F X S lru e tE . M.1.W .E I , M.Cons.E

    JL G.- Burdett                   G .M , B.Se.C£ng), C Eng,, M.I.C.E.           I   j o g T , 4.

    R. c. A. Eastwood B .S c , C.Eno» M.I.ci, M .I.Struct.E.
    A n o eiaus;
    Geoffroy Spir                     C .£ng., M.1.C.E,, M .l.M se£ 6 .

    C. S. Greaves                     B.Eng., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M J.S truct.E .
                                                                                                              Our Ref:    WE/JAS/PB/ 3 5 6 3
    A. J . Clough                    B.A., C .in g ,, M.C.I.B.S., M .I.M «h.E .

    J . A. Stranga                   C.Enj., M.I.StructJE. '      '                                           Your Ref:
    te n su ftsm i:
    A. L. Percy                      M .T«ch.(H on.), B .S c, C.£n*.» FJ.C.E.,
                                     F .l.S truct.E ., F.I.MuruE., M .R.T.P.l.




     South Yorkshire County Counci 1,                         2 September, 1981
     County H a l l , -........ :............................. -..................
     BARNSLEY, S. Yorks.

§    S7Q 2 T N .


      For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan.                                                                x
                                                                                                      .
      Dear Mr. Vaughan,

                                    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club L t d .
                                         Radial Fences at Leppings Lane End

                      We have been instructed by the Club to organise the
      installation of two radial fences on the terrace at the
      Leppings lane end of the ground.

                      It is intended that these fences are so positioned
      that they divide this section of the terrace into
      approximately three equal areas, each served by its own
      entrance.

                      By dividing the terrace more control over supporters
      should result.                           A visiting team with only a few followers
      will be allocated one section, with the other two sections
      retained by the home supporters.

                      Larger contingents of visiting spectators could be
      accommodated in two or all three areas as their numbers
      dictate.

                      A 1.15 metre wide gate is proposed at the rear of
      each fence to give access for maintenance and also policing
      during a game.                           The gate could be left o p e n , but fastened
      back, to connect the areas during a game if adjacent ones

                                                                  RegisM f I 1C Aland - No. 1134531
are accupied by supporters o f     the same team.    When establishing
the height we have considered that the views to the corner
flags should not be restricted any further than they are at
                        % . •.

present by the perimeter fence.       We therefore propose that the
top of the fence should be approximately 1680mm above the
terrace.

     This may not prevent the odd spectator climbing the fence
but should eliminate a m a s s i n v a s i o n from one area to the other.
Fences this height appear to work successfully at St. James’s
Park, the home of Newcastle United.

     We would be pleased if this specific point can be discussed
within the Working Party and your comments forwarded to us.

     Also to be included in the same contract are some gates at
various locations around the north stand.         Now the gymnasium is
open to the general public security to other parts of the ground
must be maintained.     It is proposed that gates are provided at
the top of the ramps at both ends of the stand with additional
gates at ground floor level at the Penistone Road end of the
stand.     A separate gate will be placed behind the west ramp to
prevent people going round the rear of the gymnasium towards
Leppings Lane.

     Six copies of our drawing 3563/1 together with two copies ;
of our drawings 3563/2 and 3 (for reference only) are enclosed.


                                        Yours sincerely,




c.c. Mr. 1. England,
     S.W.F.C. Ltd.




                                 GD
                                                                   IfS;?#


                                                                                                                  23 KING FIELD ROAD
                C o n s u ltin g      E n g in e e r s
                                                                                                                  SHEFFIELD. S11..9AS
W. Eastwood                       B ,E n o .‘ P h .D ? R Eng* F A C E * ':                                        T e l: (0742) 583871
                F.I.StructE.F.G.S.,M.Cons.E
A. A. Wood;1sV- B.Eng.,Ph.D„C.£nfl.»F.tC.E.,...
                        ■   . .   F .I.S tru e tE , M J.W .E & , M.ConsJE

A. G. Burdett...... G.M.,B.Sc.(Eng),C.EnguM.I.C.E. .
R. c. A. Eastwood B.Sc.,C ,Efi0, M.I.C.E,, M.I.Struct.E.
Associates .*                                               •. ■
Geoffrey Spir                     c.En*,, m.i.c.e., m.i j m I e,
C. S. Greaves                     B.Eng., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M.l.Struet.E.
A. J . Clough                     B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S., M.l.Msch.E.                        Our Ref:               WE/KH/3563
J . A. S trange                   C.Eng., M.I.Struct.E. '                                      Your Ref:              DV/MB/583/5
Consultant:
A.     L. Percy                   M .Tech.(Hon.), B.Sc., C .Eng., F.I.C.E.-
                                                                                               oFcoariaL
                                  F .I.Struct.E ., F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.    SOUTH
                                                                                                 itritijfi


                                                                                      VJ      I/- I
                                                                                 Lvvy
                                                                                    "''
                                                                                      *      :;;ASwuf,
                                                                                 SOUlH       <1'S70 2 »«"
Chief Executive,                                                                                                      9 September 1981
South Yorkshire County C o u n c il ,
County Hall,
Barns ley
South Yorkshire,
S70 2TN.


 For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


 Dear M r . V a ug ha n ,
                                          Safety of Sports' Grounds Act, 1975
                                          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
            Thank you for your letter of 8 September.                                                         I am grateful
 to you for accepting our letter of 2 September as giving
 the formal 21 days notice under paragraph 5 ( 2 )                                                           of the
 General Safety Certificate.
            Tenders have to be returned by 23 September and we shall
 be reporting to the club shortly thereafter.                                                                Normally the
 contractor would commence on site in not more than about two
 weeks from receipt of order.                                                    Thus work is likely to begin
 in early October subject to there being no objection from the
 County Council.
            We may be wishing to place the formal order for the work
 on about 24 or 25 September so that if there is the likelihood
 of suggestions for major changes to our proposed scheme, I should
 be grateful if I could have notice by t h a t time.


                                                                                     Yours sincerely,



                                                              Re s j r J l n9iand - No-1134B31
PRESENT;       D.   Chapman (South. Yorkshire Police)
               B.   A. Ellis"(South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
               P,   Garner (South Yorkshire Police)
               D.   H o m e r 1 CSouth.Yorkshire County Fire Service)..............
               W.   O rNeill (South Yorkshire Police)
               J.   Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
               D.   Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
               T.   W. Stuart {South Yorkshire, Police)
               D.   I . Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1.    Purpose of Meeting             '

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 2nd September
and plans submitted by Messrs, Eastwood and Partners-on behalf of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. relating to the proposed erection
of Radial Barriers on the West Terrace for crowd control purposes and
Security Gates at various locations around the North Stand n ow that the
gymnasium was open to the general public,.

2.    Radial Barriers on West Terrace

Whilst there were drawbacks to the division of the terrace into
approximately three equal a r e a s , each served by its own entrance, the
Working Party felt that increased control on the Terrace should result
from the proposals. For instance there could well be problems with
opposing fans mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or the final exit
gate s, but the police considered that they could cope with any problems
of this nature.

The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be installed at the rear of
the radial barriers was also d i s c us sed , as well as the use of the
existing gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the front of the
Terrace.

It was noted that the plans submitted did not indicate the amount of head­
room which would be available at the rear of the Terrace should the
radial barriers and gates be i n s t al led .

IT WAS AGREED that M r . Vaughan should notify M e s s r s . Eastwood and Partners
that the Officer Working Party        sees no objection to   the proposals to instal
two 1680mm high radial b a r r i e r s , with 1.15 metre wide gates at the r e a r ,
on the West Terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium, subject to

       (i)■         the further calculations required by the Building
                    Authority being satisfactory;

       (ii)         confirmation that adequate headroom will be
                    available at the rear of the T err ace , and

       (iii)         the new gates at the rear of the Terrace also being
                    under police control.
      Security Gates around North Stand

Now that the gymnasium was open to .the general public, the Club wished to
erect security gates at^ the top of *the ramps at both ends of the North
Stand, with additional gates at ground floor level at the Penistone.Road
end of the Stand. A separate gate would also be placed behind the West
Ramp to prevent people going round the rear of the gymnasium towards
Leppingg Lane.

These gates would .be fastened when the gymnasium only was in use so as to
provide security for the rest of the ground. However, on match days they
would be secured in the fully open position to allow unrestricted access.-

IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
that the Officer Working Party sees no objection to the erection of security
gates around the North Stand, subject tcf the gates and/or their supports,'
hinges, etc not impinging on the existing critical ramp widths, and to the
gates being secured in the fully open position on match days.

4.    Police and First Aid Facilities

It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory police and first aid
facilities under the North Stand had been accepted on an interim basis".
The Club had undertaken to provide purpose built facilities in a similar
position to the existing timbered facilities during the 1980 close
season. Whilst some progress had been made in discussing details of the
facilities, no firm indication had yet been given as to when they would
actually be provided.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr..D, Vaughan should press- the Club and/or its
Consultants   for a firm indication as to when the new police and first
aid facilities are to-: he provided.

5.    Lottery Ticket Boxes

Attention was drawn to the blocked egress which could result if the
timber lottery ticket boxes presently sited close to the ramps were, to
be tipped over or ignited, either accidentally or deliberately,

IT WAS AGREED that Mr, Vaughan should draw the Club’s attention to the
desirability of re-siting the lottery ticket boxes.




                             CHS
                                DV/SY/583/5....        WE/KH/3563             14th September, 1981,



                      Dear Sir,     .. ■

                      Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975                                          :
                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

             ........ Inferring 'to your letter-of 9th September, the Officer Working Party.
   )                  (Sheffield District) has -considered the proposals referred to la your
               . ■:   letter of 2nd September and accompanying plans.

                       X,     Radial Barriers on West Terrace

v :'-r- ..w",."...   . Whilst welcoming the increased control on the Terrace which should
                    result, concern was expressed as to the problems which could occur with
     .............. opposing fans mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or at the entry/
  ;                 exit!, gates. However, it was felt that only experience would show
    -      ' .      whether this would prove to be a reality and, if realised, whether the
                    problem was of such* a small scale that it could be easily coped with by
                    the police.

                       Accordingly, the Officer Working Party at this stage sees no objection
                       to the proposals to instal two 1680 nan high radial barriers, with 1.15
                       metre gates at the rear, on the West Terrace, subject to;-

                       (a)    the further calculations required by the BuildingAuthoritybeing
                              satisfactory (Mr. Sheriff to contact you direct);

                       0 i)   confirmation that adequate headroom will be available at the rear

•                      (c)
                              of the Terrace after installation of the barriers and gates, ana

                              the new gates at the rear of the Terrace also being under police,
                              control.

                       2.     Security Gates around North Stand

                       The Officer Working Party fully recognises the Club’s need to provide_
                       security for the remainder of the stadium when only the gymnasium is in
                       use.

                       Provided that the gates and/or their supports, hinges, etc. do not
                       impinge on the existing critical ramp widths and the gates ^are secured
                          the fully open position on match days, the Officer Working Party
                       sees no objection to the erection of security gates around the North Stand.

                       Dr. W. Eastwood,
                       Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
                       Consulting Engineers,
                       Bowmaker House,        (k
                       23 Kingfield Road,     jjj Jjfi 1
                       Sheffield,             MmSmKU f
                        South Yorkshire                                      _   .    ,
                        Sll 9AS                                              Conta..../
                                                                                                        M M
                    3.        OtliS'Matter#'';

                    Two other matters were also raised by the Officer Working Party relating
                    to the Police and First Aid Facilities and the siting of certain of the
77 7;.. '.~7'“.•.Lottery' ficket''''B«es.'''r'/r'
                                                :''''''''':':'''''..r""T-.'''-77.7“.7"‘.....

                     (a) Police and first Aid Facilities                                           ..

                              It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory police and first \
                              aid facilities under the Sort! Stand had Been accepted on aa interim *7'
                              basis on the understadding that the Club would provide purpose built
                              replacement facilities in the 1980 close season.        .            :

                              It is appreciated that discussions on the detailed requirements are ; ;
                              still continuing, but it is felt that the Club should be asked to give';.;
                              a firm indication when the new police and first aid facilities are to,.-..;
                              be provided...                                                                   '        :
                     (by Lottery Ticket Boxes ......... ;... "                   "..... "7-...... '. 7 :
                                                                                                       T      77* .... ..

                              Concern was expressed as to the blocked egress which could result if 1
                      -   7   the timber lottery ticket boxes presently sited close to the ramps .
                              were to be tipped over or ignited, either accidentally or deliberately.

                              The Officer Working Party felt that the Club should be requested to
                              re-site the boxes in a less critical position,

                   I attach an additional copy of this letter for your use.

                                                                       louts faithfully,




                                                                       Chief Executive.
                                                    SMMttfi
    x&m                    mmmfiM              mWwd$
                                                                                                                           BOWMAKER HOUSE;
                                                       e e r iy                                                            23 KING FIELD ROAD
                        Consulting'
                                                                                                                           SHEFFIELD S1V9AS*
          W . Eastw ood                 B.Eng* Ph-D- f.Eng.. FJ.C.Ei                                                       Tel, ; (0742)' 5838711
                                        FXStructE. F.G.S., M.Con».E
          A. A. W ood                   B.Eng, Ph D . C.Engc. F.l.C.f. :
                                        FJ.StruotE. M J.W .E.Si M.Cons.E

          A. 6 . B u r d e tt...... G.M., B.Sc.(Eng), C.EnU, M.t.C.E. -
          R. C. A. Eastwood B .S c , C .Eng., M .I.C.E,, M .l.S tru o tE .
          Associate*:                                          iy.»•'
          Geoffrey Spir                 C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mm A .6.

          C. S. Greaves                 B.Eng., C.Eng., H.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.

          A. J . Clough - -            B.A., C E n g ., M.C.I.B.S., M.I.M«ch.E;
                                                                                                    ■^=QubBal^          WE/JAS/ SR/3563.
          J . A, Strange               C.Eng., M.I.Struct.E.                                             Your R e f :
          Consultant;
          A. L. Percy                  H .Tech.(H on.), B.Sc., C.Eng., F.t.C.E.
                                       F.I.Struct.E„ F.I.Mun.E., M.R.T.P.I.                                .13 DEC m i
                                                                                                    COUNFf HALL, Ehkh„L-b‘,
                                                                                                   m m WMiiiiRi m z m


            South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                             14 December,      1981
            County Hall,
4           Barnsley,
            South Yorkshire.
            S70 2TN


            For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

            Dear Mr. Vaughan,

                                    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                  Radial Fences at Leppings Lane End
                                                 and Security Gates

                         The work on the radial fences and security gates
             indicated on our drawings 3563/1-3 which we sent to you on
            2 September 1981,                          is now substantially complete.
                         Three first team home games have been played since the
             fences were erected.                                 We have not heard any formal comments
             from the Working Party about the operation of the fences and
             their access gates but we understand that representatives of the
             South Yorkshire Police have inspected the work and they are
             satisfied with the new arrangements.
                         To increase security it is proposed that pairs of gates
             are installed at the bottom of the two staircases at the back of
             the West Stand.                        Two copies of our drawing 3563/4 are enclosed
             showing details of the gates.



                                                                                        Yours sincerely,



                                                                  R e o ill J r i * J o la n d - No. 1134531

             c.c.        Eric England.
                                                 mmm                                                                                            ft%li<$S
                                                                                                                                                       sp®
                                                                                                                                                         §®                fefplfi
        §C" ~
            mmm                                                                                                                               !»#»»




                                                                                                                                     D IVISIO N AL HEADQUARTERS
'   .
                                                                                                                                     HAM M ER TO N ROAD
                                                                                                                                     SHEFFIELD S6 2N D
                                                                                                                                     TELEPHONE (0742) 343131




                       A L L C O M M U N IC A T IO N S TO BE ADDRESSED TO "T H E CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT"




                 The Chief Executive       ;                                                                             YOUR REFERENCE             DV/MH/583/5
                 South Yorkshire County Council
                                                                                                                         OUR REFERENCE              F/RH/DR
                 County Hall
                 BARNSLEY                                                                                                DATE                        18 January 1982
                 South Yorkshire
                 S70 2TN




                 Dear Sir                                                                                                             ■        .’     | 9     J A R ^32*
                 SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                 SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD

                 I refer to your letter of 23 December 1981 and to the letter f r o m Messrs.
                 Eastwood & Partners - the Club's consulting engineers - relating to their
                 proposals to erect a pair of security gates at the base of the two staircases
                 at the rear of the West Stand at the groun d. From a policing point of view I
                 see no problems whatever concerning the erection of these ga t e s , subject of
                 course to them being secured in a fully open position during the time the
                 public parts of the ground are occupied when matches are being played.

                 Dealing now with the radial fences which have recently been installed on the
                 Leppings Lane terracing, I can confirm that the fences are working particularly
                 well and proving to be most satisfactory in effecting the segregation of
                 opposing groups of fans.  Since the fences were put up there has been no
                 fixture at the ground of sufficient interest to result in that entire section
                 of terracing being given to one group of fans and so I am unable to comment in
                 that respect, but I see no problems wh at ev er .


        §        H ow ev er , there are one or two points concerning the actual construction of the
                 fencing which give cause for concern from a police point of view.      In some
                 places the existing barrier rails have been extended up to and completely
                 through the new radial fences at a height of 4*6" or so from the g r ou nd ,
                 making it very easy for fans to climb from one pen to another. In other
                 places the existing barrier rails have been cut off short of the radial
                 fences, leaving what the police consider to be dangerous pieces protruding
                 into some of the gangways.      This matter has been drawn to the attention of the
                 Club Secretary, who has been advised of m y intention to bring it to your
                 notice.      I would point out that Mr. England totally agrees with police
                 observations regarding the construction of the radial fences but I understand
                 from him that it is being suggested that a n y alterations could conceivably
                 result in a reduction in the capacity of the Leppings Lane terracing.      I am
                 not aware of the thinking behind that but for my part see no reason why that
                 should be.




            A D M /3    THE OFFICER DEALING W ITH THIS CORRESPONDENCE I S ...................................................   .EXTENSION.
                                                                                  «
                                                                                  lSi8ffe
                                                                                        l
                                                                       f!i§       sf??it
                            1   ^


The:;,.Chx;ef..'Executive
South'Yorkshire County CoScil

18 January 1982


SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY POOTBALL CLUB LTD

I apologise for the delay in replying to you but I am sure you will appreciate
that the recent bad weather has necessitated the cancellation of a number of
matches at the ground which would perhaps have provided greater experience in
the handling of spectator 3 within the new pens - particularly the match on
Boxing Day.                             -...........................     ......

Yours faiiJafully______             •                 '    '"




Chief Superintendent
              ■- Y
        py/SY/583/5             WE/JAS/SR/3563        20th January, 1982,


Dear Sir,    :

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.             ‘..... ...................

In repIf to your letter dated 14th December, 1981, I understand that
the Building Authority has contacted year office direct for 'clarification
on a small number of points regarding the proposed installation of pairs
of gates at the bottom of the two staircases at the back of the lest
Stand# Subject to the satisfactory resolution of these points and, of
course, to the gates being secured in the fully open position during the
time the public parts of the stadium are occupied when matches are
being played, the Officer Working Party has no objection to the proposals. ,

As regards the radial fences installed on the West Terrace and the
security gates around the North Stand, the Officer Working Party wishes
to make the following coaaents;-

(a)   Radial Barriers on Wes*- Terrace

The matches played at the stadium since the installation of the barriers
confirm that they appear to be working well and satisfactorily effect the
segregation of opposing groups of fans. However, the entire section of
the Terrace has yet to be given to one group of fans.

The Police inform me that, on installation of the new radial barriers,
the existing crush barriers have been extended in some places up to and
completely through the new radial barriers at a height of 4 ’6” or so
from the ground. The effect is to make it very easy for fans to climb
from one pen to another. In other places the existing crush barrier
rails have been cut off short of the radial barriers in a manner which
leaves dangerous pieces protruding into some of the gangways.

(b)   Security Gates around the Horth Stand

You will recall that my   letter of 14th September, 1981 stated that,
provided that the gates   and/or their supports, hinges, etc., do not
impinge on the existing   critical ramp widths, the Officer Working Party
saw no objection to the   erection of the security gates.

X am informed that the Banner in which the gates have been installed ■
has resulted in each gate’s hinge impinging at least ?i” into the width
of the ramp. This means that there is a 15" reduction in width of the

Dr. W. Eastwood,
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers, •
Bowmaker House,                   .                    .
23 Kiggfield Road
Sheffield,
South Yorkshire
Sll 9AS                                                    Contd..,./
                                                                       mSSlliilM


                                  w^   ,..,, - ._.„   .                     mmtmmm
Dr. W. Eastwood ■ ■'■• ’        ~2“                       January, IS82,



nsans'of escape on each ramp*

4s the Annual winter inspection of the Hillsborough Stadium is due
to take place aaf£i»e around new, -I-would suggest- the. opportunity be:.
taken to discuss these matters at the inapectioa,        . ......... ; .

Perhaps you would contact Mr, B. Vaughan of my staff (extension 422)
so that the necessary arrangements may be made.

An additional copy ‘of this letter is attached for your use.

                                   Yours faithfully,

                   k


                                   Chief Executive.,
 m m M o o
               Consufti      'E'nglneert.
                                                               -•
, W . Eastw ood           ;" £ 6 ^ VPh.D„ F .E ng, F.I.C.E,                 D‘finmn                  :       M . | (0742,
                           P.l.StroetE., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.

A . A. Wood                B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                      28 J                           1
                           F.I.Struct.E., M .I.W .E.C M.Cons.E

 A. G. B u rd e tt         G .M ., B.Sc.(Eng), C.Eng., M.I.C.E.
                                                                            COW M MALI t                        36   H ig h   H o lb o rn
                                                                           Mma                                      LondonWC1V6AA
 R.   c. A.    Eastwood    B.Sc., C.Eng., M .I.C.E., M .I.StruotE.
                                                    *».    -                                             '      Tel.: (01) 242 7436
 Associates:
 G eoffrey Spir            C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.

 C. S. Greaves             B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Scruct.E.
                                                                                        Our Ref:             W E/KB/3563
 A . J . Clough..          B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Mech.E.

 J . A. Strange            C.Eng., M .I.Struct.E.   * '                                 Your Ref :            DV/SY/583/5
 Consultant:
 A. L. Percy               M .Tech.(Hon.), B.Sc., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.
                           F .l.Struct.E., F.I.M un.E ., M .R .T.P.I.




  Chief Executive,                                                                                            26 January 1982
  South Yorkshire County Council,
  County H a l l ,
  Barnsley,
  South Yorkshire,
  S70 2TN.


  For the attention of M r . D . Vaughan


  Dear M r . Vaughan,
                                      Safety of Sports Ground Act
                  Thank you for your letter of 20 January.
                  I believe the small number of points needing
  clarification have already been discussed between
  John Strange and Mr. Sheriff.                                         One of these refer to the
  need for a goal post type frame over the gates but this is
  in fact already provided by the sheeting frame.                                                        There is
  also a small amount of rust staining arising from misplacement
  of reinforcement in the 100mm thick retaining w a l l .                                                      There
  is no immediate danger arising from this and an appropriate
  maintenance repair will be carried o u t .
                  Turning now to the radial barriers on the West
  terrace it is of course accepted that where there is a
  crush barrier passing through or close to the radial barrier
   it will make it easier for anyone who so wishes to climb
  over.           Nevertheless we believe it is not unreasonable to
   leave the crush barriers as they a r e .                                          If all barriers
  were removed back to a distance say 1.2m from the fence it
  would mean a 2.4m wide gap which is not protected by barriers.
                                                                                                                        .     •, "1       C c ■ C 'f~o
                                                          Registi       jland - No. 1134531                                           >          fii

                                                                                                                                      y, *   .
T h e r e w o u l d be a consequent loss of calculated spectator
capacity which is undesirable from the C l u b 's point of
view.      However from the point of view of safety a strip
of that width without* a single crush barrier would be a
major hazard.
           It should be kept in mind that the introduction
of these radial barriers has effected a very great
improvement from the point of view of segregation of
spectators but to achieve perfection from the point of
view of segregation brings with it other disadvantages.
I believe that what we have done is a reasonable compromise
between the various interests.
           In the second paragraph on this subject you
refer to dangerous pieces of rails protruding from the
crush barriers.      I have not had an opportunity to check
this since receiving your letter but I am informed that
the word    'dangerous1 is a little exaggerated and they
do not of course protrude into a gangway as there is no
gangway at this position.
           With regard to the security gates around the North
stand the point at issue is whether the encroachment into
the gate width is at all critical.        The remaining clear
width is 3.300mm which is equivalent to a six unit exit.
Thus the theoretical number of people who can get out in
eight minutes using the green book figure of 60 people
per minute per exit width is 5,760 shared between the two
routes.      The stand capacity is of course 10,000 and in
practice more than half the number tend to use the lower
exits since most spectators are reluctant to walk uphill
to the upper set of exit stairways.        The picture is that
fewer than 5,000 people will be trying to get out of
exits which can accommodate 5,760 in eight minutes.
        There were very good structural reasons for placing
the gates in this way.   The theoretical exit capacity has
not been changed since it was always a six unit gateway.
There is no funnelling effect, and there is a good
'reservoir1 area upstream of the gates.
         I telephoned your office yesterday but gather
you were on leave and have again telephoned this morning
with a view to agreeing a tentative date for the winter
meeting of the working party.    I will try again in the
next day or s o .


                                Yours sincerely,
     PRESENT:   Representing t h e 'Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd
                                   -V ''   *                        '

                E.    England       '(Secretary)
                ,Dr_W..,„ Eastwood.:.: (Messrs...... Eastwood.. &.. Partners)   ...   :
                                                                                      ..
                 J. Strange         ‘ (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)

                Representing the Officer W orking Party (Sheffield District)

                M s . J. Barker                (South Yorkshire Police)
                R. HeroId                      (South Yorkshire Police)
                D. Horner                      (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                M. J o hnson...                (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
x>              D. Sheriff                     (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District



t
                                                Council)          ,      -
                D. Sumner                      (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
                                                Council)
                D. I, Vaughan                  (South Yorkshire County Council)
                F. Waterhouse                  (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)


     1.     Purpose of Meeting

     The purpose of the meeting was to discuss%£he apparent difference of opinion
     on certain aspects of the radial barriers installed on the West Terrace
     and the security gates at the top of the North stand ramps, as well as to
     carry out the usual winter inspection of tne Stadium.

     2.     Ground Inspection

     A.     West Terrace

     Whilst the whole Terrace had yet to be used, the matches played since the
     erection of the radial barriers indicated that generally they worked well and
     satisfactorily effected the segregation of opposing groups of fans.

     However, the police pointed out that in places the existing crush barriers
     had been extended up to and, in some cases, completely through the new
     radial barriers, which had the effect of making it relatively easy for anyone
     who w i shed to do so to climb from one pen to a no ther. Also, in tne pen
     nearest to the South Stand, a small length of existing crush barrier had been
     left unsupported.

     IT WAS AGREED -

     (i)   That, on balance, it was preferable from a safety point of view to
     prevent crowd surge-by the existing barriers being extended up to and/or
     through the new radial barriers than to completely prevent persons being
     able to climb from one pen to another, subject to review at the end of the
     current season.

     (ii)   That the unsupported small length of existing crush barrier would
     be cut o f f .




                                               Kwi'l
'One^of^the-secuHty-^gatesi^wEicli^the... Club, wished.-to' instal.afcLthe bottom
the two staircases had now been erected. ....                       .■ '              '

IT WAS AGREED    that this could be regarded as satisfactory.              .

C.     North Stand           .

The Fire Service f e l t t h a t t h e manner-in- which the security gates-had been
installed at the top of the ramps unduly restricted the exit width available.

The Club’s Consultants and the Fire Service disagreed on the interpretation
of paragraph 16 of the "Green Guide", and consequently on the figure to be
applied in the calculation for assessing whether the exit w i d t h ^ lost at the
of the ramps by the method of security gate installation was critical ox not

IT WAS AGREED"" that, as the point might well have been covered i n the
initial consideration of the C l u b 1s application for a General Safety
Certificate, the point would not be pursued at the m o m e n t .

       NOTE - A search of the file subsequently revealed that, as
              suspected, the point had been considered at a
              meeting of the Officer Working Party on 12.2.79,
              the relevant part of the Note of the meeting reading:-

                 "the construction and width of the ramps being
                  such that they could quite- properly be
                  regarded as elevated ro a dw a ys " .

 D.     Spion Kop

 It was noted that the ltiii 1 ixng or trie step adjacent to che h.a.iiUi.ail on
 the left of the original exit at the top of the Kop had taken place; that
 the boundary fence at the top of the Kop had been reinforced, and that the
 existing barriers had been permanently extended and the area at the foot
 of the new Kop exit (adjacent to the brick built refreshment point)
 levelled off as agreed.

 E.     South Sl:and

 The agreement to visually inspect tiie roof trusses for apparent deflection
 after exceptional gale or snow loading conditions was recalled.

 F.    Items   of General Maintenance

 IT WAS AGREED      that the following items of general maintenance required
 attention:-

 (i)   The rounding off of the corners on the steelwork of the underside of
 the exit at the southerly end of theWest Stand     (tobe done  that d a y ) , as
 well as the rounding off ofthe brackets to     the North Stand security ga t e s .

 (ii)  The repair or replacement of the corroding stanchions supporting the
 fencing and sheeting above the boundary wall on the right hand side or
 Gate "0".
                                                IMmISp IIIII       mmm:
#ltf§lJllS#    WI§MM                                                              m*m


         (iii) The cracks‘in the -concrete "terracing of the Spion Kop to be filled.

         (iv) The wooden support tfi the electrical line between the brick built
         refreshment point and the Owls Club to be fixed more securely..         ;

         (v> -r- The brick wall between the South Stand and the Spion Kop (nearest
         to the South Stand) to be;pointed.

         (vi)  The concrete supporting strut to the wall between the Spion Kop and
         the South'Stand (nearest- to the Spion Kop) to be protected (cracks, an .........
         exposed bar) .

         G.            Temporary Structures

         Concern was expressed as to the possibility of inadequate structural stability
         of temporary structures, such a s .scaffolding used m connection with
          television transmissions..

         Paragraph 20 of the C l u b ’s General Safety Certificate required T.V. cameras
         and portable equipment to be placed only in such positions as may be agreed
         between the Police and the Club,.... The Club also were generally required      to
         ensure that the Stadium complied       with good engineering and building practices
         and with the relevant British Standard Specification or Code of Practice.

          IT WAS AGREED  that the question of temporary structures should be kept
          under review, and that the Club's Consultants should give advice to the
          Club.
                                        .   .     .    .       .          .   .



          3.       Future Developments

          A.           police and First Aid Facilities

        'It was likely that, following continuing consultations with the Police, the
         Club would shortly be in a position to formally notify t h e _County Council
         that the new Police and First Aid Facilities would be provided m the
              forthcoming close season.

              B.       Additional Turnstiles and Exit Gate in Penistone_Rgad

              The Club hoped to formally notify the County Council shortly of their^      ^
              intention to proceed in the forthcoming close season with the demolition 0i
              some of the existing toilets on the Penis tone ^Road side of the Stadium in
              order to provide additional turnstiles and exit gate on that side of the
              Stadium.

              C.       Widening of Walkway and Erection of New Fence

              Because of drainage problems, the existing concrete panel fence to the
              rear of the Spion Kop (nearest to the Owls Club) had nad to be remove .
              When settlement was complete, it was intended to widen the. existing
              walkway and erect a new fence on the revised l i n e .
ihis:                'O tU si                                                   r-   • o a '- y *
                                                                         /Y )


EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                S t. A n d rew s House
                                                                                                                   23 K in g field Road
                                                                                                                                              48
              (C o n su ltin g E n g in e e rs)
                                                                                                                   S h effield S t t 9AS
Directors:
W . E astw ood              F .E ng , B.Eng., Ph.D ., D .E o g ,                                    coirA          T e l.: (0742) 583871
                            C .Eng,, F.I.C.E., P.P.I.St^l^ct,Ei• .                    C£W.                         T e le x :       547266
                            F.I.M ech.E., F.G .S., M .C c k s.E .“

A . A . W ood               B.Eng.. Ph.D ., C.Eng., F .l|c.E ,                                                                      and at:
                             F.I.StructE., M.I.W .ES., MlCons.E

R. C . A . E astw ood        B.Sc., C.Eng„ M l.C.E., M .IStructE.                                                     36 High H olborn
G . S p ir                  C .E ng., M.I.C.E., M .I.M ech.E.                                 S73                     London WC1V 6AA
                                                                                                                      Tel.: (01) 242 7436
Associates:
C.   S. Greaves             B.En*., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M J.Stroet.E .
J.   A. Strange             C.Eng., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                    Our R e f;    WE/JF
G.   Doughty                C E n (., F.LStruct.E.                                                  Your R e f:
S.   Preston                B.Eng., C.Eng., M J.C.E., M XStniccJE.

R.   Tandy                  C.Eng., F.I.Struet.E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett               G.M ., B.Sc.(Eng.), C .E ng.,
                            F.I.C.E., F.I.Stniet.E.



South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                     9 April, 1985
 Department of Administration,

•
County Hall,
BARNSLEY

For the attention of Mr D Vaughan

Dear Mr Vaughan,
            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd
       Segregation of Visiting Spectators at Leppings Lane End

         The club is anxious to segregate the visiting team’s supporters
as they enter the ground, and also to enable the police to control
their exit at the end of a game.
    We have prepared the scheme shown on the attached print of our
drawing 6705/2. This involves the construction of two new banks of
turnstiles (Nos 17 - 21 and 22 - 29), and various runs of fencing
and new gates.
    It would be appreciated if the Working Party could consider this
 proposal at an early date. Mr Chester has already given a copy of
 the drawing to the police so that they have had some advance notice.




                                                                       Yours sincerely,




 c.c. Mr R. Chester
                                                                                in England -         No 1833144
                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

               Note of a meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield
               District) held at the Police Sports & Social Club, Niagara
                             Sheffield, on 18th April 1985


PRESENT: N. Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
         C. Calvert   (South Yorkshire Police)
         R. Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
         G. Stanley   (South Yorkshire Police)
         T. Stewart   (South Yorkshire Police)
         G. Sykes     (South Yorkshire Police)
         D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
         A. Vickers (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)


1.    Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 9th April
and plan from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners relating to the proposals of
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to construct two new banks of
turnstiles and various runs of fencing and new gates in order to achieve
segregation of visiting supporters at the Leppings Lane end of the
Hillsborough Stadium.

2.    Consideration of Proposals

The Police representatives pointed out that the proposals had been
prompted in the main by comments they had made to the Club. At one
time, both the West Stand and Terrace had been regarded as exclusively
for the use of visiting supporters, but recent patterns of attendances
at the Stadium made it necessary to allow for some element of use by
home supporters as well.

The proposals now outlined by the Club were generally acceptable to the
Police representatives, subject to:-

(a)   additional gates being provided between the turnstile numbered 16
      and the wall of the inner access road;

(b)   the central area of the Terrace (indicated as the neutral area or
      visiting supporters' terrace) being divided in half by a new
      central radial fence running from the tunnel entrance to the
      pitchside security fence with gates erected so as to permit entry
      to be diverted to either half as appropriate (the proposed new
      secondary radial fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
      on the plan to be abandoned);

(c)   the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as home supporters'
      terrace) also to be divided in half by a new central radial fence
      running from back to front with two gates (the existing radial
      fence dividing the present two Terrace areas - neutral area and
      home supporters - to have a second gate installed;

(d)   the existing pitch perimeter fence to have additional exit gates
      installed - one in the neutral area and one in the home supporters
f
        The County Fire Service saw no objection in principle to the proposals,
        subject to more detailed investigation of the means of escape aspects,
        and the Building Authority similarly saw no objection, subject to
        submission of detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of
        Sports Grounds Act and Building Regulations.

        3.   Action

        IT WAS AGREED

        (a) That    R. Grimshaw should investigate as amatter of urgency the   means
        of escape   aspects of the proposals and let D. I. Vaughan know the
        outcome.

        (b) That, subject to satisfactory clearance of these aspects by the
        County Fire Service, the outline proposals submitted b y Messrs. Eastwood
        & Partners be agreed as now amended by the suggestions of the South
        Yorkshire Police, also subject, of course, tothe submission of the
        necessary detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of Sports


    *   Grounds Act and Building Regulations.




J#




                                                2   .


                                        GD
                         N O      b >0^1^            -


                    ^South Yorkshire County Council                                                                                   50
                           H.   E. Wright, M .l. Fire E.                                                  Sheffield (West) Division
                                Chief Fire Officer
                                                                                                          Division Street
                            K L Mettam            JP         Grad I Fire E
                                                                                                          Sheffield
                           Divisional Commander                                                           South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                                          Telephone Sheffield
J. C. Harris, M.A., LL.B,(Cantab) Fire Service Department.
                                                                                                          STD (0742) 731645/6/7
(Chief Executive and County Clerk)


                          Our Ref:    C2088/AV/IR               Your Ref:                                 Date:     30 April 1985

             This matter is being dealt with by                    Stn .0.Vicars.                         Ext. No       59.

              The Chief Executive                                                                Copy:       Fire Service HQ
              Dept of Administration
              County Hall
              BARNSLEY
              For the attention of Mr D Vaughan




              Dear Sir

              SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
              SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC

              Further to the joint meeting on 18 April 1985, to discuss the proposals for
              new crowd control arrangements, the means of escape implications have now
              been considered. The scheme would appear to be satisfactory providing that
              certain gates have the minimum widths (in metres) as indicated on the enclosed
              plan. It is understood that these gates will be supervised by either the police
              or club officials.

              Should you require any further information, please do not hesitate to contact
              this Department.

              Yours faithfully




              DIVISIONAL COMMANDER




                                          All communications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
              DV/AA/583/5               VE/J?                 2 May 1985


                                      D. Vaughan               422



Dear Sirs,

Safety of Sports Grounds Acy, 1985
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC

In reply to your letter dated 9th April, whilst a meeting of the
Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) was held on 18th April
to consider the proposals vhichyyou outlined, the County Fire
Service requested additional titne to consider the naans of escape
aspects.

I am now able to say that, subject to the incorporation of the
following points and to the submission ofddetailed plans and
calculations under both the. Safety of Snorts "rounds Act and
Building Regulations, the proposals outlined are regarded as
generally acceptab le :-

(a)   additional gates being provided betveen the turnstile
      numbered 16 and the wall of the inner access road;

(b)   the central arsa of the Terrace (indicated as the neutral
       area or visiting supporters* terrace) being divided in
      half by a new central radial fence running frors the tunnel
       entrance to the pitchside security fence with gfctes erected
       ao as to permit entry to be diverted to either half as
       appropriate (the proposed new secondary radial fence
       adjacent to the existing fence indicated on the plan to be
       abandoned);

(c) the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as horae supporters’
     terrace) also to he divided in half by a new central radial
     fence running from back to front with two gates (the existing
     radial fence dividing the present two Terrace areas - neutral
     area and home supporters - to have a second gate installed;



                                     /Contd


Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
St. AndrewsUHouse,
23 Kingfield Road,
Sheffield.
Sll 9AS
(d)   the existing pitch perimeter fence to have additional exit
      gates installed - one in the neutral area and one in the
      home supporters area;

(e)   certain gates to have the minimum widths (in metres) indicated
      on the attached plan and to them being fully supervised.



                                   Yours faithfully,




                                   Chief Executives




                         CD
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                             S t. A ndrew s House
              (Consulting Engineers)                                                                                 K in g field Road
                                                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                                                   leffield S11 9AS
Directors:
W . Eastw ood          F.Eno-, B.Eng„ Ph.D., D.Eng.,                                                  raiiea            (0742) 583871
                       C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.PJ.Struct.E..                                                           lex:          547266
                       F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S.. M.Cons.E.
A . A . WOOd           B.Enfl„ Ph.D., C.Eng„ F.I.C.E,                     COUNT     BA                                           and at:
                       F.I.StructE„ M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                     iASfgRE
R. C. A . Eastw ood     B.Sc., C.Eng.. M .I.C.E. M.I.StiuctE.                                                      36 High Holborn
G . S p ir             C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.                                                               London WC1V 6AA
                                                                                                                   Tel.: (01) 242 7436
Associates:
C. S. Greaves          B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struet.E.
                                                                                             Our R e f:        WE/KH/6705
J . A. Strange          C.Eng., M .I.Struet.E.
G. Doughty             C E ng., F.I.Struct.E.                                                Your R e f:
S. Preston             B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
R. Tandy               C.Eng., F.I.Struet.E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett          G.M ., B.Sc.(Eng.), C.Eng.,
                       F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.




Department of Administration,                                                                                  8 May 1985
South Yorkshire County Council,
County Hall,
Barnsley,
S70      2TN.                                           _         ^



For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan

Dear Mr. Vaughan,                         \
                     Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975
                   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
                Thank you for your letter of 2 May giving the comments
of the Officer Working Party on the proposals which we sent
to you on 9 April.
                In the interim period several of the points which you
raised had already been incorporated in our latest scheme
which has yet to be considered by the Club Board.                                                              However I
would ask that further consideration should be given to the
request in paragraph                        (c) of your letter for a second gate to
be installed in the radial barrier and for the new radial
barrier which you have asked for to have two gates.                                                             If these
gates are meant for use in emergency it would mean having                                                                  a
steward in attendance on each occasion, the expense of which
would hardly be justified.                                  It is our view that in the event of
emergency,spectators can be evacuated quickly enough by the
gates on to the pitch and by the normal exit gates at the rear.
We will of course be prepared to discuss the matter with the
Fire Officer's staff should you so wish.

                                                                                  Yours sincerely,
                                                                      istered in England -    No. 1833144
                             DV/JC/583/5                            WE/KH/6705                                        lOth May, 1985.
                                                                                                                                                   -   y;

                                                                                                                      422

             . . . .. .. ~


Dear Sirs,
                                                                                                                .... -\              ,v:-''''
                                                                                                 ....... .




             Wednesday Football Club PLC             m»      •- .    •...............                                           ..
                                                          : ,,                  , /v , ; v ' r

In reply to your letter of 8th May, the extra gates referred to in par,
(c) of my earlier letter of 2nd May were included primarily at the request
of the South Yorkshire Police.                                        -,:y; y „ , ' fy;'

Provided that the remainder of the points raised by the Officer Working Party
are incorporated in the latest proposals (yet to be considered by the Club),
the Police are prepared to concede the request for two gates per radical fence
in the right band area of the beppings Lane End Terrace (indicated as home
supporters* terrace on the plan).


                                                       Yours faithfully.




                                       '   ..-o r.

                                                          Chief Executive.




                                                                                                             urfkv c:X ' C                 £af <hk'
                                                                                                                   S ■O . \               Ni '
                                                                                                                                             •


                                                                                                                '-i ~z<$   C. ■ C . 5 ■ L - . r*   i,j
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
Consulting Engineers,
St. Andrews House,
23 Kinffield Road,
SHEFFIELD.
Sll 9AS
E A S T W O O D & P A R TN E R S                                                                                       S t. Andrew s House
                                                                                                                       23 Kingfield Road
                                                                                                                                                      54
            (Consulting            Engineers)
® imeats:
                                                                                                                       S heffield S11 9AS
W . Eastw ood              F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., D.Eng.,                                                              T e l.: (0742) 583871
                         : C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E..
                                                                                                                       Telex:         547266
                           F.I.M ech.E., F.G .S., M.Cons.E.

A. A . W ood                  B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                                              and at:
                              F.LStructE., M .I.W .E.S., M.Cons.E.

R. C. A . E astw ood          B.SC., C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., M .I.Struot.E                                                    3 6 H ig h H o i b o r n
& S plr                       O E nfl., M .I.C.E., M .I.M ech .E .                                                         London W C 1 V 6AA
                                                                                                                           T e l.: (01) 242 7436
C. S. Greaves                 B.Enj., C.Eng.. M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
                              C&>*„ M XStruet.E.
                                                                                               Our R e f :          W E /K W P /S E B /6 7 0 5
                              ® £n*., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struet.E.                         Your R e f :
                              CJEitf., F.KStructJ:.
                                                                                             COUNTY GOUNCi:
« . m- $9ammn                 B je ..C .6 n*.,M .I.C .E ..M .1.Struct.E.
                                                                           ycparidieiri; .o| ■Administration
d. M. Wood                    B .Sc, C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
                       '■                  • ‘
                                                                                  26 JULIES
                                                                           m m        HAIL, BARNSLEY
                                                                           mm wsmm m                    2w
 South Yorkshire County Counci1,                                                                                    25 July 1985
 SefyartlBent bf Administration


 S.- i


 For                                        of Mr. D . Vaughan


 Dear Mr.
                                   S^i^field Wednesday Football Club pic
                                                                  of Visiting Spectators at
                                                                Leppings Lane End

            Further to our preliminary submission in April 1985, we
 enclose six                           of the drawings as follows
                     1             Existing Layout of Leppings Lane Entrance
                                   ftetails of the New Central Fence on West Terrace
                                  Hodifications to Entrance Routes                                            &     Revised
                                  ^Eipaut of Facilities.
                                   Proposed New Ladies Toilets Under West Stand
                 .                 Details of New & Refurbished Toilets at
                                   Pepping s Lane End.
                                   Details of New Refreshment Facilities Under-
                                  JElevated North West Terrace.
                  A m    -.       Defrails of New Handrail at Leppings Lane
                                   Bttrance and Barrier on West Stand.
                  13              Details of New Safety Barrier East Side of
                                 ...Barth Stand.
                                   Be» Brickwork Wall - Leppings Lane End

                                    ® f; JBnlirniterf Com                  ered in England -    No, 1 8 3 3 1 4 4
    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




        6705/15   Repairs to Crowd Control Barriers -
                  Spion Kop.
             16   Plan on Spion Kop - Barrier Numbering
             17   Details of New Radial Fence on West Terrace
             18   Details of New Fences on Access Level of
                  West Stand.
             19   Location Plan for Crowd Security Fence,
                  West Stand.



                                    Yours sincerely,
(




#
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) held at
the Police Sports and Social Club, Niagara, Sheffield, on 29th July, 1985

PRESENT:   S. Allcock (South Yorkshire County Fire Service).
           N. Atkinson (City o F SRefffield Metropolitan District Council).
           Ms. J. Barker (South Yotkshire Police).
           J. Freeman (South toricshire Police).
           B. Sheriff (City oi* Sheffield Metropolitan District Council).
           D. I. Vaughan (South Yt^ksfiire County Council).

1.    Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the detailed plans submitted by the
letter dated 25th July from lf£sfr;§» j^ftwood and Partners of arrangements
for the segregation of visitfl^ fepectitots at the Leppings Lane End of the
Hillsborough Stadium of the               Wednesday Football Club. It was
recalled that consideration of -'ositttne' proposals had taken place by the
Officer Working Party on 18th April, 1985. Whilst formal application had been
made for Building Regulation sfrpKQval and" some, of the work had actually
commenced, Messrs. Eastwood 'gliC.IIittJieEShad apologised by ’phone that
submission of the detailed proposal's for Safety of Sports Grounds Act
approval had apparently been overlooked due to pressure of work and staff
holidays. The plans also included details of repairs to certain crush
barriers on the Spion Kop.
           .                                  ~"    , ~-S  ■:£- ' .   - .
2.     Consideration of                   :       '     I

The 14 detailed plans submitted were, each considered and discussed individually

IT WAS AGREED   that, subject to the      following points and to the submission of
the necessary detailed calculations       to the Building Authority, the proposals
for segregating visiting supporters       at the Leppings Lane End of the
Hillsborough Stadium were generally       accepfe^te:--

'(a)   Plan No. 6705/6 - for Beth security access and emergency egress purposes
a pitch perimeter fence gate to Bfc

(b)    Plan No. 6705/8A - the new landrail by, turnstile 23 to be either
shortened or re-aligned so as to maintain the exit width between the outer
(river) wall and Turnstile 23* and £be e^it        between Turnstile 16 and
the new handrail not to be less than the width of the roller shutter gate
between Turnstiles 16 and 17;

(c)   Plan No. 6705/9A - the single block thickness of the interal walls
(e.g. the cubicles) is not considered to be substantial enough, and a
substantial stud partition (tiy>ez or steel - suitably faced) is felt to
be required;

(d)   Plan No.       6705/10A - same comments as for plan 9A;

(e)   Plan No. 6705/I1A - no objection in principle» but details        of exact
location required;

(f)   Plan No.       6705/12 - no objection in principle, but no barrier height
indicated;
                 •                                   1
(g)   Plan No. 6705/14A - so long as increased thickness is achieved by steep
slopes as indicated on the plan an$',^t l5 ,;
                                            .,^§^ggedM' arrangements to give


                                m
                                    ...
                                            „   it   . •i t f i,   ■
foothold- rhc: nrc.Dos ? are satisfactory but the possible need to take
measure? on top of the vail to discourage persons from attempting to climb
over will have to be borne in mind;

(h)    Plan No. 6705/16A - in view of experiences last year, the front
corner of the Spion Kop (by the crush barriers numbered 5, 8 and 22) to
either have a Pitch Perimeter Fence Gate or radial barrier(s) to overcome
possible lateral crushing hazard when large crowds are present;

(i)    Plan No. 6705/17 - for both security access and emergency egress
purposes, a Pitch Perimeter Fence Gate to be provided;

(j)    Stewarding of New Gates - as mentioned in my letter of 2nd May, |1>85,
it is essential that all the new gates are fully supervised by Stewards*’
who must be fit, able and properly trained.
                                                               VE/KWP/SEB/6705                      30 July 1935


                                                               •D. Vaughan .                             422


Bear Sir,;

Safety, of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

The..-Officer '1c rkinr Party (Sheffield District) 'iret yesterday afternoon
t® consider the detax lad drawmngs enclosed with your letter dated
25th July relating principally to arrangements for the segregation
oJf m s i t i n g spectators at the Leppings Lane end of the Hillsbrugagh


S u h j& c t to the following, points and to the submission of the necessary
detailed calculations to the Building Authority, the proposals are
r@gasdeivas-. generally acceptable

                   So. 6705/6 - for both security access and emergency egress
                                   fence gate to be provided;

CpJ'                 SQi, 6703/8A - the new h a n d r a il by T u r n s t i l e 23 t o be e i t h e r
s h o rte n e d o r r e - a lig n e d so as t o m a in ta in th e e x i t w id t h betw een th e
o u t e r ( r i v e r ) w a l l and T u r n s t i l e 2 3 , sad th e e x i t w id th betw een T h m s t i l e
I & M » f t t a new h a n d r a il n o t to be le s s th a n th e w id th o f th e r o l l e r
                                  T h in ts tile s 16 and. .17 j

(c >        Flam H e . 6 7 0 5 /9 A - th e s in g le b lo c k th ic k n e s s o f th e i n t e r n a l w a lls
( « . * . tfce c u b ic le s ) i s s o t c o n s id e re d t o be s u b s t a n t ia l enough, and a
s u b s t a n t ia l       p a r t i t i o n ( t im b e r o r s t e e l - s u i t a b l y fa c e d ) i s f e l t t o


            It a n t He*. 6 70 5 /1 0 A -    same coraaents as f o r platt,: ? A |
    lir m
W           W U® 9im 6 7 0 5 /1 1 A - no o b je c t io n i n p r i n c i p l e , b u t d e t a i l s o f e x a c ^


                                            no o b je c t io n i n p r i n c i p l e , b u t no b a r r i e r h e ig h t


                                                             /C o n td . . .



M asars. Eastwood * P a r t n e r s ,
C o n 3 u ltin g E n g in e e rs ,
S t . Andrews House,
                                                                2 -                                30 July 1985



       (g )      P la n No. 6 70 5 /1 4 A - so l o n g a « in c re a s e d th ic k n e s s is ach ieved
       by s te e p s lo p e s as in d ic a t e d on tiwfe p la n and n o t by "s te p p e d " arrangem ents
       to g iv e f o o t h o ld , th e p ro p o s a ls n e s a t i s f a c t o r y b u t th e p o s s ib le need to
       ta k e measures on to p o f th e w a l l t o d is c o u ra g e persons fro m a tte m p tin g to
       c lifa h o v e r w i l l have to be borne i n m ind;

       (h )        P la n N o. 6 7 0 5 /1 6 A - i n v ie w o f e x p e rie n c e s l a s t p e a r , th e f r o n t
       c o m e r o f th e S pion Kop (b y th e cxastL b a r r ie r s numbered 5 , 8 and 2 2 ) t o
       e i t h e r have a F i t c h P e r im e te r F&nce G ate o r r a d i a l b a r r i e n f s ) t o overcome
       p o s s ib le l a t e r & i l c r u s h i n g h a z a rd when, la r g e crowds a re p r e s e n t;

       (i)         P la n No. 6 7 0 5 /1 7 - f o r b o th s e c u r it y access and emergency egress
       p u rp o s e s , a P it c h P e r im e te r F e n c e S a t e t o be p r o v id e d ;

        (j)         S te w a rd in g o f New Gates - a s m entioned i n my l e t t e r o f 2nd Hay,
  mb   1 9 8 5 , i t i s e s s e n t i a l t h a t a l l t$m •a*w gaAes a re f u l l y s u p e rv is e d by
  (    S te w a rd s , who m ust be f i t , a b le and p r o p e r ly t r a i n e d .
"he




                                                                             ■t'
                                                                             ’..
    p A s T W O O D & PA RT NER                                                                               S t. A ndrew s House
                                                                                                                                             57
                  (Consulting Engineers)                                                                      23 Kingfield Road
    Directors:
                                                                                                              S h effield S11 9AS
    W . Eastw ood               F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D ., D                                                     T e l.: (0742) 583871
                                                                                                              T e lex :      547266
                               F.I.M ech.E., F.G.S., M .C o n s . E . '. .

    A . A . W ood              B.Eng., Ph.D., C E n g ., F.I.C.E.,                                                                 and at:
                               F.I.Struct.E,, M.I.W .E.S., M .Cons.E,

    R. C. A . Eastw ood        B .Sc., C.Eng.. M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.                                           36 High Holborn
    G. Spir                    C .E ng,, M.I.C.E., M I M ech E.                                                   London WC1V 6AA
                                                                                                                  Tafcr mi 242 7436
    Associates:
    C. S. Greaves              B.Enf „ C.En*„ M.I.C.E., M .I.Struet.E.
                                                                                             Our R e f:       WE/KB/6705
    J. A.  Strange
    S. Preston                 B.En*„ C E n*., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struet.E.                      Your R e f:
    R. Tandy                   C E n*., F.I.Stniet.E.

    G. M. Seaman                B .St„ C.En*.. M.I.C.E., M.LStruct.E.
    J . M. Wood                B-Se., C.En*., M.I.C.E., M.i.Struct.E.

    Consultant:
    A. G. Burdett              G.M ., B.Sc,(Enf.). C.Enx.,
                               F.I.C.E., FTl.Stfuct.E. *




    The Chief Executive,                                                                                      X Augpsfc 1985
    Department of Administration,
    County Hall,
    Barnsley,
    South Yorks.
    S70 2TN.


                                                                                                                   "'\.V
                                                                                                                       y'V
    For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan
                          ■:         ■
    Dear Mr.
                                         Safety of Sportsground Act, 1975
                                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
           Thank you very much for your letter of 30 July giving the
    outcome of the Working Party meeting on 29 July.   We note
    the general cbnment that the calculations have to be approved
t
    by the Building Surveyors Department.                                          We believe that all ttie
    calculations which are likely to be required have been seist for
    checking and comment.
            With regard to your detailed observations our response
    is as follows;jif-                                          -'
    (all-:; We are rldt sure of the location on the West terrace of
    the             ;ra security gate. There is already a gate in
    the 2m wide gap^formed by the new radial fence for use by the
    police. This same gate will still be available for the spectators
    in emergency as”there are gates into the 2m gap from the terrace
    which will be under the control of the police.                                                         This point may
    perhaps be clarified during the Working Party's visit on 7 August.

    (b)           The foundations~for this fence are in fact already aligned in
                                     An Unlimited C o ^ ^ ^ i^ ^ is t e r e d in England -    No. 1833144     -    ’     n f   f      E
                                                                                                                                          V .
,ASTW OOD £r PARTNERS




 the way you suggest.

  (c) and (d)
               We are a little surprised by the suggestion that a
 single block thickness is not sufficient for the cubicle
 waJtls. The inside of a toilet cubicle is not a very
 vtjOtoerable area and the walls are braced by the door frame.
 Studding is not at all suitable in terms of strength or
 durability/ and w u l d probably invite vandalism.

  t& f  The refreshment area is under the most westerly
 staircase up to the north west corner terrace. There will
 He an opportunity to inspect on 7 August.

               The handrail is to be at a height of 1250mm (4*1")
 absve the horizontal step* measured at the face of the vertical


 ■        ■   :'©foe-stepping of the face of the wall is achieved by 45°
 cdfaatfers which will not form good footholds.

  ikf         Mr. Chester says that the club will certainly not
 abject to the provision of another gate at this point, and
         precise location can be discussed on 7 August.

 H #    As with point (a) r we are not sure what is intended,
 ara#the matter can be discussed on 7 August.

  fttlf   Your comment regarding stewarding will no doubt, be
 tadfcen care of by Mr. Chester.


               It will be much easier for your Working Party to
 appreciate what is intended when they see the works under
 constructiortlll. There will also be an opportunity to see
 the metal decking of the South stand.


                                   Yours sincerely,




 etc.          Mr. R.H. Chester,
                               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

         N o te o f a m e e tin g h e ld a t th e H ills b o r o u g h S ta d iu m , S h e f f i e l d on
                                        7 th A u g u s t, 1985

PRESENT:        R e p re s e n tin g th e S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a ll C lub p ic

                D r . W. Eastwood (M e s s rs . Eastwood & P a r tn e r s )
                P . Hough (D e p u ty S e c r e ta r y )

                R e p re s e n tin g th e O f f i c e r W orking P a r ty ( S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t )

                N.   A tk in s o n ( C i t y o f S h e f f ie l d M e t r o p o lita n D i s t r i c t C o u n c il)
                C.   C a lv e r t (S o u th Y o r k s h ir e P o lic e )
                B.   C o p ley (S o u th Y o r k s h ir e County F i r e S e r v ic e )
                B.   M ole (S o u th Y o r k s h ir e P o lic e )
                D.   S h e r i f f ( C i t y o f S h e f f i e l d M e tr o p o lita n D i s t r i c t C o u n c il)
                D.   I . Vaughan (S o u th Y o r k s h ir e County C o u n c il)
                F.   W aterhouse (S o u th Y o r k s h ir e County F x r e S e r v ic e )

1.        Purpose o f M e e tin g .
                                                ■V



The purpose o f th e m e e tin g was to c a r r y o u t th e ^summer" in s p e c tio n o f th e
Stadium w i t h p a r t i c u l a r r e f e r e n c e t o th e Lepping^s Lan e end improvements and
th e m e ta l s h e e tin g o f th e u p p er s e a te d areaadF'.C fie S outh S ta n d .

2.        Ground I n s p e c t i o n . .

A.       L e p p in g s L a n e End

The p r o g r e s s o £ . t h e w orks t o s e g re g a te v i s i t i n g , s u p p o rte rs b e h in d and on th e
West T e r r a c e and Stand w ere in s p e c te d w it h p a r t i c u l a r r e fe r e n c e t o the
p o in ts r a is e d a t th e O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y 's meetings h e ld an 2 9 th J u ly ,
(fo rw a rd e d to ; H e 9? r s . Eastwood and P a rtn e r® % th e C h ie f E x e c u tiv e ’ s l e t t e r
o f 3 0 th J u ly )           M e s s rs . Eastwood & P a rtn e r s r e p l y o f 1 s t A u g u s t.
              ..... igi _... .
Messrs. Eastwood^* Partners had c o n firm e d t h a t a l l th e c a lc u la t io n s w hich
w e re l i k e l y
            to             had now been s e n t to                                         for
ch ec k iq g               e n t.      i.r.'

                                    B u ild in g A u t h o r it y p o in te d o u t w h a t th e y c o n s id e re d
to be th e               s tandard o f w orkm anship i n th e c o n s t r u c t io n o f th e new
                            g | b e i n g , b u i l t behin d :;th e                        p o s it io n o f th e
                            a ccess g a t e and. th e s te p p in g o f th e fa c e o f th e w a l l b y
                                                fo o th o ld s w ere a c c e p ta b le .
                                                                                                            „ t.t
                               th e new h a n d r a i l by T u r n s t i l e 23 had a c t u a l l y bee
aligned sot:                           th e e x i t w id th betw een th e o u t e r (ir fv e r)^ w a l l * , f .
                                      • t h e in d i c a t i o n on th e p la n s u t a i t t e d ) . , .
                                           y 1 ^ '1 ■ -           «s - -,«y ^     - * .
                                Le block thickness of the internal walls of the cubicles
i n th e new m ale and fe m a le t o i l e t f a c i l i t i e s a t th e r e a r o f t h e s ta n d ,
M e s s rs . Eastwood and P a r t n e r s c o n s id e re d t h a t th e in s id e o f a t o i l e t c u b ic le
was n o t a v e r y v u ln e r a b le a r e a , and p o in te d o u t t t ia t th e w a lls w ere braced
by b o th th e o u te r w a lls and th e door fra m e s . The B u ild in g A u t h o r it y no ted
th e assurances g iv e n by D r . E astw ood, b u t exp ressed c o n c e rn t h a t th e
d iv id in g w a lls in th e new t o i l e t f a c i l i t i e s e v id e n t ly d id n o t have any
fo u n d a tio n s , a p p a r e n tly h a v in g been b u i l t s t r a i g h t o n to th e e x is t in g
c o n c re te s la b s .    I t was no ted t h a t th e r e w ere some 9 in c h t h i c k b r i c k w a lls
in the M ale T o i l e t s , i t b e in g c o n sid e re d t h a t any h o o lig a n is m o r v a n d a lis m
would be more l i k e l y to occur th e r e than in th e Female T o i l e t s .

The Club p o in te d o u t t h a t th e new t o i l e t f a c i l i t i e s would n o t be c o m p le te ly
fin is h e d by th e f i r s t m atch o f th e season (on 1 7 th A ugust) b u t th a t
tem porary f a c i l i t i e s w ould be a v a ila b le and th a t no b u ild in g m a t e r i a l would
be l e f t on s i t e .

The p o s itio n o f th e new re fre s h m e n t a re a under th e most w e s t e r ly s ta ir c a s e
up to th e N o rth -W e s t c o rn e r te r r a c e was n o te d . T h is a g a in had been b u i l t
s t r a ig h t o nto th e e x i s t i n g c o n c re te s la b s .

On the T e rra c e i t s e l f , i t was no ted th a t th e r e was an e x i s t i n g g a te in th e
new 2 m. w ide gap form ed by th e new               r a d i a l fe n c e f o r use by th e P o lic e .
T h is g a te would s t i l l be a v a i l a b le  f o r th e use o f s p e c ta to r s     in       an
emergency as th e g a te s a t th e to p o f the T e rra c e under th e c o n t r o l o f th e
P o lic e would e n a b le s p e c ta to r s to be d ir e c t e d down th e 2 m. w ide gap.
However, i t was ag reed t h a t s te p s o r a lo n g e r g a te would be r e q u ir e d .             It
was a ls o agreed t h a t a new g a te would be r e q u ire d from th e new South
C e n tr a l T e rr a c e P en.

As re g a rd s th e u p p e r s e a te d stand a r e a , M e s s rs . Eastwood and P a r tn e r s had
s en t by l e t t e r d a te d 2nd A ugust p la n s o f th e new fe n c e s and b a r r ie r s in
b oth th e Stand and a t th e Access l e v e l .

IT WAS AGREED:-            -

(a )       t h a t th e c o n d it io n    o f th e i n t e r n a l w a lls i n th e new m a le and    fe m a le
t o i l e t f a c i l i t i e s a t th e   r e a r o f th e Stand should be m o n ito re d ;

(b )  t h a t th e e x i s t in g g a te i n th e p it c h p e r im e te r fe n c e should e i t h e r be
extended o r have s te p s to p ro v id e e a s ie r access fro m th e new 2 m. w id e gap
formed by th e new r a d i a l fe n c e ;

(c )   t h a t a new g a te i n th e p i t c h p e rim e te r fe n c e should be             p ro v id e d   from
th e new South C e n t r a l T e r r a c e Pen;

(d )    t h a t th e a d v e r t i s in g h o a rd in g s a t th e f r o n t o f th e u p p e r seated stand
a re a should be s e c u r e ly f i x e d to th e c o n c re te w a l l ;

(e )   t h a t th e s p a l l i n g o f th e c o n c re te o f th e w a ll a t th e f r o n t o f the
u pper s ea te d s t a ^ a r e a should r e c e iv e a t t e n t i o n as a m a t t e r o f m a in ten a n c e;

(f)   t h a t th e c o r r o s io n o f th e s t e e l columns a t           th e r e a r o f th e Stand
should r e c e iv e a t t e n t i o n on a m ain ten a n c e b a s is .

B.       South Stanfe^                           '

M essrs. Eastwood'Isi P a r tn e r s r e p o r te d th a t th e c o n d itio n o f th e u p p e r
c o n c re te o u te r p o r t i o n o f th e e x t e r i o r w a l l o f th e Stand had been ?
in v e s tig a te d and was c o n s id e re d to be s a t i s f a c t o r y .

I t was n o te d th ia t th e m e ta l s h e e tin g o f th e wooden u p p e r p o r t io n o f the
Stand had been l a r g e l y c o m p le te d , and th e s p ra y in g o f th e non—s l i p
s u rfa c e was to commence v e r y s h o r t ly (and c e r t a i n l y be com pleted by th e
s t a r t o f th e s e a s o n ).
IT WAS AGREED t h a t th e m e ta l s h e e tin g o f th e wooden u pper p o r t i o n o f th e
Stand should l a r g e l y overcome th e f la m m a b ilit y problem s in h e r e n t i n such
tim b e r s t r u c t u r e s , and th e C lub s ta te d t h a t th e y would ensure t h a t th e
wooden in te r m e d ia te steps w ere s e c u r e ly re p la c e d upon c o m p le tio n o f th e
la y in g o f th e m e ta l s h e e tin g .

C.      Spion Kop                                                                        ?%: ■

M e s s rs . Eastwood & P a rtn e rs r e c a lle d t h a t o u t l i n e d e t a i l s o E J S m Club** s
p ro p o s a l to c o v e r th e Spion Kop had been s e n t f o r th e in fo r m a tio n o f th e
O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y by l e t t e r d a te d 22nd J u ly .    As p a r t o f 't h a t scheme,
th e b r id g e p o r t io n o f th e Kop would be rem oved. I t s p r e s e n t c o n d it io n
rem ained a c c e p ta b le w it h c o n tin u in g m a in te n a n c e .

I n v ie w o f e x p e rie n c e s l a s t season, th e C lu b were re q u e s te d to. p r o v id e an
a d d it io n a l g a te i n th e p i t c h p e r im e te r fe n c e in th e f r o n t c o m e r n e a r e s t
to th e South S tand to overcome th e l a t e r a l c ru s h in g h a za rd w h ic h c o u ld
occur when la r g e crowds were p r e s e n t.

IT WAS AGREED t h a t th e Club would p ro v id e a new g a te in th e p i t c h p e r im e te r
fe n c e i n th e f r o n t c o m e r n e a r e s t to th e South Stand w it h
arrangem ent to a s s is t access and e g re s s .

D.     N o rth Stand

The te m p o ra ry s to ra g e f a c i l i t i e s c re a te d by th e e r e c tio n o f a t im b e r w a l l
( i n f r o n t o f th e L a d ie s 1 Changing F a c i l i t i e s i n th e S p o rts          iw ere
in s p e c te d .    ^

I T WAS AGREED t h a t so long as l i g h t c o m b u s tib le s (such as p a i n t ) w ere n o t
s to re d in t h i s a r e a , i t s use c o n tin u e d to be a c c e p ta b le on a te m p o ra ry
b a s is .

E.     C lo sed C i r c u i t T e le v is io n F a c i l i t i e s

The advantages f o r g e n e ra l crowd c o n tr o l and s e c u r it y (b o th i n and o u t s id e
th e S tadium ) w hich would be g iv e n by th e r e c e n t ly i n s t a l l e d C lo s ed
T e le v is io n System were e x p la in e d to th e O f f i c e r W orking P ar£y»

IT WAS AGREED

(a )     t h a t a 2^ k g . C02 F i r e E x tin g u is h e r should be i n s t a l l e d     i n 1>ofth th e
P o lic e C o n tro l Box and th e D is c Jockey Box;

(b )      t h a t lo o s e e x t e r n a l w ire s on th e o u ts id e o f th e Boxes should “be made
s e c u re .
                                                                                                                               59
                                  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1 9 75
      Note of a Meet i n g of th e O f f i c e r W orking Party ( S h e f f i e l d District) held at
      th e P o lic e S p o rts and S o c ia l C lu b , N ia g a ra          S h e f f i e l d , on   1 3 th November, 1985


      PRESENT:         N.    A tk in s o n ( C i t y o f S h e f f ie ld M e t r o p o lit a n D i s t r i c t C o u n c il)
                      C.    C a lv e r t (S outh Y o rk s h ire P o lic e )
                      R.    Greenwood (S o u th Y o rk s h ire P o lic e )
                      R.    Grimshaw (S outh Y o rk s h ire County F i r e S e r v ic e )
                      A.    McKenzie ( C i t y o f S h e f f i e l d M e t r o p o lit a n D i s t r i c t C o u n c il)
                      G.    S ta n le y (S o u th Y o rk s h ire P o lic e )
                      D.    I . Vaughan (S o u th Y o rk s h ire County C o u n c il)
                      R.    Woodhouse (S outh Y o rk s h ire County F i r e S e r v ic e )


      1.      Purpose o f M e e tin g

     The purpose o f th e m e e tin g was t o c o n s id e r th e response to be g iv e n to th e
     p ro p o s a ls o u t l i n e d i n th e l e t t e r d ated 2 5 th O c to b e r, 1985 and p la n s re c e iv e d
     from M essrs. Eastwood & P a r tn e r s r e l a t i n g to f a c i l i t i e s f o r th e d is a b le d , an



f
     in c re a s e d c a p a c it y f o r th e S pion Kop and consequent a d d i t i o n a l e x i t r o u te s .
     O u tlin e d e t a i l s o f th e ro o f to be e re c te d o v e r th e S pion Kop had a ls o been
     p ro v id e d .                                             ■

      2.      D is a b le d F a c i l i t i e s

     The O f f i c e r W o rkin g P a r ty e xp ressed r e s e r v a tio n s on b o th o f the suggestions
     proposed b y M e s s rs . Eastw ood & P a rtn e rs f o r th e d is a b le d .              I f the d is a b le d
     c o n tin u e d to be accommodated i n f r o n t o f th e N o rth S ta n d , th e y would s t i l l
     be i n the " f i r i n g l i n e " o f nrLs*'-aimed'shots and any c le a r s h e e tin g o v e r th e
     top o f th e a re a th e y o c c u p ie d c o u ld c o n s t it u t e an u n a c c e p ta b le h a za rd to
     persons who m ig h t v a c a te th e U b rth S tand in an em ergency s i t u a t i o n by
     c lim b in g o v e r th e f r o n t w a it o f th e s ta n d o n to th e p i t c h p e r im e te r .       I t was
     accep ted t h a t th e means o f escape d iif n o t p r o v id e f o r t h i s to be done, b u t
     i t had to be re c o g n is e d t h a t i t * p r a c t ic e t h i s was a r e a l p o s s i b i l i t y .    The
     s t r u c t u r a l s tre n g th o f such a sfcim cture w ould a ls o be som ethin g o f a problem .
     The o th e r s u g g e s tio n o f a c c o m m o d a tin g th e d is a b le d i n f r o n t o f th e p e rim e te r
     fe n c e a lo n g th e f r o n t o f th e Sgion Kop (n e a r e s t to th e N o rth S tan d ) was a ls o
     u n a c c e p ta b le f o r th e reasons s ta te d by M e s s r s . Eastwood & P a r tn e r s .

     ^The s u g g e s tio n o f th e P o lic e r e p r e s e n ta tiv e s was t h a t th e f r o n t a re a o f the
v   I lo w e r Spion Kop (n e a r e s t to th e H b rth S ta n d ) sh o u ld have th e t e r r a c in g le v e l le d
      to p r o v id e , s a y , a two—t i e r l e v e l la n d in g on w h ich to accommodate th e d is a b le d ,
      w it h a s u b s t a n t ia l fe n c e a t th e r e a r . The e x is tin g ^ p it c h p e r im e te r fence in
      f r o n t o f t h i s a re a c o u ld be removed,, and th e d is a b le d w ould c o n tin u e to g a in
      access from th e ramp betw een th e Spion Kop and th e N o rth Stand as a t p re s e n t.
      T h is would a ls o e n a b le f r e e access                 th e d is a b le d to th e proposed d is a b le d
      t o i l e t s u nd er th e r e b u i l t t e r r a c i n g o f th e S p io n Kop.

     The c u r r e n t l e g i s l a t i o n r e l a t i n g to th e d is a b le d was a ls o d is c u s s e d .

      I T WAS AGREED t h a t th e p ro p o s a ls f o r th e d is a b le d * as now
       o u t lin e d by th e P o lic e r e p r e s e n t a t iv e s * s h o u l d be s u p p o rte d and
     - tr a n s m itte d to M essrs .' Eastwood & P a rtn e rs as th e v ie w s o f
      th e O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y , s u b je c t t o th e r e b e in g no o b s tr u c tio n o f e x i t
      ro u te s and f lo w s .

      3.      E n la rg e d S pion Kop                                                         *

     The Fire Service and the Building A u t h o r it y a g re e d t h a t calculations showed
that the enlareed Sri on Kcip would provide for an increase* of some 5,000
spectators on the present capacity of 16,850, and that the number of exit
widths required to achieve evacuation was 46. The proposals to increase the
tunnel exit on the north side of the Kop to 8 clear units and to provide a
complete new six unit staircase on the south side were regarded as acceptable.
As when the original calculations had been made, the units of exit width
included the emergency gates in the pitch perimeter fence, but it was cons­
idered that landings in front of these gales should be constructed (as has
been done at Bramall Lane).

IT WAS AGREED that, subject to the following points, the proposals from the
enlarged Spion Kop submitted by Messrs. Eastwood & Partners were generally
acceptable:-

     (a)    adequate headroom being provided between the new roof and the
            upper rear and the new south side exit routes;
     (b)    to barriers being provided adjacent to the refurbished gents*
            toilets and the new ladies' toilets in the new six unit staircase
            on the south side;
     (c)    to landings being constructed in front of the existing emergency
            gates in the pitch perimeter fence;
     (d)    to confirmation of the number of new turnstiles to be provided on
            the south side and on the Penis tone Road side ;
     (e)   until acceptable alternatives are available, the new exit gates to
            be fitted with a turn-bar arrangement under the control of
            stewards.

4.   Roofing of Spion Kop

Whilst it was accepted that only an outline of the roofing proposals hadbeen
supplied to date, the Building Authority pointed out that the plans showed
that the gables were not lined.

IT WAS AGREED that this should be pointed out to Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,,
as well as the fact that should any of the proposed works on enlarging or
roofing the Spion Kop take place other than in the close season, it will be
a requirement that the areas concerned will have to be secured to prevent
unauthorised access.

5.   Crowd Flow at the Leppings     Lane End of the Stadium

The Police reported on the continuing problems caused by the merging of
spectators from all parts of the Stadium at the Leppings Lane end.

It was difficult to see how this could be overcome, as the physical restraints
to achieve this could conceivably be more of a danger than allowing the present
position to continue.

6 .___ Duties of Stewards Booklet

IT WAS AGREED that the draft of a Booklet prepared by the South Yorkshire Police
outlining the duties of safety stewards was acceptable and should be distributed
to designated grounds for the information and guidance of stewards employed at
such grounds. Factors peculiar to particular grounds could, of course, be
added if considered appropriate.

7 .___ Spot Checks at Designated Grounds

The Fire Service reported on the success of the recent spot check carried out
at the O a k w e 11 Ground cf the Bar n s Jey Football (Huh i n .conjunction with the
Police and the Building Authority, and reported that the Divisions of the
Brigade were being asked to carry out similar spot checks at designated
grounds in their areas.

IT WAS AGREED that such spot checks were essential        to ensure that the required
standards were being maintained by the Clubs.
                             DV / M / 3 8 3 /5            IvE/JAS/KIi/6648                     th NovarJber        1925

                                                          D . Vaughan                               422


Dear S i r s ,

S a f e t y o f S ports Grounds A c t, 1975
S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a ll Club p ic

The O f f i c e r W orking P a r ty ( S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t ) met y e s te r d a y a fte rn o o n to
c o n s id e r th e p ro p o s a ls c o n ta in e d i n y o u r l e t t e r dated 2 5 th O c te b a r, 1985
and accom panying p la n s .

1.        D is a b le d F a c i l i t i e s

The O f f i c e r W orking P a rty e xp re s se d r e s e r v a t io n s on b o th o f y o u r suggestio ns
f o r th e d is a b le d .     I f th e d is a b le d c o n tin u e t o be accossodated i n f r o n t o f
th e N o r th S ta n d , they w i l l s t i l l be i n th e ’' f i r i n g l i n e ” o f ta is-aiia ed shots
and any c le a r s h e e tin g o v e r th e to p o f th e a re a th e y occupy c o u ld c o n s t it u t e
an u n a c c e p ta b le hazard to persons who m ig h t v a c a te th e N o rth Stand in an
emergency s it u a t i o n by c lim b in g o v e r th e f r o n t w a ll o f th e stand onto th e
p i t c h p e r im e t e r . I t is a c c e p te d t h a t th e means o f escape does n o t p ro v id e
f o r t h i s to be done, but i t has to k e re c o g n is e d t h a t in p r a c t ic e t h i s i s a
r e a l p o s s ib ility .     The s t r u c t u r a l s tr e n g th o f such a s t r u c t u r e c o u ld a ls o be
so m ethin g o f a problem . The o th e r s u g g e s tio n o f accommodating/"the' d is a b le d
in f r o n t o f th e p e rim e te r fe n c e a lo n g th e f r o n t o f th e Spion Kop (n e a re s t to
th e N o rth Stand) i s a ls o u n a c c e p ta b le f o r th e reasons s ta te d by you.

The s u g g e s tio n o f th e P o lic e r e p r e s e n t a t iv e s was t h a t th e f r o n t area o f th e
lo w e r S pion Kop (n e a re s t t o th e N o rth S ta n d ) should have the t e m c i n g
l e v e l l e d t o p ro v id e , s a y , a t w o l t i e r l e v e l la n d in g on w hich t o accocscodate
th e d is a b le d , w ith a s u b s t a n t ia l fe n c e a t th e r e a r . The e x i s t i n g p itc h
p e r im e te r fe n c e i n f r o n t o f tfcss a r e a c o u ld be rem oved, and the d is a b le d
c o u ld c o n tin u e to g a in access fro m th e ramp between th e Spion Kop and th e
N o rth S tand as a t p r e s e n t. T h is w ould a ls o e n a b le f r e e access by th e
d is a b le d to th e proposed d is a b le d t o i l e t s under th e r e b u i l t t e r r a c in g o f
th e S p io n Kop.


                                                                                          /C ontd ,     . .




M e s s rs . Eastwood & P a r tn e r s ,
C o n s u ltin g E n g in e e rs ,
S t . Kndrews House,
23 K i n g f i e l d Road,
5'nef t i o I-;i
                                                  - 2 -                                  14 November 1985


The c u r r e n t l e g i s l a t i o n r e l a t i n g t o th e d is a b le d was a is o d is c u s s e d .
In th e c irc u m s ta n c e s , th e O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y c o n s id e r t h a t th e
p ro p o s a ls f o r th e d is a b le d suggested by th e P o lic e should be supported
s u b je c t, o f c o u rs e , to th e r e b e in g no o b s tr u c tio n o f e x i t ro u te s and
flo w s .

2.      E n la rg e d Spion Kop

The O f f ic e r W orking P a r t y agreed w it h yonr c a lc u la t io n s and p ro p o s a ls to
in c re a s e th e tu n n e l e x i t on th e n o r th s id e o f th e S pion Kop to 8 c le a r
u n it s and to p ro v id e a c o m p lete new 6 u n i t s t a ir c a s e on th e South s id e .

A c c o rd in g ly , th e O f f i c e r W orking P a r t y a g re e t h a t , s u b je c t to th e fo llo w in g
p o in t s , th e p ro p o s a ls f o r hhe e n la rg e d Spion Kop a r e g e n e r a lly a c c e p t a b le : -

(a )     adeq u ate headroom b e in g p ro v id e d between th e new r o o f and th e upper
         r e a r and th e new s o u th s id e e x i t r o u te s ;
(b )    to b a r r ie r s b e in g p ro v id e d a d ja c e n t to th e r e fu r b is h e d g e n ts '
         t o i l e t s and th e nev l a d i e s ' t o i l e t s in th e new s ix u n i t s ta ir c a s e
         on th e south s id e ;
(c )    to la n d in g s b e in g c o n s tru c te d i n f r o n t o f th e e x i s t i n g emergency
         gates in th e p it c h p e r im e te r fe n c e (as a t B ra m a ll L a n e );
(d )     to c o n firm a tio n o f th e number o f new t u r n s t i l e s          to be p ro v id e d on
         th e south s id e and on th e P e n is to n e Road s id e ;
(e )     u n t i l a c c e p ta b le a lt e r n a t i v e s a r e a v a i l a b l e , th e new e x ift g a te s to
         be f i t t e d w ith a t u m - b a r arrangem en t under th e c o n tr o l o f s te w a rd s .

3.      R o o fin g o f Spion Kop

I t was accep ted th a t o n ly an o u t l i n e o f th e r o o f in g p ro p o s a ls has been s u p p lie d
to d a te , b u t th e B u ild in g A u t h o r it y p o in t o u t t h a t i t appears th a t th e g ab les
a re n o t to be lin e d and thus i t w ould be c o m p a ra tiv e ly easy f o r them to be
c lim b e d .

A ls o the P o lic e asked me to s tr e s s th a t should any o f the proposed works on
e n la r g in g o r r o o fin g th e Spion Kop ta k e p la c e o th e r th a n i n th e c& ise season,
i t w i l l be a re q u ire m e n t t h a t th e a re a s concerned w i l l have to be secured to
p re v e n t u n a u th o ris e d a c c e s s .

4.       Crowd Flow a t th e Leppings Lane end o f th e Stadium

The P o lic e re p o rte d on th e c o n tin u in g problem s, caused by th e m erging o f s p e c ta to rs
from a l l p a r ts o f th e Stadium a t th e Leppings Sane end.

I t was agreed th a t i t was d i f f i c u l t to see how t h i s could be overcom e, as th e
p h y s ic a l r e s t r a i n t s to ac&Aeve t h is c o u ld c o n c e iv a b ly be more o f a danger th an
a llo w in g th e p re s e n t p o s it io n to c o n tin u e , b u t I was re q u e s te d to r e g i s t e r th e
p o in t.

                                                           Yours f a i t h f u l l y ,



                                                           County Solicitor.
                                                                          ;„
                                                                   •-     -.;. .
                                                                        ■y':- .

                                                                                                  ei

                                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

                          Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield
                                           on 22nd January, 1986

    PRESENT:                Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football
         .   .........

                            Dr. W. Eastwood (Messrs.
                               Ward (Groundsman
                                   .
                              ^presenting the Officer Working Party

                            S. Allcock (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)? JeSr^V*
                            N. Atkinson (Sheffield City Council - Building Surveyors* Division)
                            Mrs. L. Bashforth (Sheffield City Council - .Legal .& Admin. Dept)
                            A. Campbell (South Yorkshire County Fire
                            J. Derricott (Sheffield City Council - -Legal & Admin T)ept.)
                            R. Greenwood (South Yorkshire Police) t ^                  -


f                           D. Rosevere (South Yorkshire Police) - * ' . _* ~       ..
                            T. Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)     -
                            G. Swann (Sheffield City Council - Building Surveyors* Division)
                            G. Sykes (South Yorkshire JPolice)     _ .. “ ’
                            D. ■'1; Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
                            R. Woodhouse (South Yorkshire County Fire

    1.                   Welcome and Introduction

    Mr. Vaughan pointed out that the Local Government Act, 1985, would abolish
    the South Yorkshire County Council (and the other Metropolitan County Councils)
    on 31st March, 1986. From 1st April, 1986, the Certificating Authority under
    the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, would be the appropriate District
    Council. In the case of the Hillsborough Stadium this would naturally be
    the Sheffield City Council. For this reason, it had been suggested to the
    City Council that appropriate representatives in addition to the Building
    Surveyors* Division might find it useful to be present at the meeting, and
    Mrs. L. Bashforth and Mr. J. Derricott were welcomed and introduced to the
    remainder of the representatives present.

    Mr. Vaughan took the opportunity of expressing appreciation and thanks to
    the representatives for the help and assistance which they had given to him
    in his role as Co-ordinator of the Officer Working Parties since 1978. There
    had obviously been o c c a s i o n s when differences of opinion and interpretation
    had occurred but, in the main, these had been resolved bothi^amicably and
    constructively.

    For the Club, Dr. Eastwood thanked Mr. Vaughan'for' his ;ser^^B^and^n.shed
    him well for the future. Other representatives endorsed, firi!^astwoqd*s
    remarks.                                  . ‘ *• V               ^       •

    2.                   Purpose of Meeting

    The purpose of the meeting was two-fold; firstly to discuss the further
    details of development proposals at the stadium forwarded with the letter
    dated 23rd December, 1985, from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners and, secondly,
    to carry out the "winter" inspection of the Stadium.

    A.                   Development Proposals for the Spion Kop

    The further details "were%ini^dditipni;tO: the comments set out in the letter
    dated 29.th November,,: 1985, on the observations made following the Officer
    Working Party meeting h e l d o n        ember.
      S.                                                                      S      ®            S       K   '■' -
»     r ~»                 r      ~         .        v
                                                                    . .- .
            !.■■■■■?■■ .,; : .,-. 'V: v - ':t ■ .'■
       ■: : .: -                                    ;
        :7 , ? • • -:- ■■*>--V
           .                                    ='' * ,;i'v:*   +                                                         ■V '

     :vv:V=          ...                              ■''
               (i)           Sheeting of Outer Face

                     Dr. Eastwood reported that the sheeting of the enlarged Spion Kop at
                     the rear and sides would result in the structure W i n g virtually
                     sealed. In reply to queries from the CounQr Fire 'Service, he confirmed
                     that no storage would be allowed under the structure and that checks
                     for any accumulations of rubbish would be — -*— *      o n e regular basis.
                                                                                                               i
                                  Climbing of the -Inner Steel
                                                     .
                               Regards the possiblity of unruly spec                                                                                                steel
                               sme of the new- structure, Dr. Eastwood                                                                      bottom boom
                                    was now to be omitted. The resultant                                                                    J O feet
                                    take it very difficult for                                                                            structure.
                                      . ,       ..

                                  Mew Step                          Barrier
                                                                              -.   .... .. .. .

                                        6648/56 was circulated                                                                               related to the
                                step and barrier layout on the Spion                                                                  ■■Eastwood reported
                               particular on the discussions which he had                                                                the Planning        '• -v
                                 rity as to the height of an                                                                             s e c o n d rail to  1 j
                                barriers .where the drop^to the gangway below                                                            be over one metre
                               places. He sought the Officer Working                                                                         and the merits
                               the options were considered.
                                            '

                     IT WAS AGREED that, in the view of                                                                                        the best
                     option for a second rail in the areas                                                                           a lew toe rail at
                       height of s    200
                                                                                                      ;

                     Facilities for the Disabled                                                                                     ■;    "-V--           ■
                   ■:--                                                                                                                                            ■'4
    To illustrate that the figures originally quoted to provide facilities for the
    disabled at the foot of the Spion Kop (nearest to the North Stand) were not
    unrealistic, Dr. Eastwood reported on the breakdown of the tender figures
    (opened on Monday) for the enlarged, roofed Spion T£oj>. H e still considered
    that any such proposals would involve the loss o f u p to^l,000.of theextra
    5,000 spectator places which would be provided by the enlarged %jsion Kop*
    Other areas of the Stadium had also been considered and investigated, but
    none could provide as large a flat, easily accessible area as that in front of    \
    the North Stand, which had been successfully used for so long without any major - s
    problems. Up to 80 disabled persons, plus attendants, used the area. The only
    major drawback he saw was that when there was a strong southerly wind, rain
    could be blown onto the disabled, despite the cantilever roof<of the North
    Stand extending virtually to the pitch. For this reason, the Club were willing
    to roof an area from approximately the letter "0" on the results board to the
    end of the Stand (nearest to the Spion Kop) with a substantial roof, including
    armoured glass where there might be a visibility problem, .^provided that this
    was supported by the Officer Working Party.

           ‘accepting much of what Dr. Eastwood said, the Officer Working Party
    (and the Police representatives in particular) still expressed some concern as
    to whether making semi-permanent facilities for the disabled in lEront of the
    North Stand was the appropriate and correct thing to do.

    The Building Authority confirmed that, after further investigations, it was
    considered that the disabled facilities requirements of the Building
    Regulations 1985 did not appear to strictly apply to the roofing of the
    enlarged Spion Kop.

                                                                                                  '             '     "          ■                 '   '       '         '
                                                 ,   , •   ,       '■                ■ rV y   .

:.i.-v■■■■■'                                                                    ;; /.y yX yi.^yy1-
                  • ■ ..
IT WAS         that, m the first instance, Dr. Eastwood would prepare sketch
plans of Jdhe suggested-....roofed disabled facilities in front of the North Stand
for consillerxtion by the Officer Working Party.

C.                Ground Inspection
                  *05   West Terrace and Stand

The Police representatives confirmed that the revised                                                              ;ation arrangements
to tbe rear of the Stand worked well on by far the maj                                                               f occasions.
•    * J.  ; T     "■  -                 -                                                                                              -
                              the segregation rail                                                                r seated area
                      poved within .certain limits if                                                          lice considered
                        a useful purpose.
                                                                                                     :
                                                                                                                           fi.y ' ; -
                                                               .
                          advertisement hoardings at                                                             t of the upper
seated stand area Clearest to the North-West Terrace)                                                          d also be securely
fixed to concrete wall;
                                                                                              ■ v;                    "' .u '■-■
m                                            ter .areas of spalled concrete at the front of the upper
                                          area should received'attention as matters of maintenance.
                   •-                        ”                                  *      -                                   '

                   |iO                 North-West Terrace
     J.I.V ■ \y , y y ,, . .. _ y / ' : ■■ ; y                          -V;-.                            ^   ~ _               '

IT WAS AGBEED that ttie advertisement hoardings erected on the upper North-
West Terrace should be securely fixed.

                   (iii) Uorth Stand

The area for Che suggested covered disabled facilities was inspected.

As previously:mentioned by Dr. Eastwood, the possibility of providing an
increased width access to the pitch area (between the North Stand and the
Spion Kop) for possible use by emergency vehicles, as well as far maintenance
by the Club was discussed. The facility could be incorporated into the
enlarged Spion ^op proposals relatively easily.

It WAS AGREED that, whilst the County Fire Service felt that such a facility
was not essential for their purposes, it could be useful for use by emergency
vehicles in certain situations and generally should be supported.

                    (iv)               Spion Kop

Dr. Eastwood indicated the extent of the work to construct the enlarged,
roofed, Spion “Kop, and confirmed that steps would be taken to prevent
unauthorised access to areas where work might be in progress during the
course of the season.

It was noted that the additional gate in the pitch perimeter fence in the
front corner nearest to the South Stand, with a stepped arrangement to
assist access and egress, had been provided.

                    (v)                 South Stand

It was noted that the metal sheeting of the wooden floor of the upper
portion of the Stand (with sprayed non-slip surface) had proved to be of an
acceptable appearance in use, and generally appeared to provide a compromise
solution to the flaxnmability problems inherent in such wooden structures.

IT WAS AGREED that its condition would continue to be monitored.
                                  mmmm                     35$$t2sfc>5                                      '
                                                                                                            •': \'V
     m am                                                                                                                                   C kJ
                                                          mmm
                                                                                                                      . BOWMAKER HOUSE ^
E A S T W O O D" £r ’P A R T N E R S                                                                                  23 KINGFIELD ROAD
               C o n s u ltin g    E n g in e e rs                                                                    SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
                                                                                                                      Tel.: (0742) 583871
W. Eastwood                   B .E n g . P h .D . F.Eng., F.I.C.E.
                              F .l^ tr u c tL . F .G .S , M.Cons.E.

                              B .E n g . Ph.D ., C,Eng., F.I.C.E.
A. A. Wood                    F .I.S truct.E . M .I.W .E .S .. M.Cons.E.

A. G. Burdett                 G.M ., B .Sc.(Eng), C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.

R. C. A. Eastwood             B .Sc„ C .E n g , M.I.C.E™ M .I.Sliuct.E.

Associates:
Geoffrey Spir                 C .E n t-, M .I.C.E., M.I.M»ch.E.

C. S. Greaves                 B .E n t., C .E n i., M .I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E .
                                                                                                   Our R e f:            WE/KH/2419
A. J . Clough                 B .A ., C .E n f., M .C.I.B.S., M.I.Mech.E.

J . A. Strange                C .E n f., M .I.Struct.E.                                            Your R e f:

Coflsu/toAt:

A. L. Percy                   M .Tech.(H on.), B.Sc., C .Eng.v F.I.C.E.,
                              F.I.Scruct.E., F.LMun.E., M .R.T.P.l.




                                                                                                                         11 September 19 8(



                                        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.

                INSPECTION JULY/AUGUST 1980 OF HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM



                Items of maintenance which it is suggested should be carried
   out in the reasonably near future.


   1.          Some of the fencing posts at the top of the Kop need painting
                near the base.


   2.          The fencing at the rear side of the gangway over the lower
                 exit from the Kop is becoming very corroded.


    3.          The concrete posts forming part of the retaining wall at the
                 foot of the bank at the rear of the Kop                                                        (behind Penistone
                 Road turnstiles)                                are showing signs of spalling due to
                  corrosion of the reinforcement.                                                The cracks should be repaired
                 with either liquid epoxy or by epoxy mortar.


    4.          The Denso tape wrapping on some of the starter bars at the
                  back of the North West corner is coming loose.


    5.          Cracks running from the top to near the bottom of the concrete
                  terrace at the North West corner have grown more pronounced
                  in the past year with salts leached out of the concrete
                  being deposited on t h^widerside.                                                  These cracks should be

                                                                                 ngland -   No. 1134531
EASTWOOD £r PARTNERS




        sealed to prevent the reinforcement corroding.


  6.    There is a very small area of rust spalling on the
        ballustrade at the front of the West stand.


  7 .   The boundary wall at the South Wes’t c o m e r needs
        pointing in places.


  8.    Certain timbers in the roof of the South stand may     be
        suffering from damp penetration.      These can be checked
        when part of the roof is examined at the end of 19 80.
                           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975                '

            Mote of a -gisxtfto the Hillsborough Stadium,Sheffield.: ' . ; .            ■
             ... v          . . - on 10th February, 1981 :       '   -7:    '

    PRESENT;.        Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club L t d . :

                     K. T. Addy .(Director)
                     E. England (Secretary)

                     Representing* the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

                 B.    A. Ellis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                 R,    Herold (South Yorkshire Police)
                 K.    Mettatn (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)         ;
                 B.    Mole (South Yorkshire Police)
                D.      Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
         .....- A.     Roberts (City of Sheffield Metroplitan District Council)
3               D.     1. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

    1.         Purpose of Meeting.            .     .

    Mr. H. E. McGee,        the C l u b 's Chairman, welcomed the Working party.    *

    As had been explained in theChief Executive's letter dated 10th January to
    the Club, the County Council felt it was desirable to introduce a twice-
    yearly programme of visits by the Officer Working Parties to all five of
    the League Football Grounds in South Yorkshire (namely, early in the year and
    also in the middle of the Year) in an effort to maintain public confidence
    in their safety at football groun d s. Additionally, at the other grounds,
    it was hoped that this procedure would obviate the real possibility of the
    Clubs carrying out works which might prove* abortive or require additional
    work on designation. This was the first of such a programme of v i s i t s .

    2,         Inspection of Ground

    Mr. McGee left to attend to other b u s i n e s s , and the remainder of the
    representatives made a tour of inspection of the ground.          It was agreed
    that the majority of matters revealed (detailed below) could be regarded
    as routine ma intenance.

    (a)        South Stand

    The detailed inspection of a mutually agreed part of the roof structure
    had taken place on 13th/14th January after the erection of scaffolding and
    p l a t f or m s. Bearing in mind the age of the stand, relatively little
    deterioration had taken p l a c e . It had been agreed that the apparent
    deflection in the steel trusses should be monitored over a period of t i m e .
    Whilst there were signs of water staining on the roof timb e rs , it was by
    no means certain if water penetration was still taking p l a c e . It was
    agreed that the area around the roof hatch should be particularly investigated,
    which would also give the opportunity of inspecting the roof tiles generally I

    It was also agreed that should any of the exterior windows in the L a d i e s ’
    Toilets below the stand be broken, they would be replaced by wired or some .
    such safety g l a s s .
                                                           :1 ''  :
                                mg
                                 maintenance of the, concrete terracing,       andcrush
     barriers, the   only matter requiring attentionlva? the infilling, of...a. step.
     adjacent to the handrail on the left of the original exit at the top of
     the Kop.

     The Club had received' Planning Permission and Building Regulation approval
     to the erection of a brick built chip shop at the bottom right of the new
     exit from the   Kop (viewed when descending). The siting of the chip shop
     would not interfere with the egress from the new Kop e x i t ,

     (c)        North Stand

     Expansion cracks had appeared in the wall of the North Stand         (nearest to
     the Spion Kop) which required attention.

     The Club were in the process of building showers and changing accommodation
     attached to the existing gymnasium at the rear of the S t a n d . The public
     did not have access to the f a c i li t ie s . Additionally, the Club were
     investigating the possibility of acquiring property in Vere Road so as to
     provide an alternative exclusive access to the gymnasium without using
     the existing access through the ground.

     Revised proposals for the facilities to be provided in the n ew Police Post
     and First Aid facilities had been agreed, and it was intended to build
     permanent accommodation m virtually the same position as the existing              ,,
     temporary structures.

      W)        North West C o m e r Terrace

     The Club had received quotations for making good the cracking of the concrete
     on the terracing, which the Board were to consider s h o r t l y .

      (e)       West Stand

     Some cracked brickwork at the rear of the stand required pointing and then
_)   checking to see if the cracks re -o p en e d.

     /Apparent distress on the concrete pillar supporting the steps at the rear
     of the Stand required urgent attention, and attention ought also to be
     given to cracks in the concrete at the top of both sets of s t ai r s .

     The weathering and corrosion in the base plate of the sheeting column in
     the south-west c o m e r of the stand required attention, possibly by concrete
     sheeting.

     Finally, the steel supports to the new emergency exit         (nearest to the
     South Stand) still required to be rounded o f f .

      (f)       Police Control Facilities

     The Club pointed out that the police now had exclusive use of the box
     (overlooking the whole of the ground) previously used by the disc jockey.
     The disco unit had been re-sited underneath the original box.
7iim&0)M& llMISiH
                iiA i                                 ^                             ‘MM’dMi8    mmm     JS8S8S
     Mmmm
     ■mm.           msxm                                                I S M j H Wwmmm.
                                                                                   Htt&l          1 «
                                                                                            ^ (pi          ips&fc



                                           flagl0g
                                               il
                    Revised’Entrance

      The Club;outlitied:':
                          the,;'consideration; being: givea'-tO' the'siting of caravans- •
      outside the Penistone Road and Leppings Lane -ends- o f the ground to sell...
      tickets.: It was. hoped,-,that if this took place, increased entry flow of
      spectators to the ground would result by reducing delays at the turnstiles.

      4.            Bar Facilities;    ,

      The Club also outlined* the consideration being given, at the request of
      the Police, to revised bar facilities at the Leppings Lane end of the
       ground.                                 ;.      .       ,-....        ..................

       5.           Future Developments                    -

      Whilst the proposals were xn a very preliminary s t a g e , consideration was
      being given by the Club to the provision of an Executive Club                     at the
      Leppings Lane end of the car park under the South Stand and the adjoining
      store area.  There was, also a possibility of the existing office accomm­
      odation being extended o u t w a r d s . A d d i t i o n a l l y , the reception lounge
      might be extended, the kitchen area moved and a new D i r e c t o r s ’ Ro o m b u i l t .
      It was stressed that these were long term plans and no firm proposafs existed
       at the m o m e n t .
               .......
                         SAFETY
                              •
                                   OF SPORTS GROUNDS A C T , 1975 '
                                ,, ,




 :    N ote of a Visit to the Hillsborough Stadium,                   Sheffield,
                         on 8th June, 1981

PRESENT:   Representing' the' Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

           E. England           (Secretary)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

           C. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
           F. Davis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           R. Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           R. Herold (South Yorkshire Police)
           A. Roberts '(City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           J. P. Ruddy (South Yorkshire Police)
           D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D .I . Vaughan-(South Yorkshire County Council)

1.      Purpose of Meeting

The visit was the second in the twice-yearly programme of visits by Officer
Working Parties to all five League Football Clubs in South Yorkshire, as
mentioned at the meeting on 10th February, 1981, and originally referred to
in the Chief Executive's letter to the Club dated 10th January, 1981.  The
visit on 7th April had been a special one in view of the Stadium being the
venue on 11th April for a F.A. Cup Semi-Final match.

2.______ Inspection of Stadium

The representatives made a joint inspection of the Stadium.

(a)     South Stand

The progress of the monitoring of the apparent deflection in the steel
trusses referred to at the meeting on 10th February was queried but, in
the absence of Dr. W. Eastwood, no specific answer could be given.

It was noted that the monitoring device to be sited adjacent to the new
metal case for the batteries supplying the emergency power supply for the
public address system (referred to at the meeting on 7th April) had yet to
be provided.

(b)     West Stand

The cracked brickwork at the rear of the stand, as well as the apparent
distress on the concrete pillars supporting the steps at the rear of the
stand and the cracks in the concrete at the top of both sets of stairs,
had been made good.

As previously agreed, as soon as a grinder was next present at the Stadium
the Club would round off the steel supports to the new emergency exit
(nearest to the South S t a n d ) .

Following experiences at the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match, the Club were
considering revised arrangements on the terracing in front of the Stand.
An assurance was given that the Officer Working Party would be consulted
when these had substance.
{> p' I    KOrtn Wcov■■ ' ; icii»av.c
          — —....................
                          .I  "■ - - " 111-■■■■■■■   ■ ■            . .
                                                                          ■%’■
                                         '                 .    ,
The two small areas where water seepage had continued to take place after
treatment had now been satisfactorily treated.

It was also noted*that the tie bars through the upper level concrete
area to the rear had been protectively w r a p p e d . ---

(d)       North Stand

The expansion cracks in the wall of the North Stand (nearest to the Spion
Kop) had been made good.

(e)       Spion Kop

The infilling of the step adjacent to the handrail on the left of the
original exit at the ‘top of the Kop had not been done to date but would
be attended to shortly.

The temporary barrier of scaffolding tubes erected between the end of the
new Kop exit outer barriers and the concrete pillar of the lowest of the
Kop original exit steps* (adjacent to the new brick built chip shop) prior
to the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match remained.    However, the Club intended to
extend the existing barriers to fill the gap on a permanent basis and to
level off the area between the bot to m of the new Kop exit staircase and the
original Kop exit steps prior to the commencement of the forthcoming season.

(f)       General

It was noted:-

(i)    that the steel girders with mesh on top adjoining the wall at the
rear of the B u tc h e r 's Shop on Penis tone Road required attention because of
corrosion, and (ii) that the top of the brick built wall between the Spion
Kop and the South Stand required pointing.




                                                                                    in*.
               Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium
                          Sheffield on .24 August 1982


    PRESENT:    Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd

    Dr W Eastwood (Messrs Eastwood & Partners)
    E England (Club Secretary)
    J A Strange (Messrs Eastwood & Partners)

                Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

    N Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
    Ms J Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
    D Billington (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
    C Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
J   R Carnall (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
    R Herold (South Yorkshire Police)
    J T H Ray (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
    D Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
    T Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
    D I Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
    A Wright (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

    1_____ Purpose of Meeting

    The visit was the usual summer inspection carried out of all.Football
    League Clubs in South Yorkshire (originally referred to in the Chief
    Executive’s letter to the Club dated 10 January 1981).

    2_____ Ground Inspection

    A      West Stand

    It was noted that there was light surface corrosion at the foot of the
)   steel supporting pillar nearest to the North-West Terrace. As there was
    no enclosing wing to the stand, the pillar was open to the elements.

    The possibility of spectators climbing onto the roof of the store shed to
    the rear of the stand and adjacent to the boundary wall was discussed.

    IT WAS AGREED -

    (i)    That the Club would arrange for the foot of the steel supporting
    pillar to be cleaned and painted and possibly for the gusset plate to be
    covered by a concrete haunch.

    (ii)   That the Club would consider whether any useful purpose would be
    served by retaining the store shed adjacent to the boundary wall.

    (iii) That the Club would investigate and make good the crack in the
    concrete adjacent to stand entrances "W" and "X".

    B      North West Terrace

    It was noted that the cracks in the concrete underneath the Terrace had
    been repaired and appeared satisfactory. However, there was seepage of



                                  QjQ
                    “t

    water between the North West Terrace ahd the West Stand in heavy rain. *

    IT WAS AGREED - That the Club'would make good the bitumastic sealing
    between the Terrace and the West Stand,

    ■C     North-'Stand :"."T5T;..                                       ^

    A crack in the concrete at the expansion joint adjacent to Stand entrance
    "R" was noted.

    IT WAS AGREED - That the Club would investigate and make good the crack.

    D       Spion Kop

    The Building Authority suggested that at some future date the Club should
    consider giving attention to the original steps at the rear of the Kop
    (at the bottom of the new staircase) so as to remove the slight downward
    tilt and ensure a common height of risers.

    IT WAS AGREED - That, whilst there had b e e n no reported incidents, the Club
    would bear the suggestion in mind for attention at a future date.

    E       South Stand

    The Club reported that the gantry access to the Commentary Box on the top
    of  the Stand was not now     used, except byground  maintenancestaff.

    IT WAS AGREED - That the      Club would replacethe    missingringsinthe chain
    used as a handrail on the gantry.

    F       Crush Barriers

    The Club reported that the remaining third of the crush barriers on the
    Spion Kop had now been tested. The only problem had been rusting of some
    of the clips over the top tubes. These had been replaced or would be
    replaced by the start of the Season on 28 August.

    A visual inspection had also been carried out of the clips on the crush
J   barriers on the West and North-West Terraces, and similar action taken.

     G      Police and First Aid Facilities

     The new police and first aid facilities under the North Stand were well
     on the way towards completion, and would be utilised at the opening match
     on 28 August.

     H      Penistone Road Side

     It was noted that the steel girders adjoining the wall at the rear of the
     Butcher’s Shop had been satisfactorily attended to, and that the Folding
     Exit Gates had had new tops and runners installed and the concrete made
     good.

     So far as the proposal to re-site an existing toilet block to the rear of
     the Spion Kep to enable additional turnstiles and an exit gate to be
     installed was concerned, the Club had reported to the Chief Executive
     by letter that this had had to be deferred until the end of next season
     due to the size of the problem and the possibility of creating hazards for
     spectators.
         Television camera purposes had now been removed.

         T h e r e did not appear to have been any progress with the Television
         Authorities to date on the subject of permanent or semi-permanent
         facilities.              "
                                  -   '
         J      Fire-Fighting Equipment                        .

         Whilst the Club were*confident that all of the fire extinguishers, etc,
         were still sited as originally required by the General Safety Certificate,
         the County Fire Service felt that a routine inspection of the equipment
         would now be appropriate.

         K      Maintenance

         Certain areas of spalled concrete in the Stadium required attention, and
    .)   the Club had the work in hand as items of routine maintenance.




:




                                          m
                                                 mm;*
                                                   vM$m

E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                            Bowmaker House
              C o n s u l t i n g E n g in e e r *                 ^
                                                                                                                      23 Kingfield Road
                                                                                                                      Sheffield S11 9AS
W. Eastwood                   B .E ng, Ph.D.. F.Eng., F.I.C.E.                                                        Tel.: (0742) 583871
                              F.I.Struct.E„ F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                      Telex:     547266
A. A. Wood                    B.Eng., Ph-D„ C.Eng., F.I.C.E*
                              F.I.StructE., M.I.W.E.S:, M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                      and at:
A. G. Burdett                 G.M., B .Sc.(Eng), C.Eng„ M.I.C.E

R. C. A. Eastwood             B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.. M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                        36 H igh H o lb o rn
                                                                                                                        London WC1V 6AA
Associates:
                                                                                                                        Tel.: (01) 242 7436
Geoffrey Spir                 C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.

C. S. Greaves                 B.Eng., C .Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                   Our R e f:      WE/CW/3911
A. J . Clough                 B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S., M .|.Mech.E.

J . A. Strange                C.Eng., M .I.Struct.E.    1               ...   .                   "Y-etff R e f:
Consultant:
                                                                                            COUKU rrw
A. L. Percy                   M .Tech.(Hon.), B.Sc., C .Eng., F .I.fc X
                              F.l S tru ct.E ., F.I.Mun.E., M .R .T .P i.     \) *

                                                                                     -   s i? m

 Chief Executive,               10^                                                                                27 August, 1982
 South Yorkshire County Council.#;•
 Department of Administratis,--
 County Hall,
 Barnsley.
 S. Yorks.


 For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


 Dear Mr. Vaughan,

                              Sheffield Wednesday Football Club L t d .
                                 Minutes of Meeting held on 24 August

              Thank you for sending us a copy of your note of the
 proceedings of the meeting.                                                  My one comment              on these minutes
 is that although the leakage of water between the north
 west terrace and west stand was discussed, there was
 no commitment to effect a repair.                                                       This is not a matter
 which in any way affects the ground safety at this moment.
 As I explained, creating the perfect seal at a junction
 of this kind which is subject to opening and closing with
  change in temperature is extremely difficult and quite
 expensive.                 The polysulphide sealant which would need to
 be used would itself cost not less than £200 to install
 but we fear that unless a carefully shaped chase is cut
  into both the concrete and the brickwork the sealant
 will not work.                        Thus an expenditure of quite a few hundred
 pounds would be necessary and the Club is unlikely to
 wish to spend this money on a matter which does not
  present a hazard to spectators.                                                    Nevertheless, we will
  suggest that this be put on the list of items which might
  be attended to during future maintenance by the Clubs own staff."
                                                                                                   Y ours s i n c e r e l y ,
 C .C . E r i c E n g la n d                                R e g r T ^ ^ l a n d - No. 1134531---------------
                    SAFETY OF SPORTS CROUNDS ACT,   1975

Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,        Sheffield, on
21st February, 1983

PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

           D. Knights    (Assistant Secretary)
           J. Strange    (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)

           Representing the Officer Working Party      (Sheffield District)

           N.   Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           K.   Blount (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           K.   Brewster (South Yorkshire Police)
           C.   W. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
           A.   R. Park (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           D.   Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           T.   W. Stuart (South Yorkshire Police)
           D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
           F.   J. Waterhouse (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

1 .______Purpose of Meeting

The visit was the usual winter inspection carried out of the Football
League grounds in South Yorkshire (originally referred to in the Chief
Executive's letter to the Club dated 10th January, 1981), as well as to
discuss and comment on the Club's proposal to erect a new score and
message board (referred to in the letter and plans from Messrs. Eastwood
& Partners dated 7th February, 1983) .

2.     New Score and Message Board

The new board was to be erected in the south west corner of the ground
between the South and the West Stands at a height of some 7 metres above
the terrace level.  The siting and construction of the supporting pillars
were such that there would be no appreciable effect on the number of
spectators who could be accommodated on the terrace.

The Building Authority regarded the detailed drawings and calculations as
satisfactory, and Messrs. Eastwood & Partners outlined the steps taken to
take effect of wind and ice-loaaings on the structure.  The South Yorkshire
Police were satisfied with the assurances given that the structure would,
for all practical purposes, be climb proof.  The South Yorkshire County
Fire Service saw no objection to the proposal.

IT WAS AGREED That the Officer Working Party saw no objection to the
proposal, and that Mr. D. Vaughan would reply to Messrs. Eastwood & Partners
to this effect.

3 ._____ Ground Inspection

A.     West Stand

Ic was noted that, whilst the foot of the steel supporting pillar had been
cleared of light surface corrosion and its gusset plate had been covered
by a concrete haunch (as agreed at the summer inspection on 24th August,
1982), it still required to be painted.
It was also noted that the crack in the concrete adjacent to stand entrances
"W" and "X" had been made good.

The Club had also been requested at the summer inspection on 24th August,
1982, to consider whether any useful purpose would be served by retaining
the store shed at the rear of the Stand and adjacent to the boundary wall.
This point was repeated, and the South Yorkshire Police added that at
some time in the future they hoped the Club would be able to provide some
form of segregation, as well as separate bar and toilet facilities, to
separate home and visiting supporters at the rear of the Stand.

IT WAS AGREED that the n e w expansion crack in the brickwork   at therear
corner of the Stand (nearest to the North West Terrace) should be
monitored to ensure its condition did not worsen.

B.     North West    Terrace

It was noted that the seepage of water between the North West Terrace and
the West Stand in heavy rain (also raised at the summer inspection) apparentl
continued to occur.

IT WAS AGREED that, whilst not being a matter of safety, the Club should
be recommended to replace the bituman impregnated fibre board as a matter
of maintenance to overcome the seepage problem.

C.     North Stand

The crack at the expansion joint adjacent to Stand entrance     "R" (which the
Club had been requested to investigate and make good at the     summer
inspection) had received some attention but could not be regarded as
satisfactory.

IT WAS AGREED that the Club would give further attention to the crack.

D.    Spion Kop

All of the crush barriers had been tested since certification, the main
problem having been rusting of some of the clips over the top tubes on
certain barriers.

IT WAS AGREED that the Club would investigate and make good the spalled
concrete and corrosion of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Spion Kop
(at the North Stand end).

E.    South Stand

In view of recent adverse weather conditions, the agreement to visually
inspect the roof trusses for apparent deflection after exceptional gale
or snow loading was recalled.  It was noted that the sixth roof truss from
the East Gable (including the Gable) particularly appeared to have deflected
since the summer visit.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)    That some form of measuring the evident deflection in the roof
trusses was desirable, and the Club were requested to consider whecher some
form of quick and/or economic method of doing so could be devised.

(ii)   That the Chief Fire Officer     berequested  toconsider  thesuitability
from a fire resistance point    of view of thecladding   in the first floor


                                E0
enclosed link bridge from the Stand to the Restaurant.

F.     Police and First Aid Facilities

The new police and first aid facilities under the North Stand had been
welcomed by the users and were proving to be most useful.

G.     Maintenance

It was noted that certain items of maintenance throughout the ground
required attention.

IT WAS AGREED that under this general heading the Club would look particularly
into the loose wiring at both ends of the South Stand, at the pointing and
spalled concrete in the Male Toilets at the Spion Kop end of the South
Stand, and at the pointing required to the wall (including coping stones)
and the loose metal sheeting between the South Stand and the Spion Kop.

H.     Floodlighting Pylons

Whilst the electrical c o nt r ac t or ’s staff obviously had to climb the flood­
lighting pylons from time to time, it appeared that no regular inspection
of the pylons took place from a structural safety point of view.

IT WAS AGREED that a regular   inspection of the floodlighting pylons from
a structural safety point of   view was desirable, say, every, two or throe
years, and that to establish   the present position, an inspection of one of
the pylons should be carried   to see what was revealed.

I.     Painting of Structural Steelwork,    Roof Trusses,   etc.

Whilst not being a matter of immediate concern, the Officer Working Party
felt it would be in the Club's own interests to institute a programme for
the painting of structural steelwork, roof trusses, etc.

IT WAS AGREED that the Club should be requested to consider instituting a
programme for the painting of structural steelwork, roof trusses, etc. on
a regular b a s i s .

J.     Penis tone Road Side

The Club were not yet in a position to say when the proposed improvements
at the Penis tone Road side of the Ground were likely to be implemented.
    EASTWOOD                               PA R TN E R S                                                    Bowmaker
                  C o n s u ltin g    E n g in e e rs                                                       23 Kingfield Road
                                                                                                            Sheffield S11 9AS
    W. Eastwood                  B .E ng. P h .D . F.Eng.. F.I.C.E.                                         Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                 F.I.Struct.E. F .G .S . M .Cons.E.
                                                                                                            Telex:     547266
    A. A. Wood                   B .E ng. P h .D . C .E ng . F.I.C.E.
                                 F .I.S tru c tE . M .I.W .E.S. M .Cons.E.
                                                                                                                             and at:
    A. G. BurdeU                 G .M . B .Sc.(Eng), C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.

    R. C. A. Eastwood            B.Sc.. C.Eng., M .I.C.E. M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                              36 H ig h H o lb o r n
                                                                                                              London WC1V 6AA
    Associates:
    Geoffrey Spir                C .Eng., M.I.C.E.. M .I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                              Tel.: (01) 242 7436
    C. S. Greaves                B .E nt., C .E n t.. M .I.C.E., M .I.Siruct.E .
                                                                                             Our R e f:     WE/JAS/KH/3911
    A. J . Clough                B.A.. C .E n t.. M.C.I.B.S.. M .I.Mech.E.

    J . A. Strange              C.Eng., M .I.Struct.E.                                       Your R e f:
    Consultant:
    A. L. Percy                  M .Tech.(H on.), B.Sc., C .E ng., F.I.C.E..
                                 F.l S tru ct.E ., F.I.M un.E., M .R.T.P.I.




)
                                                                                                            8 September 1982

                              Sheffield Wednesday Football Club P.L.C.


    ANNUAL INSPECTION OF THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM AS REQUIRED BY THE
                                        CERTIFICATE OF GROUND SAFETY


                         On 16 August 1982, I made an inspection of the ground,
    after having had approximately one fifth of the crush barriers
    on Spion Kop tested by members of my staff under my control.
                         At the end of June, crush barriers numbers 43, 44, 45,
    46, 51, 52, 53, 54,                                   62,63, 63A, 65, 66, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 78,
    79, 80, 86, 87, 88,                                   89,91, 92, 94, 95, 97,                  98, 99, 100, 101, 103,
    104, 105, 107, 108,                                  109and 110 were tested in accordance with the
    procedures laid down in the Guide to Safety at Football Grounds.
    All the barriers sustained the test load although in some instances
    the clips retaining the horizontal tube deformed.                                                      These clips have
    been replaced.                         At the same time, other clips and horizontal rails
    showing signs of advanced corrosion were replaced.
                         I am now able to certify that all 41 barriers have a
    satisfactory strength.
                         Two radial fences have been installed on the Leppings
    Lane terrace to segregate spectators.
                         Gates have been installed at various locations around
    the ground to prevent intruders entering the stands.
                         Repairs have been carried out to six stanchions
    supporting sheeting along the boundary wall near gate *0' on
    Penistone Road.
                                                             R e o i T • ■ |and -   No. 1134531
                                                                     SaJ5H|E]E



      ASTWOOD fir PARTNERS




                   Sharp corners on the underside of the landing of
        the south exit at the front of the West stand have been
        ground smooth.
                  Various minor items of remedial work to concrete
        and brickwork walls, steps, terracing and the like have
        been completed as part of the maintenance programme.
.'j               Certain other items of maintenance work which it
         is suggested should be carried out at an appropriate time
0       have been recommended to the Club.   A list is attached.
                  I certify that in my opinion the various structures
         on the ground are in a satisfactory condition and appropriate
         for the stadium to be used to the full capacity as laid down
         in the Certificate of Ground Safety.
                        SAFETY 07 SPORTS GROUND ACT, 1975

           Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,
                  Sheffield on 11th August, 198.3

PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield We dn e sd a y Football Club PLC

           Dr. W. Eastwood (Eastwood & Partners)
           E. England (Secretary)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

           Ms. J. Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
           C. W. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
           J. Miles (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           A. Roberts (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1.______ Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was primarily to carry out the "summer"
inspection of the Ground in accordance wi t h the policy of twice yearly
visits to Football League grounds in South Yorkshire b y the appropriate
Officer Working Party.

In particular, the Officer Working Party wished to see the position with
regard to the effect of the carrying out of the improvements at the
Penistone Road end of the Ground (considered by the Officer Working Party
on 28th June, 1983 and agreed subject to certain reservations contained in
a letter to the Club dated 29th June) . F„eoorts being received from the
Building Authority had indicated extensive movement of existing retained ear
material, apparently of sufficient magnitude to impair the stability of the
adjacent access ramp and associated perimeter walls and barrier rails.

2 ._____ Ground Inspection

A.      Electronic Score and Message Board

It was noted that, since the agreement indicated at the "winter" inspection
of the Stadium on 21st February, 1983, the electronic score and message
board had been erected between the South and West Stands.  Evidently, it
was proving to be a most welcome feature.

B.      West Stand and Terrace

The Club's intentions with regard to the brick built former A.R.P. building
at the rear of the Stand and adjacent to the boundary wall (now used as a
store) were again discussed in view of its condition.

The condition of the crack in the brickwork  at the rear corner of the Stand
(nearest to the North West Terrace) raised at the last meeting was inspected

Dr. Eastwood reported that the crush barriers on the Terrace had been tested
completing the first cycle of crush barrier testing at the Stadium.  One had
failed and been replaced.
    IT WAS AGREED -

   (i)     That, if the Club intend'  to continue to use the former A.R.P. building
-• adjacent to the boundary wall, the lintel over the door w o u l d require attention
   in particular, as would the general maintenance of the building.

    (ii)    That the condition of the crack in the non load be a r i n g br i ck w or k at
    the rear corner of the Stand (nea 'sst to the North West Terrace) should continue
    to be monitored.

    (iii)   That the Club would give attention during normal maintenance to the
    loose concrete rendering apparent in places.

    C.      North West Terrace

  As the Terrace and the West Stand were separate structures, the Club were of
  the opinion that there would continue to be movement betwe e n the structures
  caused by changes in weather conditions, thus making it difficult if not
  impossible to achieve a seal sufficient to permanently prevent the seepage of
  water between the two.

     IT WAS AGREED that this was not a matter of safety and that the Club w o u l d
^ ^ c o n £ i n u e to monitor the position.

     .      North Stand

  The Club reported that the further attention to the crack at the expansion
  joint adjacent to Stand entrance "R" requested at the last meeting was in hand
  as a matter of maintenance.

  E.        Spion Kop

  As requested at the last meeting, the Club had investigated the spalled concrete
  and corrosion of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Spicn Kop (cowards the
  North Stand e n d ) . Action w ou l d be taken shortly to cut off the front (and
  worst affected) portion of the roof, which wo u ld also have the effect of
  increasing the headroom.

  Whilst certain remedial work had already been undertaken by the contractor to
  stabalise the banking at the rear of the Spion Kop following digging out
  to provide new refreshment and toilet facilities, the Officer Working Party
  were of the firm opinion that further work was essential.  Measurements had
  shown that in places there had been as much as four to five inches of


•
  movement.  Simple visual inspection showed that there was a lack of the
  former retained earth material underneath the access ramp in places, and
  consequently there had also to be doubts about the stability of the foundations
  of the existing barrier rails.  The Club would have to look to the contractor
  (or his insurers) to meet the cost of the remedial work to the existing access
  ramp and barrier rails.

  As pointed out in the letter to the Club dated 29th June, measures wo u l d
  require to be taken to prevent the public gaining access to the roofs of the
  new facilities (as they were not load b e a r i n g ) . Barriers w o u l d have to be
  provided or other measures taken to enable the new facilities to w i t hstand
  crowd pressures where these were capable of be in g generated (as also pointed
  out in the letter of 29th June).

  IT WAS AGREED

  (i)     That the Club's proposals for dealing with the spalled concrete and
  corrosion of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Spion Kop be supported in
  principle.
(ii)      That as soon as possible, and certainly prior to the first home
mat c h on 3rd September, the condition of the existing ramp and barrier
rails must be stabilised (possibly b y drilling holes at intervals and
inserting grouting under pressure) and the resultant success or otherwise
of the measures tested by test loading the barrier rails (or a representative
sample) to the Green Guide requirements.

(iii)   Also prior to the first home ma t c h on 3rd September, measures must
be taken (a) to prevent access by the public to the roofs of the new
facilities and (b) to enable the new facilities to withstand crowd pressures
where these are capable of being generated.

(iv)    That the new buttresses to the existing boundary wall in connection
with the new turnstiles and exit gate must be sited so as not to reduce the
support to the wall, and that the need for pointing of the wall externally
in places must also not be overlooked.

F.        ’’Stands" Club

It was noted that there was spalling of the concrete surrounds to the steel
beams underneath the "Stands" club.  It was understood that the premises
were leased on a full repairing basis to Mansfield Breweries Ltd.

It was also noted that there was a certain amount of deflection £n the brick
built screening wall in front of the Male toilets underneath the Club if
pressure was applied to the top of the wall.

IT WAS AGREED

(i)     That the Club would request Mansfield Breweries Ltd. to give
attention to the spalling of the concrete surrounds to the steel beams
under the "Stands" Club in accordance w i th the terms of their lease.

(ii)    That the brick built screening wall in front of the Male toilets
should be test loaded to the Green Guide requirements.

G.        South Stand

It was noted that some of the loose coping stones on the top of the
dividing wall between the South Stand and the Spion Kop had been removed,
and that a certain amount of pointing of the wall had been undertaken.

It was also noted that there was severe corrosion at the bottom of both
steel supports to the sides of the concertina-type exit gate from the
Stand (nearest to the Spion K o p ) .

IT WAS A G R E E D :-

(i)    That the Club would  remove the remaining coping    stones and arrange
for the remainder of thepointing to the    upper level  of the wall to be
undertaken as a matter of maintenance.

(ii)    That the Club would shortly consider a scheme to be prepared by
Messrs. Eastwood & Partners for replacement of both steel supports to
the exit gate from the Stand (nearest to the Spion K o p ) .
H.     Ground Fitness Certificate

Dr. Eastwood pointed out that many of the matters discussed at the meeting
were contained in his Annual Ground Fitness Certificate. However, he had
delayed submitting this to the County Council, as required by the General
Safety Certificate, in view of the situation on the Penis tone Road end of
the Stadium.

IT WAS AGREED that Dr. Eastwood would submit his Ground Fitness Certificate
to the County Council, excluding the Penistone Road end of the Stadium at
the present time. '
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                               B o w m a k e r H ouse
                   Consulting Engineers                                                                           23 K ingfleld Road
                                                                                                                  S h effield S11 SAS
W. E a stw o o d            B.Eng.. Ph.D ., F Eng.. F.I.C.E.,                                                     T el.: (0742) 583871
                            F.I.Struct.E.. F.G.S., M .C ons.E.
                                                                                                                  T elex :        547266
A. A. W ood                 B.Eng., Ph.D ., C.Eng.. F .I.C .E ,
                            F.I.Struct.E., M .I.W .E .S, M .C ons.E.
                                                                                                                                   mnd   tt:
A. G. B u rd e tt          G .M .. B .Sc.(E ng), C.Eng., M .I.C.E.

R. C. A. E astw o o d      B .Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.                                                 36 H ig h H o lb o rn
                                                                                                                    London WC1V 6AA
Geoffrey Spir              C .E n*., M .I.C.E.. M XM ech.E.                                                         Tel.: (01) 242 7436
C. S. Greaves              B ,£ n * „ C.En*., M .I.C.E., M .I.S tru ct.E .

A. J . Clough              B.A ., C .E n f M .C .I .B .S ., M J.M ech.E .                       Our R e f:    WE/JAS/PB/4644
J . A. Strange             C.£nc-* M .i.S truct.E .                                             Your R e f:
C onsultant:
A. L. Percy                M .T «ch.(H on.), B.Sc., C.Eng., F .I.C .E .,
                           F J.S tru c t.E .. F-l.Mun.E-. M .R .T.P.I.                                       29 August, 1983




                           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic


        Annual Inspection of the Hillsborough Stadium as required
                              by the Certificate of Ground Safety


               On 25 July, 1983 I made an inspection of the ground after
having had approximately one fifth of the crush barriers
 tested by members of my staff under my control.

               At the end of June, crush barriers numbers 121, 122, 123,
 124A, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 1 3 5 r
 136       (part), 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144                                                        (part), 145
 (part), 146 (part), 147, 148, 149                                                (part), 150, 151, 152, 153
 and 154 (part), all at the Leppings Lane end of the ground
were tested in accordance with the procedures laid down in the
Guide to Safety at Football Grounds.

               In all but one case the barriers sustained the test load
although in two cases the clips retaining the horizontal tube
 deformed.               These clips were on barrier 136 between spans 6-7
 and 8-9.              New clips have been fitted.

               The only failure was the centre support of barrier 141
where the angle leg parted where it was badly corroded.                                                                 The
 angle has been plated and new bolts inserted.

               I          am now able to certify that all the barriers tested
have a satisfactory strength.

               Various minor items of remedial work to concrete walls
at the back of the North stand, steps and terracing on Spion


                                                      Registered        w M w m   No. 1134531
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




Kop and protection of the North side gable stanchion in the
West stand have been completed as part of the maintenance
programme.

     Certain other items of maintenance work which it is
suggested should be carried out in the near future have been
recommended to the Club.     A list is attached.

     New toilets and turnstiles have recently been constructed
behind Spion Kop.     During these operations the ramp down the
back of Spion Kop was disturbed by movement of the embankment.
In particular the hand rail and concrete wall guarding the
edge of the gangway moved sideways.     The hand rail and wall
have now been tested in accordance with the requirements of
the Code of Practice and in all but one case, where there was
excessive deflection of a hand rail post, successfully
resisted the test load.

     Following these inspections and tests, I certify that in
my opinion the various structures on the ground are in a
satisfactory condition and are appropriate for the stadium to
be used to the full capacity laid down in the Certificate of
Ground Safety.




c.c. S.Y.C.C.




                              SB
                            SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT,            19 75
                                                                                                       71
                 Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,
                          Sheffield, on 29th February, 1984

 PRESENT:     Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Pic

              Mr. R. Chester (Secretary)
              Dr. W. Eastwood (Eastwood & Partners)

              Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield D is t r i c t )

              S, Allcock (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              N. Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
              Ms. J. Barker (South Yorkshire Police)
              C. W. C a l ve r t: (South Yorkshire Police)
              M. Johnson (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
              D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1.      Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to carry out the "winter" inspection of the
Ground in accordance with the policy of twice yearly visits to Football League
grounds in South Yorkshire by the appropriate Officer Working Party.

The Club reported that the m a jority of the items listed as normal maintenance
items following the "summer" inspection had yet to be carried out.     This was
due to a combination of the change in Club Secretary and certain development
proposals (outlined on a confidential basis) which the Club had in mind.
However, those which the Club's staff could undertake would be commenced shortly
and tenders had been invited and received for the urgent remaining larger
items (to be carried out commencing in M a y ) . The exception was the roof of the
tunnel exit from the Spion Kop (towards the North Stand end) in view of its
possible inclusion in the development proposals outlined.

2 .____Ground Inspection

A.        West Stand           and Terrace

It   was noted that the former ARP building adjacent to the boundary wall was
in   the process of demolition and the site cleared and levelled.   This would
have the additional benefit of improving the acc e ss / eg r es s .

B.        North West            Terrace

It   was noted that     whilst generally the sealing ofthe cracks beneath the Terrace
to prevent seepage of water had been successful, there was still a slight
seepage from one of the repairs.

The possible need for protection of the wire mesh on the inside of the upper
access deck was also discussed.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)    That the C l u b w o u l d co nt i nu e to monitor      the .slight   s e e p ag e of water
front the repair ed cracks u n d e r the Terra ce.

(li)        That the p o s si b le need for lateral b r a c i n g ro the f r am e of t h e •wire
m e s h b a rri ers on the inside of the u p p e r a c ce s s de c k be i n v e s t i g a t e d by a
test loading d u r i n g the forthcoming close season.




                                           m
c .     Spion Kop

As previously indicated, the Club confirmed that the remedial work to the
existing access ramp and barrier rails required as the result of the
construction of the new refreshment and toilet^  together with the erection
of barriers to prevent access to the roofs of the new facilities, had been
carried out.

The present condition of the spalled concrete and corrosion of the roof of
the tunnel exit from the Spion Kop was inspected.

The stability of the perimeter wall at the Penistone Road end of the ground
was also discussed.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)    That the Building Authority and Mr. J. Strange of Messrs.  Eastwood &
Partners should discuss and inspect that part of the perimeter fencing
erected at the northern end of the ramp to prevent access to the roofs of the
new facilities.

(ii)   That the Club would undertake continuous maintenance work on the roof
of the tunnel exit, pending a decision on any development proposals.

(iii)  That the Building Authority and   Dr. W. Eastwood should    discuss and inspect
the stability of the perimeter wall at   the Penistone Road end during  the
forthcoming close season.

D.    Lighting Pylons

The Club undertook to carry out a visual inspection of the lighting pylons during
tne torthcoming close season and to make more detailed inspections should this
prove to be necessary after the visual inspection.

E.    Emergency Lighting, Fire   Alarm and Public Address   Systems Test

IT WAS AGREED - That the County Fire Service in conjunction with the South
Yorkshire Pol_ce and the C l u b ’s staff, would carry out a test of these systems
at the evening match against: Fulham to be held on 7th March.




                                 GO
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                           Iiv VP   ^ .                      S t. A n d re w s House
              Consulting Engineers                                                                              23 K ingfield R o ad
Directors:
                                                                                                                S heffield S11 SAS
W. E astw o od           F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., D.Eng.,                                                         T el.: (0742) 533371
                         C.Eng., F.I.C.E.. P.P.I.Struct.E.,                                                     T elex:           547266
                         F.I.M ech.E., F.G.S., M .Cons.E.

A. A. W ood              B.Eng.. Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                                          arid at:
                         F.I.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.S., M .Cons.E.

R. C. A. E a stw o o d   B .Sc., C.Eng„ M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.                                                   36 H i f h H o lb o rn
G. Spir                  C .E n g ,          M .l.M ech.E.                                                         London WC1V SAA
Associates:
                                                                                                                   Tel.: (S I) 242 7436
C.   S. Greaves          B.Eng., C E rsj-.fiiC .E ., M J.S trua.1.
                                                                                              Our .ReJL: ,— ,   WE/KH/5840
A.   J . Clough          B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S.,
                                                                                              -
J.   A. Strange          C.Enjf., HJLSmict£.                    ulii-l -
G.   Doughty             C.Enj., FJScruct-E.                          C:.c:
S.   Preston             B.Eng.,          M l.C.E., M.LStroctX
R.   Tandy               C .En*.,FX Str«£.£.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett            G.M.. B.Sc.(Eni.), F.I.C E ., FJ.Stifcc.E.   SOUTH                   ::o 21h




The Director of Administration,
South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                                 7 June 1984
County Hall,
Barnsley,
South Yorks.
S70 2TN.


For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                                           Testing of Crush Barriers
                The barriers at the North West corner of the ground,
are due to be tested this year, which will complete the fir-st
fiveyear cycle.                       As the ground is being used by a congress of
Jehovah's Witnesses during early July, we shall be carrying-
out the tests during June.
               Mr. Sheriff will be informed of the arrangements so
that he can carry out his usual inspections.


                                                                              Yours sincerely,




c.c.           Mr. D. Sheriff, Department of Planning & Design




                                                         ED
                                                Registered in England -         No. 1134531
EASTW OOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                                St. Andrews Hou        73
                Consulting Engineers                                                                                                23 Kingfieid Road
Directors:                                                                                                                          Sheffield S11 9AS
W. Eastwood                F.Eng., B.Eng,, Ph.D., D.Eng.,                                                                           Tel.: (0742) 583871
                           C .Ena.. F.I.C.E, P.P.I.Struct.E..
                           F.l.M ech.E.. F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                    Telex:       547266
A. A. Wood                B .E n g , Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E..                                                                                         and at;
                          F X S tra c tE , M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.

R. C. A. Eastwood         B .S c , C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.. M .I.Struct.E.                                                                    36 H igh H o l b o r n
G. Spir                   C E n g .. M.I.C.E.. M.I.Mech.E.                                                                             London WC1V 6AA
Associates:
                                                                                                                                       Tel.: (01) 242 7436
C.   S . G reaves                              M.I.C.E., M .I.S tru ctE .

A.   J . C lough                                                                                        Our Ref ;       WE/JAS/SEB/5 605
                          B-A-.             M .C.I.B.S.. M .I.M ech.E.

J.   A. S tra n g e       C G it^ , M -l.Struct.E.                                                      Your R e f:
G.   D oughty             CL£n5„ FXScrucr-E.

S.   P re sto n                     C .rng.. M I .C .E , M .I.Struct.E ,

R.   T andy               C .£ a g ^ RLSEruet.E.

Consultant.*
A. G- E u rd e tt         G Jtt.e 3 .Sr_(£r5|; .'; a FJ.C .E ., F.I.Struct.E.




 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic                 25 July 1984
 Hillsborough ^
 Shef f ie Id                          TfrmVrn 1
                                       ;SOUIH ¥&RIiK;.a;
 S6 1SW
                                                                                                    W sjW IFfenejrt   of A   ,r ;


                                                                                                                V w U <_ Yf&A
 For the attention of Mr, R. Chester
                                                                                                              ¥ UAi-JLj BAKft'SLEY

 Dear Dick,
                                                        Barrie r Testing—±5-64r-■

               On 18 and 19 June, crush barriers 155, 15 6, 15 7, 15 8, 159,
 160,          164, 165, 166, 167,167A, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173,
 174,          175, 176, 177, 178f 179, 180 (spans 3 and 4), 182, 183
 (spans 1 and 2}r 1,84 and                                         185, on the north west corner terrace,
were tested in accordance with the procedure laid down in the
Guide to Safety at Football Grounds.                                                          The barriers are shown
on the attached print of our drawing 1610/64C.
               Barriers 161,, 162, 163, 180 (spans 1 and 2), 181, 183
 (spans 3 and 4) and 186 could not be tested because being                                                                                     very
close to the back af. the terrace the testing rig would not fit
into the space available.                                               Because the distance behind these
barriers i s so resitricted it is extremely unlikely that the few
people behind them will exert the full load suggested in the
•green' guide.
               In all cases tested the barriers sustained the test load.
               On 20 June the fencing along the internal edge of the
access walkway at the rear if the north west corner terrace was
tested.               Thirteen spans were tested and although the wire mesh
deformed by as much as 36mm during the load application,

                                                     Registem
                                                                  ftn    id     i ! i -   No. 1134531
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




recovery at the end of the final test was 100%.
      On 22 June the concrete parapet wall along the front cf
 the suspended section of terracing, in the north west c o m e r
was tested.   During the load application, movement of the
wall was so small that readings using the measuring equipment
 could not be taken.
      Enclosed are single copies of our record sheets showing
 the results of all the tests on the barriers and fencing.
We are pleased to report that none of the barriers needs
strengthening work.
      This set of tests now complete the five year test cycle
 at the ground.


                    v~~ ;   ,        1 ,j   Yours sincerely,
          ^   tec           1 e-c,




c.c. Mr. D. Sherriff - Sheffield M.D.C.
     Mr. D. Vaughan - South Yorkshire C.C.



                                      EQ
                                                               r - %                                                                                                  K 1;W
                       EASTWOOD & PARTNERS,                                                                                 ,jffiKFFI ELD WEDNESDAY,
                       CONSULTING ENGINEERS,                                                                                 HILLSBOROUGH,
                       ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,                                                                                    SHEFFIELD SS 1SW
                       JJK, KINGFIELD ROAD,
                       SHEFFIELD Sll 9AS                                                                                     ANNUAL INSPECTION 1984
                                                                       BARRIER TESTS
                                                                                                                             JQ I)    NO !         5840
                       DATE     to -                                   RECORD SHEET

                                                "j/.f'
                       COMPLETED BY
                                                                             U n ai-iC f       Kf        N /o ^ i   Wee/' Coz           m e_ e .



                                       MAXIMUN TEST LOAD                    ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
iRRIER       BARRIER SIZE
>ST          & No. OF SPANS                         APPLIED                 TEST 1                                  TEST 2                                TEST 3
                                                    LOAD                                                            REST     LOAD       u/ loao.   % m RES?    LOAD   Ij/lOAB   %R£C
                                       KN/M         TONNES                 REST   LOAD         u/ load


■jz           3 -Im                    ^2- 74-           0   65             O      £0            0        lOO        0                    0         \oo O     .*2 b    O        too


U'b                    ,S?FAH          2 '7 i            0*65               0      jLw3          0        too        O                   0         100    O    7a      O        to o

i / 5         3m       6 jpak                            0 622         .   O       J?7          D         j.CP      O            25      0         loo    O    26      <9       ICO

w       7     2' 9 m                                     0 8                O      16           O         100        O           Id      0          100   O     Id     O         100
                                       ?74-

s y     9      ^aa     5FAM             ?•;&             0 572             O       3o            O        100        O       3o          0         100    O    '2 o    O        100
0/      il     3 m 5 fam                2 ->             0 -6 7 7          O       56           10         72        O       3o          0          loo   O    *30     O        100
               3 m S fam                *2-7b-           O-SZZ              O      25           O         lO O       O           25      0          100   O     23     O        100
                                          /




                                                                                           •




 y
                                                                9 ~
                                                                                                                           « •
                               KABTWOOl) h PAU't'Ntiittt,                                                                             Kl.n WKONKflDAY,
                               CONSULTING ENGINEERS,                                                                       W I Ll.BliO U O U UII,
                               ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,                                                                           SHEFFIELD SB 1SW
                               S.'l, KINOFIKLD ROAD,
                               SHEFFIELD SJI DAS                             BARRIER TESTS                                  ANNUAL J NHPKCTIO N           HUM
                                                                                                                            JOB NO :             5840
                               PATR       16          •6                     RECORD SHEET

                               COMPLETED BY               W .

      »

                                               MAXIMUN TEST LOAD                 ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
 \RRIER           BARRIER SIZE
 )ST              & No. OF SPANS                           APPLIED               TEST I                              TEST 2                                  TEST 3
 ).
                                                           LOAD
                                               KN/M        TONNES            REST     LOAD       u/ load    $REC    REST    LOAD     u/ load .   % REC   RES I   LOAD   i/ load   %m

                      10      2-               Co •         13^                  O                     1            O                 CP          IOCD    cz>           <z^>      ICXJ




                      i n>   v - it?            c *   .         l-   3 e>.   O                     <0       IO O    O       •<:?         1       ^e>      0       ,CT    0        lO o

           vB



 ^    7. C        l. , o     2 -a > . H - ?                      1Hr             O       II        0        tc> o   0         II         0        |<JO    O       /I     0        lo« >

           •■.                          1.3     c               1 H-         O                      0        \U O   O       t Ci.    0                   O                         I c;>. j
                                    2                                                    ' O?                                                                            o>

      ■r   ■; ■                                                                                       f


                                                                                     fT") O
\« b b .                     2 7,              c=>.                          O       2o           0         ICO     0       270       0          lO o    e>                       lO i   )




                             7-f
                               J.
      (T




                      I'S"                                                           /- ^ 1
xf>




                                                                                                 ' ■> V ,
                  •                            C? •              1           *       •w, j £*■          j   G*'i>           &1j      r&          17      0       £>2    JO        B l



                                                                        •            —
                   EARTWOQP & PARTNERS.
                   OONSUM'iNU liNui NJilliSUM,
                   ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
                   23, KINGFJELD ROAD,
                                                                   r#                                                 ^ H E F F I ELD WEDNESDAY,

                                                                                                                          HHWt              an IHW

                   SHEFFIELD S U BAS                                                                                      ANNUAL |NSPPfJTION 10H4
                                                                         HAiUMEH I'KH til
                                                                         RKCORP SHEET                                     JOB NO:            5840
                   D A IS .   1 6 ^ 1 9 * (6

                   COMPLETED BY                p ^


                                   MAXIMUN TEST LOAD                           ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
\RRIER   BARRIER SIZE
>ST      & No. OF SPANS                              APPLIED                                                    TEST 2                                 TEST 3
                                                                               TEST 1
                                                     LOAD
                                                                           REST     LOAD      u/ loao   %REC   RESI       LOAD   u/ load.    %REC    RESI   LOAD   / load
                                                                                                                                                                   u        % REC
                                   KN/M              TONNES

            \Q   7 ' r~}l           Co                     \ G *o          O        4 ?r>                       o                 H-                  o     M -7             ^ •j
£=>o.                                      .                                                            1H'.              m -7                                      r*.




Cal.i      A v m La s I^.         \C f     /6 o      *5 m a            1c *2    £

t& 2      A yaiO & L c.          /cr
                              H i5         /£ o      t W       l    To r       Klc, .

         ^ \ va iIa&Lb        S f * CE y & o ^ m IL                 7ot • B e *


——— E1                                                                                                                                                                       |oo
* L f.    1 ^ 2- Co .                G.               1’                   o            \b     \               O          \^2      O          ICO     O     \2      O
                                       *


Jz? .     \Q?-&                      Cs.              l’£>Cs- .            o            W      o        ICO    o           u     o           ICO     <3     II     o        loo




*C *.    '2-0    IC,.               C
                                    b>.               ° ' ‘i               o        3        - o        1C*0   o          3>      o          too     o      3       o       loo
                                                                   w
                                                                                                                      1
                       KAIiTWOOD & PAHTNlSUfl,                                                                              affiFFIELH WEDNESDAY,
                       CONSULT1 Ntl KKGJ NKKlta ,                                                                          > ■rLHiiuitouuii,
                       ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,                                                                                   SHEFFIELD SO 1SW
                       23, KINGFIELD ROAD,
                       SHEFFIELD Sll 9AS                                                                                    ANNUAL IN S P E C T IO N    1.DH4
                                                                           HARRIER TESTS
                                                                           RECORD SHEET                                     JOB NO :          5840
                       PATE           |Q / M - 6 ' 6 f t .
                                                                                                                                                                                    \

                       COMPLETED DY ,                                                                                                                                                   \


tRIER    BARRIER SIZE                       MAXIMUN TEST LOAD                   ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
>T :     & No. OF SPANS
                                                             APPLIED            TEST J                             TEST 2                                  TEST 3
                                                             LOAD




                                                                                                                                                                                VO
                                                                                                                                                                                o\
                                                                           REST              U/IOAD %m         RESI         LOAD                       RES1     LOAD   / load




                                                                                                                                                                                s
                                                                                                                                              % REC




                                                                                                                                                                                 L_>
                                            KN/M             TONNES                 LOAD                                           u/ loao.                            u


to].         g V a l- f o                    Gs>                            o           a.       «s>   IO Q    to           "2b*        a     ICX2     O        3       CP       JO'"-)




                                                               1            a        *o      O          \oO        a                o         lo o     a        q,      O        I.J .
         ^ ^..........? ‘ C»                  Ce» .                                  Ca                                     7


i p      1
p
i»oo E                                                        I            o                 o                     o                 o        lo o     o                c?      lex .)
                D '2 • lh                    O                                      i2                 to o                                                     \<l

                                     v.

                   V 05                      Cr>,             o<            o                o         to o    o            3                          O        *3      C?       lo o
                                              *


1a        4Q        i - c*       m   Z2      Ck>              0 '%         o        3        o         lo o    o            3                  lo o    o        3       o        IC O

                                 2 43 '       G              o •^ G         o       H-       o         \o o    o                    O                  o               u        |CKJ
                                                                                                                                              ICO

                             o    ‘f H-                      O • ‘-I G ^    0       2        o          lo o   (J            n      o         1o o     O        2       (.)     to. i
                                                                                                                           ^4-

                                                                                                                       r
                            EASTWOOD k PARTNERS,                         / A                                             .^ i H E F F J KI.D W EDNESDAY ,
                            CONSULTl NG EtiGl N M S ,                      ^                                             " in .L a n o R o u u ii,
                            ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,                                                                               SHEFFIELD SG 1SW
                           ,2 3 , KINGFIELD ROAD,
                            SHEFFIELD S H BAS                                  HARRIER TESTS                                 ANNUAL IN U IW H O N JHH4
                                                                                                                             JOB NO:              5840                              \
                            dato         ■;©                                   RECORD SHEET

                            COMPLETED BY              Tpf?                                                                                                                              \
                                               MAXIMUN TEST JjOAD                AU< DIMENSIONS ARJ3 |N M IU 4 METRES
vRRIER       BARRIER SIZE
>ST          & No, OF SPANS                                                                                         TEST 2                                    TEST n
                                                             APPI4ED             TEST J
•
                                                             LOAD                                                                      u/ load.   % REC   RES!    LOAD   / load   /o REC
                                               KN/M          TONNES            REST   LOAD       u/ loao   %REC     REST     LOAD                                        u


                                                                                                            ICXJ    u                                     a       2      G6.       io n
7i               4 0    i ‘ C* M '2            Co              » - iG           0     z           0                          2          0         >00


                                                G,             0   - cj (>      O                 0         103     0            •£>    0          IOO    0               0
                                                                                      •£>

                                                              O                                                                         0                          2>     0        K> )

         c1                                                                                      0                                                         0
~        g   J                3        4 t+     o»                              0                           IOO      0           &

                        -------------------



qZ.                                            G ,                              O                0          ICC     0        2           0        100     O       2       0       to o
                 -2 0    i c-      .

     •




                 ! 0    2 -C .                 G              \* b>C=».         0     H          0          \o o    0                  0           lo o   a       IM-     0       10a
73
                                                '
                                                                                             ■


                                                                                      sb                   100      0                   0          lo o   0        3>     0       IOC)
7 m-             2 Q 1 -C ,                     C,            o ° |G *         0




7*>                                            c=>            1* S     ^       0                 0         lo o .                       0         100     0              0         100
                                                                                      C1
                                                                                                                    ° #
                    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS,                                                                        ‘A s F F I E I . D WEDNESDAY,
                    CONSULTING ENGINEERS,                                                                         H ILLSBO RO UG H,
                    ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,                                                                            S H E F F IE L D S 3 1SW
                    23, KINGFIELD ROAD,
                    SHEFFIELD S 11 9AS                                                                           ANNUAL IN S P E C T IO N   1904
                                                                  HARRIER TESTS
                                                                                                                 JOB NO :       5840
                    DATE         /S//9^«e^                        RECORD SHEET

                    COMPLETED BY               ,

                                      MAXIMUN TEST LOAD                ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
iRRIER   BARRIER SIZE
>ST      & No. OF SPANS                         APPLIED                TEST 1                            TEST 2                               TEST 3
                                                LOAD                                                             LOAD                       RES1   LOAD   / load
                                                                                                                                                          u        % REC
                                      KN/M      TONNES                REST   LOAD       U/lOAO   %REC    REST                    % KEC



                                                      I■tz>Cc=>                  \<2     o        lo o   O                       \oo        o              CD
                 ? .c ,.              CU




                                                                                                                                 loo                       CD       loo
         S2Q     \ •C o                              <o •^ C p,                                   lo O           2=>     c=>




                                                                                                                                  IC O                     o        I C O
                                       Q>.           o                O                           IC O




                                                                                         o        loO    O                  O     (CO       o             o>       lo o
7*1       '2.0     1*O r              Gs».




                                      A vai Zaj In       Space               h a   II   f e e I IQ
3o               \*Co      l £                                    .




                          2 *    b-                         n


                                                                                                                                  to o       o             o        |O. -)
                                                     CJ «=!£»#               3           o       IC O
                              EASTWOOD & PARTNERS,                                                                            SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY,
                              CONSULTING ENGINEERS,                                                                          "^LLSBOROUGII,
                              ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,                                                                              SHEFFIELD SS 1SW
                              23, KINGFIELD ROAD,
                              SHEFFIELD Sll 9AS                                                                               ANNUAL INSPECTION 1984
                                                                             CARRIER TESTS
                              M l                                            RECORD SHEET                                     JOB NO:          5840

                              COMPLETED BY
                                                      y?.


RRIER          BARRIER SIZE                     MAXIMUN TEST LOAD                 ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
ST             & No. OF SPANS
                                                              APPLIED         TEST 1                                     TPST 2                            TEST 3
•
                                                              LOAD
                                                KN/M          TONNES         REST     LOAD         u/loao    %REC    REST     LOAD   u/loao.   % REC   RES1    LOAD   u/ load   % REC

at                                               Aw\nU A t          6>nv.r   _y6o                      Td e H   5.
                                                                                                                                                ♦
                                                                                                                                                                                -- -



               |i 9        2- •+ ■              O     .         *
                                                                1             a        a           0          lo o       O    a       0         IO O   O       e»      0


J      e

•.3.            z_f.   l    rU       i4 Q       (0              O'CfL ,       a       5            0          100    0               0         IOO         O   3       ta        lo< :>

                                                                                                             r?
                                  2td>          J iv A lU 5 U       6 PACZ 7 o O            a II    To   k   KlQ.

                                 3 1u                     n             t*        h    1
                                                                                       1            11        1<
                                                 *
                                                                                              ■

5^.             lQ         2-7,                 Co.             t(*Z>        0        if?          0         1
                                                                                                             00      O       1
                                                                                                                             6:3     0         100     O              O         |o :j
                                                                                                                                                               l£»




e>.             2 O         ••Cs>               6                             0       2       :    a         IOO     O       ^2      0         loo     O       -2     O         lo. >


           i                                1                            i    H
                                                                                                                     •
                      EASTWOOD & P ARTNERS,                                                                             M E F F IE L D WEDNESDAY,
                      C O N S U LT IN G E N G IN E E R S ,                                                              11LLSBOROUGH,
                      S T . ANDREWS HOUSE,                                                                             S H E F F IE L D S8 1SW
                      2 3 , K IN G F IE L D ROAD,
                      S H E F F IE L D S 11 9AS                                                                        ANNUAL IN S P E C T IO N       1984
                                                                      B A R R IER TESTS
                                                                                                                       JOB NO :               5840
                      LATE                                            RECORD SHEET

                      COMPLETED BY               "pf



                                       MAXIMUN T E S T LOAD             A L L D IM E N S IO N S    ARE I N   M IL L IM E T R E S
R R IE R     B A R R IE R S IZ E
ST           & N o . O F SPANS
                                                       A P P L IE D     TEST    1                             TE S T 2                                  TE S T 3
•
                                                       LOAD
                                                                       REST    LOAD       U/lOAO    %REC     REST       LOAD       u/ load.   % REC   REST    LOAD   u/ load
                                       K N /M          TONNES

               Q 'Q / ' Cs>              k    v a i La 7lx                    b h iA ll Io   k     )h .                                         •




                          ~



             a
-        i   J
    •;




                                          •
                      •                                                               •




                                                                 •                                               •
/

                                                                                              74
                            SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

        Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,      Sheffield,   on
        9th August, 19 8 4 .

        PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wed n es d ay Football Club pic
                                                                    t
                   R. Chester    (Secretary)
                   J. Strange    (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)

                   Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

                   S. Allcocfc (South Yo rkshi re C o u n t y Fire Service)
                   N. Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                   Ms. J. Barker (South    Yorkshire          Police)
                   C. W. Calvert (South    Yorkshire          Police)
                   R. Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                   D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council;' •
                   D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

        JL________ Purpose of Meeting

        The purpose of the meeting was   to carry out    the "summer" inspection of the
        Stadium   in accordance with the policy of         twice yearly visits toFootba.Il
        League Grounds in South Yorkshire.

        2.         Ground Inspection

        A.         South Stand

        The progress of the alterations and extensions to the understand area, of the
        Stand (ndtified by the letter dated 16th May fron Mr. G. Gardner, Chartered
        Architect, and commented on by the Officer Working Party through the Chief
        Executive's letter dated 31st May) were noted.  The Club reported t ha ~ the
        contractors had stated that all except the Banqueting Suite would be finished
        by the start of the season.

        IT WAS AGREED that the areas of spalled concrete cn the vertical colunns at the
        rear of the Stand required attention.
    J
        B.         West Stand and Terrace

        IT WAS AGREED   -

        (i)       That the cracked brickwork (adjacent to the concrete v er t ic a l cci'jm
        at the rear of the Stand adjacent to the North-^est Terrace) should continue
        to be monitored.

        (ii)     That the damaged angled support brackets to the pitchside security
        fence at the front of the Terrace should be repaired or replaced.

        C.         North West Terrace

        The wire mesh barriers on the inside of the upper access desk had b e e n
        test-loaded (as suggested at the meeting on 29th February, 1984), and had
        satisfactorily met the Green Guide requirements.




                                                E)
D.        North Stand

It was noted that a metal water storage tank had been installed adjacent to the
ramped access to the upper stand level.  It was also noted that a store area
had been formed by timber screening under the stand between the outer edge of
the walkaway and the Gymnasium building.

IT WAS AGREED that the County Fire Service would investigate the acceptability
of the timber screened store area and/or the items stored, and inform Mr.
Vaughan of the outcome.

E.        Spion Kop

That part of the perimeter fencing erected at the norther end of the ramp at
the rear of the Kop to prevent access to the roofs of the new facility (referred
to at the meeting on 29th February, 1984) had be e n up-graded and satisfactorily
tested to the Green Guide requirements.

The brick built screening wall in front of the Male Toilets underneath the
"Stands" Club had been braced by metal supports.

It was noted that the condition of the spalled concrete and corrosion of the
roof of the tunnel exit from the Kop had continued to deteriorate, as had the
dividing wall between the Spion Kop and the South Stand and the outer perimeter
wall at the Penistone Road end of the Stadium.

IT WAS AGREED   -

(i)        That Mr. Strange should let Mr. Sheriff have proposals in writing
for stabalising the condition of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Kop (in
view of the C l u b ’s reported intention of proceeding with development proposals
in the comparatively near future), following which Mr. Sheriff will let
Mr. Vaughan have detailed comments.

(ii)       That the removal of loose coping stones and the pointing of the vail
between the Spion Kop and the South Stand (mentioned at the 11th August, 1983
inspection) should be carried out as an urgent maintenance item.

(iii)     That, as it apparently now serves no useful purpose, the damaged
corrugated metal sheeting between the Spion Kop and the South Stand should be
removed.

(iv)      That pointing work should be carried out as a matter of urgent
maintenance to the outer perimeter wall pending agreement between the Building
Authority and Dr. Eastwood as to its stability (during the present close season,
as mentioned at the 29th February, 1984 inspection).

(v)       That the redundant wooden post and loose wire adjoining the walkaway
at the top of the Spion Kop should be removed.

F.        Lighting Pylons

The visual inspection of the lighting pylons during the present close season
(as mentioned at the 29th February, 1984 inspection) had not yet be e n carried
out .

IT WAS AGREED  that, pending the visual inspection of the lighting pylons,
corrosion of the base of the pylon at the rear of the West Stand and of the
adjoining fence posts and manhole cover, required attention.
G.          Crush Barriers
                                a

It was pointed out that the sets of tests carried out in June had completed
the five year test cycle at the Stadium.  The cycle would re-commence inext
year.

3 .______   General Safety Certificate

The numerous alterations to the Stadium since the issue*of the G e ne r al Safety
Certificate on 21st December, 1979, were recalled.

IT WAS AGREED that up-dated plans were r e quired for incorporation into, the
General Safety Certificate in order to indicate the present facilities at the
Stadium.

4 ._________Toilet and Catering Facilities

The Club gave an advance indication of the likely up-grading of toilet: and
catering facilities (particularly in the South Stand), subject to the ®utccoe
of an application for grant from the Football Improvement Trust.         In trhe more
immediate future, the caterer in question had expressed a wish to ser^r-e food
from the rear of the West Stand through serving hatches instead of f r o m insice
The area used would remain the same.   If structural alterations were rsquiref,
the Club would also require building r e g u l at i on approval from the C i t y Council
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

                Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,
                         Sheffield, on 23rd January, 1985

PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic

           R. Chester (Secretary)
           Dr. W. Eastwood (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

           S.   Allcock (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           N.   Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           R.   Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           G.   Robins (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
           D.   Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           G.   Stanley (South Yorkshire Police)
           D.   I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1 .___ Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to carry out the "winter" inspection of the
Stadium in accordance with the policy of twice yearly visits to Football
League Grounds in South Yorkshire.

2.   Ground Inspection

A.   South Stand

The alterations and extensions to the understand area of the Stand (which
had been completed since the "summer" inspection) were shown to the Officer
Working Party.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)   That any further areas of spalled concrete on the vertical columns at
the rear of the Stand would continue to be monitored and receive attention
by the Club as a matter of maintenance.

(ii) That the unsecured wire to the illuminated "Exit" sign in the Match
Day Sponsors Lounge would receive attention by the Club.

(iii) That the remaining bridge between the Stand and the Club at the rear
of the Stand (now used solely as a means of escape from the Kitchen area)
should be infilled with mesh from a safety point of view to accord strictly
with the appropriate Regulations.

(iv) That the two emergency lights in the Club not operative at the time
of the inspection would receive urgent attention by the Club.

B.    West Stand and Terrace

The Club recalled the practice followed in consultation with the South
Yorkshire Police of separating home and visiting supporters at the rear
of the Stand at certain matches (such as with Liverpool) by erecting
temporary barriers. This worked well but on all other normal occasions it
was the policy of the Police to aim for exclusive use by visiting supporters
of the West Stand and Terrace. On those occasions when the number of
visiting supporters was small and the weather was inclement, it was
obviously desirable to allow home supporters access to a sheltered area.
 IT WAS AGREED -

(i)   That the Club would consider at some future date a scheme for
permanent barriers at the rear of the Stand, subject to any proposals
being submitted for prior approval by the Officer Working Party in the
usual way.

(ii) That the cracked brickwork (adjacent to the concrete vertical column
at the rear of the Stand adjacent to the North-West Terrace) should continue
to be monitored.

(iii) That the apparent rusting of the steel columns at the rear of the
Stand should receive appropriate treatment by the Club.

C.    North West Terrace

No comments.

D.    North Stand

IT WAS AGREED that so long as larger, not easily combustible, materials
continued to be stored in the timber screened store area under the Stand,
the area would be regarded as acceptable.

E.    Spion Kop

It was noted that the remedial work to the roof of the tunnel exit from
the Kop had stabilised its condition for the time being (pending the
Club’s development proposals proceeding'; that the loose coping stores
had been removed from the top of the wall between the Spion Kop and the
South Stand, and that the damaged corrugated metal sheeting between the
Spion Kop and the South Stand had been replaced.

IT WAS AGREED -

(i)   That the condition of the roof of the tunnel exit from the Kop should
continue to be monitored.

(ii) That the Club would carry out the pointing work to the outer perimeter
wall on Penistone Road once the frosts had ceased.

F.   Lighting Pylons

The visual inspection of the lighting pylons (first mentioned at the
inspection on 29th February, 1984) had yet to be carried out by the Club.

IT WAS AGREED that the visual inspection of the lighting pylons would be
carried out by the Club in the near future (weather conditions permitting).

3.___ Public Address System

The Club pointed out that an improved public address system had been installed,
and the Police confirmed that reports received indicated that it was noticeably
better than the previous system.
- 4.   Toilet and Catering Facilities

 The Officer Working Party confirmed that plans for the revised catering
 facilities at the rear of the West Stand had been received from the Club's
 Architect and had been formally approved.

 The Club reported that the scheme for the general up-grading of toilet and
 catering facilities (particularly in the South Stand) was shortly to be
 considered by the Board.

 IT WAS AGREED that the Club would submit the proposals for improved toilet
 and catering facilities for approval in the usual way, subject, of course,
 to the Board's decision whether to proceed with the scheme.
     D V /M B/583    #                                    13th September, 1978.




Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Greminds A ct, ID75

Confirming the telephone conversation which Mr. D . Vaughan of my staff had with
you today, s o that any points of difference may be fully discu ssed before subm ission
of the draft Safety C ertificate to the forthcoming meeting of the F ir e Service
Committee, I propose to tjall a meeting of the Officers* Working P arty. This
w ill be held at 10.30 a .m . on Thursday, 21st Septmnbar, 1978, in the Conference
Room at County Fire S ervice Headquarters, Division Street, Sheffield. I regret
that you w ill not be able to be present in person but, a s agreed, I should be obliged
ii you could arrange to be represented. In the hope that it w ill a s s is t y o u , I attach
a copy of the observations made by the Chief Constable and th ■ Chief F ire O fficer.

A lso attached is a copy of the application received f r o m the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club Ltd. for a General Safety C ertificate under the Act for the Hillsborough
Stadium, together with a ccpy of my reply and of the letter dated 23rd August, 1978
(received today') from the Horae Office. I would hope that p r d iminary consideration
can be giver* to this application on the 2 1st Septem ber, 1378.

                                                  Y ours faithfully,




                                                  Chief Executive




Dcpfirtawiil cf           and
Town Hall,
Sheffield.
SI 2IIB                           03
                                                                                        77



                DV/AW /583 'i               OPS/JPR/AH                13th Septem ber, 1978




Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds A ct, 1975

I thank you for your letter dated 5th September, 1978.

fo that any points of difference may be folly discussed before subm ission
of the draft Safety C ertificate to the forthcoming m eeting of the F ire Service
Committee, I propose to ca ll a meeting of the Officers* Working Party. T his
w ill be held at 1 0 .3 0 am on Thurscfey, 21st Septem ber, 1978, In the Conference
Room at County F ire Fervlce Headquarters, D ivision Street, Sheffield. I
apologise that I w as not able to contact you by ’phone before writing this letter,
but It would be appreciated If, despite the com paratively short notice, you
could arrange to be represented. In the hope that it w ill a s s is t you, I attach a
copy of the Chief F ire Officer’s observations.

A lso attached Is a copy of the application received from the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club Ltd for a General Safety Certificate under the A ct for the
Hillsborough Stadium, together with a copy of my reply and of the letter dated
23rd August, 1978 (received today) from the Home Office. I would hope that
preliminary consideration can be given to this application on the 2 1 st September,
1978. A s you are aw are, It Is usual for the Chief Ftiperlntendent (or h is
representative) of the relevant Division to be present when any d iscu ssion s take
place covering ground(s) In their area.

                                      Yours faithfully,




                                      Chief Executive.




The Chief Constable,
Soutii Yorkshire P o lice,
Police Headquarters,
Snlg Hill,
Sheffield.
S3 8LY
                                                                           FP19/2/4
C^lef F ir e Officer                                                        HBD/HP
                                                 Mr. D. Vaughan             DV/MB/
Chief Executive                       Ext. 422                               583


Safety of Sports grounds.Act, 1975                                           1 3 .9 .7 8



I thank you for your mem o of 11th August, 1978.

So that any points of difference may be fully discussed before subm ission of the
draft Safety C ertificate to the forthcoming m eeting of the F ir e Service Committee,
I propose to call a meeting of the O fficers' Working Party. T his w ill be held
at 10.30 a .m . on Thursday, 21st September, 1978 in the Conference Room at
your Headquarters. I apologise that I w as not able to contact you by 'phone before
writing this letter, but it would be appreciated if, despite the com paratively short
notice, you could arrange to be represented. In the hope that it w ill a s s is t you,
I attach a copy of the Chief Constable's observations.

Also attached is a copy of the application received from the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club Ltd. for a General Safety C ertificate under the A ct for the Hillsborough
Stadium, together with a copy of my reply, and of the letter d£ ted 23rd August,
1978 (received today) from the Home Office. I would hope that prelim inary
consideration can be given to this application on the 21st September, 1978.




                             m
                    GP/.262/DKB



                    2 7 th A u g u s t, 1986




Mr. R." H. C h e a te r,
                                                                                                ; : : A '- ■
                                                                                                 . ■       ,
S e c r e ta r y ,
S h e f f ie ld Wednesday F o o tS a ll Club P .L .C .
H ills b o r o u g h ,
SHEFFIELD.
S6 1SW




Dear S i r ,

S a fe ty o f S n orts Grounds A ct 1973 - C a p a c ity o f th e new Spion Kop

1 r e f e r t o th e m e etin g o f tf>e CeneratX Purposes Panel o f th e C it y C o u n c il w hich
took p la ce on Thursday ;,.21a&. Aupnst 19*6 w hich you and o th e r r e p r e s e n ta tiv e s o f
th e Club a tte n d e d .

1 am w r i t i n g to c o n f l n r t S n t th e Panel agreed to in c re a s e the c a p a c ity o f th e
Kop to 2 1 ,0 0 0 s p e c ta to r s s u b je c t to th e f o llo w in g c o n d it io n s : -

       (a )   t h a t the I n f i l l i n g   of" cru sh b a r r ie r s   ta k es p la ce p r i o r to th e natch
        ■ ■ ■ on 2 5 th Augustsv""

       (b )    the o th e r worfc r e f e r r e d t o b e fo re t h * Panel be completed w it h in 2
               weeks ( i * ® -    4tf» September 19S 6 )t

       Cc)     e x t r a s te tw r d in tf " " b e d a r i n g the next 2 matches to th e
                                                                                                               '
               s a t i s f a c t i o n © « f'th e. F i r e S e rv ic e and th e P o lic e .                    •
                                                                                                               :‘'
                                                                                                               v'
O b v io u s ly , a l l worfc im to Be c a rrie t? o u t Co th e s a t is f a c t i o n o f th e
C e r t i f i c a t i n g A u t h o r it y sod tint- Panel a u th o ris e d ne to ta k e any n ecessary a c t io n
t o secure com pliance w it h th e abow* c o n d itio n s .
                            \



                                   ft:                            /




                                                                                 734690 - M r. Bowncs
                                                                                                                                        ■■■■■••. -■   ■.. ■■■■


                                                                                                                                                -IV-,



                        During Mr. Bownes* visit to the natch on 25th August it was noted that very
                        little of the fencing which should have been installed to protect the sheeting
                        at the rear and sid*»» of the Kop was in fact in place and U Is slso understood
                        that the P.A. System on the Kop was not in operation during that natch. It was
                        also noted that several pieces of fencing were in fact wired to the structure of
                        the Kop presumably as a temporary measure. I consider these'items important and
                        that it is in everyone's interest that they are dealt with Immediately and in
                        any event before the natch on 30th August.

                        I have sent a cops' of this letter to Dr. Eastwood as usual.

                        Yours f a i t h f u l l y *




                        Head of D ep artm ent


                                              .-'-o 'V~- ;V--' •; •.




                                                   ...




                                                                                                           .VS-;..
                                       .■ •




                                                                                        < :¥ ;
                                                                                             ':-Cy:
                                                                                                 v-




                                                                                                  S .- .;, Vv^.VV




                                                                                               vvssM                      ; ;
                                                                                              •     v ••      -.      I           -




      .
      . • ■'   --
                    '             H   -v"

;                                                                                         ' '■;:/'v;v::,;.?vv:.,.-
'V.                 x     .   ■                                                             ,V;        V.            ..
::fM '
                        PB                                                                                                      V-’-:
                                      V*
                                                                                                                          fV-
                                                                                             "'vVv




                                                              ...


                                              i,?\. “ V
                                        &    ia n o       i s    r e a a y    r o r   p » g    iu w                        i   -   w                      i                                         :




IT C A N m e a n aM
tf te d i f f e r e n c e ! o k n o w
that the O n e w h o
                                        Cheers all round as new
                                        Kop gets safety all-clear
' O v c * u s is in c o n t r o l
H   L    S te ve n s o n
w rote      1I c a m e about
i'ke a w e l l - h a n d l e d
sh ip    T h e r e s t o o d at
tnc w h e e l that
stee rsm an w h o m we
r.i;; God "
                                                                                              SHEFFIELD Wednesday can open their
                                                                                              £l million showpiece Kop to 21,000 fans
                                                                                              on Monday.             By John Timney
                                                                                                  That         was          the        ti"od                                                        ‘




    WARM HEARTS
                                                                                              n e w s a l t e r .1 t e n s e n i c o t ­                      l u s t u n d e r I '.< 11if) t i i         u'-c
                                                                                              in e at t h e I ow 11 H a l l                                   t h e n e w si . m i l
                                                                                              part           of      w hk h            " ii'                     The       d e c is io n          by c ity
                                                                                              b e h i n d clos ed doo r s                                     councillors                    a l l o w itie
                                                                                                                                                              K o p to be               ciled f o r the
                                                                                                  H u t ( ) » Is i l u i r m a n
                                                                                                                                                              glam our                i c h a ga i ns t
                                                                                              Bert M c G e c p l e d g e d after ­
                                                                                                                                                              Evcrton c;              c     a lte r they




     FOR ROG
                                                                                              wards t h a t 11 w a s not t h e
                                                                                                                                                              were told                   fire e x perts
                                                                                              e n d o f the s t o r y T h e club
                                                                                                                                                              and other                   civ o ffi c ia l s
                                                                                              will he b a c k l a i e r t o try to
                                                                                                                                                              tha t the fi            rc <>l        21.000
                                                                                              eel a certificate allowing
                                                                                                                                                              u»s v i l e            w i t h .1 c o u p l e
                                                                                                                                                              ol to n d id o n s

                                                                                                                                                Am .               I hese .1re t h . i ! s o t n e o f
                                                                                                                                                              t h r 1 ru s h h a r n c r > arc
                                                                                                                          S«ii Rim                            " i n f i l l e d " w i t h mesh to
                                                                                                                          hrs ins    F            (
                                                                                                                                                              M o p fans slid in g th ro u g h ,
                                                                                              Seartwroufcto .                      H5#           15
                                                                                                                                                              a n d i h r ra is in g o l some
                                                                                              Bridlington . .              VI .67 59             15
                                                                                                                                    66           10           rails a n d a d t li t i o n . i l tails
                                                                                              CrMMT ____                  1J
                                                                                              Sifjiw-u                    1.7     -              17               I it       th e         1 1r >!        1w o
                                                                                              Ijmrvtnft                   22        t4           18           m a t c h e s t h e r e n m . i be
                                                                                              fUctoii                     II    -   64           Iff          r v t i * s ie w a r th n g <* the
                                                                                              Margate                               66           11           Kop        the c o u n c il c o m ­
                                                                                              liattMgs .                  1 1 •2 64              M            m i t t e e s ai d .
                                                                                              Fjtittotiroe . .            1 8 01 6^              17
                                                                                                                                                 17                I he c o m m i t t e e w a h t o l d
                                                                                              Srmtlnfa                    1 2 .13 6)
                                                                                                                                                              hv D r H i l l I a M w o o i l . w h o



                                                 :rH:
                                                    —_  _;jLLC.l'"tbPrC*T                     Torquay ..... .
                                                                                              FaUaoetb ...
                                                                                              Pwuaoce ... .
                                                                                                                          1.7 .3^ 61
                                                                                                                          I t .41 61
                                                                                                                          *.6 M 61
                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                              de signed the K o p                 ih .i t
                                                                                                                                                              H i l l s b o r o u g h is p r o b a b l y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P a m e la A rm strong: B B C -tx xind



                                             |r:'
                                                -^r—     -SSTT-~7Tr                           Newquay .... ,
                                                                                              Ilfracombe .
                                                                                                                          1 2 .67 61
                                                                                                                               .04 61
                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                              th e saleM p r o u r i d in the
                                                                                                                                                              c o u n try     a lre a d y . and                          Newsreader Pam
                                             M       ,...■4 ...v.lIiHiJ
                                                                                              Tmby ........                - .16 50              15           a d d itio n a l w o rk w o u ld
                                                                                              \nt;lesfy .... .            I.«       6!           16           m a k e it e v e n s a l e r
                                                                                              Prestatyn ...                  - •> 64             to
                                                                                              ( 6lwy» Ray .                                      17               • \f te r th e m c e tin y .            Mr
                                                                                                                          1 ♦ .04 6J
                                                                                              SwHhport                    2.S ... 61             17           M cGee       sa id    hr       was
                                                                                                                                                              pleased w i t h ll ie o u t c o m e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UN       n e w 'rc id c r       Pamela      B i r m i n g h a m as p a r t o ! th
                                                                                              Douglas ......              I t 06 5S              13
                                                                                                                                                              H e describ ed s o m e til the                      Armstrong                       '^ 011      It BC s          new           . 11 m



                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                Ii
                                                                                                                                                              tears raised a ' a " s t o r m in
                                                                                                                                                              a te a c u p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sunday            ; > l.:.,vme N e w s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  at T en i<< i o n : ii;.- B B (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 h.edules
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mi s- . V 1r n i t r o n j       ; i . ' t *1

                                            Jy Economic Hallmark                              M W W -di*     1 b4   IX M ill.                        u            "1 n e v e r h a d a m q u a l m s                 M i's        A iitistion i;,      who
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I in    tail.     tiH o w c d         Se l in
                                                                                                             > **    ' 1 M ■ »■        (       «* '»          abiw t       it ”      he s.ud            " I lif                                               ■si o l t a n d        Anna            lo r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  has    «. o pi,•■.. t i l e d     1I N -
                                                £10 off and free fitting                      1U< 1H M ,     . *  1      N»|J«


                                                                           £ 107*                                     ’  Nt‘ t         1 .1                   a u t h o r i t i e s h a v e l>ecn l u l l s                                                   h -lo rc       he r    on     Nc» -.
                                                                                                                                            M 2*                                                                  n.ic-ship news b u l l e t i n i . u
                                            /vorth £27.50. No\,                                                                            1W ^               c o n s u l t e d a l l j a l o n g a n d it        the    p a st    t«o      ic a rv    m l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ■'l-'tt'ourspoa
                                                                                              ( 1(fruit fa          |*i                    I         3«       is e x c e l l e n t w o r k o n t h e                                                          ^^Pdivorcec. 'he bcfa
                                                        :r                                                                                                    p a r i o f b o i h de signers a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  read     her       last    M.rij'l    • n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ! .ei r : i r d i *   ' i ' * L :■        I 'i ’
                                                                                                               SJ >                                                                                               Amtu't
                                                                                                                                  ■ '-jm
                                    Gr

                                    i-X/ilS                                                                                             mmmmm
                                                                                                                                      mmsm
                                    L+. t.i.                       .'i
                                                                                                                                              mk..

                                                                                                                                              £'
                                                                                                                                             $1111’.
                                                                                                                                                   ’
                                                                                                                                                   ^.,"‘

                                                                                                                                              mSMMM'
       >;* ,*,vz. L •■<,’
                        . <U t sil &'■'Co,                                                                                           mmmmm 'it
       , j ^ j xc* l t . r                                                    - -..-rj.-'Z                                           -iSSm/gm
”   v . - S t ' , - ' ' P e t e r s ' H o u s e '. .                   , ; , .; . .
    :; Barts head ,".. ■'.• '                         ■ .■ '' '                       ’V".-/': ■.                                      mmm
    v -s h e f f i e l d        ,                                                                                                           mmmm
              IZ -.
                                                                                                                                           fipa

    -.,;f o r - ■>; .s. *<...- i of Mr.                                                                                                    “SIM’®

    T M a t/ S ir ,                      "      . ■. '■■'• ;

       s'heffield Wednesday

       1 refer l-.- v*,r i. r.^c- at lie* .Uu -si'       ■ ’o-^tv- Is connection tfit.« 'the.'
                                                                                             ■ :"
       Queens visit 'to' the -Football Club o&. 1-
                                                 2 ,tli . v e c w r . The C ouncil \ui~ now-
       decided 'to issue a Public SntertaioaeDfs'"Lir£*<ic. i-: respect of tins event".'
       which-' ia .eacloaea wi t'*?■t'rii«■ lett?e;r.» :'                                                   ■ -.- -                                 ■■■■- - -■■■■-. ■■   .                  -*

      ■:f lease -a ls o tai       tl.I s letter, as'-nofl«:,;mttier ~cc!ln? 4 of the Surety ot
     .'"Sjiorts G ro u n d s a c t 1975 a r w t i d i a g - t t i e :C l u h s S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e - . - . ' , -.'Tile .'-- :
       Ztiitlii c a t e                  i ;; ' a r . t e a u c ; . i ' a s       callows           //In     'S c*tieciuie..-"I   in ... t h e       d efin itio n           . of - ; ' - ; . '
                   4' . , ; o         ... . » J t y " a f t e r the-';'. rfard;S/-f!Ttel i.;,joa:3.- Sonve«|:.ions,,;: f'te fp.libwi".ng;
              i-'i.             i            C t;
                                                c;u- ^ #.*.•* C.                      s. ;U-y4 l .-Vi S'jt iull-'-deteiIs>e£';«htrh.are suppi'i'ed.
        £o--3iid -approv<?.ii Ly tne Ct                                                 > ,. .« i                  , . iv.v,’
                                                                                                                            « icv ut i ...    oi
                                                    -erioa             of                   •   ,      I,      ■      .c                                          >. , r...-
    ,;4»va:Ka •».. '-. ■;
                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                  '.l.:



        • I    ,                                               t                                            • „      • .       -v              r ,   s'O*-;          1   •        tax.;
    '■v/uO^'" ^-y-.t-:■**' > ';-                                                                            i).c- Z-jaD: -L; 1

     '; ¥ guts; 'fal tl/f a l l ,
 EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                             S t. Andrews Hous
                     (C onsulting Engineers)                                                                     23 Kingfield Roa 8
D irecto r* :
                                                                                                                 Sheffield S11 9AS
W. Eastwood                    PEnfl., B.Enfl., Ph.D.. D Enfl.,                                                  Tel.: (0742) 583871
                               C.Eng., F.I.C.E.. P .P .l.S tructE ..
                               F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S.. M.Cona.E.
                                                                                                                 Telex:       547266
A. A. Wood                     B.Enfl., Ph D.. C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                                                                                                                 Fax:    0742 554330
                               F.I.Stroct.E.. M.I.W.E.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                               and a t:
R. C. A. Eastwood              B.S c„ C.Enfl., M.I.C.E.. M .I.Struct. e .

G. Spir                        C.En0., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.                                                         Premi er House
C. S. Greaves                  B.Eng., C.Eng.. M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.                                              12/13 Hatton Garden
                                                                                                                     London EC1N 8AN
S. Preston                     B.Eng., C.Enfl., M.I.C.E., M .I.StructE .
                                                                                                                     Tel.: (01) 242 7436
G. M. Seaman                   B.Sc., C.Eng„ M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.                                                Fax:     01 -4045424
C o n s u lta n t:
A. G. Burdett                  G.M., B.Sc.(Enj.), C.Ent.,                           O u rR ef:       WE/ JAS/PB/9 85 4
                               F.I.C.E.. F I.Struct.E.
                                                                                    Your Ref :


City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,                                                             15 January, 1988
Administration & Legal Department,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD SI 2HH.


For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes.


Dear Mr. Bownes,

                                  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                                       Safety of Sports Grounds Act 19 7 5

                 As requested in your letter to the Club date d 8
January, we reply to your letter dated 4 December.                                                              We will
reply to your earlier letter, dated 22 April, in the next
couple of days.

                 Going through the list of items accompanying your
letter of 4 December the following are being done or have
already been done by the ground staff - 1.1, 1.3, 1.5, 1.6,
1.8, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2 and 4.1.

                 The concrete post mentioned in item 1.2 has been
 taken down and a new barrier rail fitted to an existing
steel post.

                 I have not had the opportunity of speaking to Dr.
Eastwood about the rail in item 1.4.                                               He left for
Australia the day after I returned from six weeks leave.
However, enclosed is an extract from the terrace layout.
 Is it the rail which is shown in red that was agreed to?

                 Item 1.7 is not understood.                                You will recall that
 just before opening the Spion Kop, handrails were erected

A ssociates ;
J . A. Strange
C .E nf.. M.I.Struct.E.
                                  A. J. Clough
                                  B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S.E., M.II 23        R. Tandy
                                                                             C.Enf., F.I.Struct.E.


                                    An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No. 1833144
                                                                                                             J.   M. Wood
                                                                                                             B.Sc.. C.En*., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
EASTWOOD fr PARTNERS                                     SHEET




alongside the radial barriers where the members of the
Officer Working Party considered that the step between the
gangway and terrace was excessive.     I cannot find anywhere
on the new terracing where an unprotected drop of over
600mm exists.     Perhaps the location can be pointed out to
me please.

     We do not consider that the rendering on the gable
wall adjacent to gate 'O' warrants immediate repair.     How­
ever any loose rendering will be knocked down to prevent
it falling on passing spectators.     That job can be done by
the ground staff.

     As I recall, when the store mentioned in item 2.3 was
inspected on 6 August, there was nothing in there that
constituted a hazard.

     A prototype of a gate fastening is to be trialed
shortly.     I will let you know when it has been fixed so
that it can be inspected.    Perhaps that type of fastening
will also be acceptable on the gate mentioned in item 3.3.

     The comment in item 4.1 is noted but we consider that
a greater hazard exists outside the ground, caused by the
road works on Penistone Road.    I have personnaly seen two
members of the public injured when leaving the ground.
One fell into an unprotected deep excavation, another
tripped over a partly excavated pavement and required
medical attention after receiving cuts and grazes.     I am
not aware of any similar injuries occurring within the
ground over the past few years and feel that more benefit
to safety would be gained by tidying up the pavements on
Penistone Road.

     The comments in item 4.2 are noted.
EASTWOOD fr PARTNERS                                  SHEET   3




     I understand that the Club regularly liaise with the
St. John's people about manning levels and a sufficient
number of first aiders is provided for each game, in line
with the recommendations given by the Football League.




                                       Yours sincerely,




c.c. Mr. G. Mackrell,
     SWFC.
              fw ooD & partners                                                                                                             St. Andrews House
                  ( C o n s u l t i n g E n g i n e e r s)                                                                                  23 Kingfield Road
D ire c to r! :
                                                                                                                                            Sheffield S11 9AS
W. Eastwood                         F.Eng., B.Eng.. Ph.D., D.Eng.,
                                                                                                                                            Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                    C.Eng., F.I.CE-, P.P.I.Struct.E.,                                                                       Telex:       547266
                                    F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S.. M.Cons.E                                                                           Fax: (0742)554330
A. A. Wood                          B.Eng.,Ph.D.,C. Eng .F.I.C.E.,
                                    F.I.Struct.E.,M.I,W.E.M., M.Cons.E.                                                                                             a n d at :

R. C. A. Eastwood                   B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                               Premi er House
G. Spir                             C.Eng,,F.I.C.E.,M.I.Mech.E.                                                                                12/13 Hatton Garden
C.S. Greaves                        B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.                                                                    London ECIN 8AN
S. Preston                          B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                               Tel.: (01) 242 7436
                                                                                                                                               Fax.:    01 - 4045424
G. M. Seaman                        B.Sc.,C. Eng., M.I.C.E.. F.I.Struct.E.

Consultant :
A.G. Burdett                        G.M., B.Sc.(Eng.),C.Eng.,                                           Ou r R e f :     WE/JAS/SEB/1 0481
                                    F.f.C.E.,F.I.Struct,E.
                                                                                                        Yo u r R e f :




Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic,                                                                                   2 August 1988
Hillsborough
Sheffield
S6 1SW


For the attention of Mr. G. Mackrell


Dear Mr. Mackrell,
                                               Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975
                                                               Barrier Testing 1988

                  Over the four days 14,15,18 and 19 July 1988, the fourth
part of our five yearly cycle of barrier testing was carried out.
The barriers tested were numbers 121 to 124, 124A, 125 to 128,
128A, 129 to 136, 136A, 137 to 153 and 187 all of which are on
the lower area of terrace at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.
The location of the barriers tested is shown on our drawing
1610/64E, a print of which is enclosed.
                  The load testing was carried out in accordance with the
procedure set out in Appendix C of the 'Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds 1.
                  In all but one case the barriers tested, successfully
withstood the applied load.                                                   A clip over the rail of barrier 124
broke before reaching the full test load.
                  Visual inspection of all the barriers on the ground revealed
that some of the ends of the rails are corroded although those
tested on the Spion Kop last year and also those tested on the
Leppings Lane terrace this year all safely supported the test
load.
A sso ciates:
J . A. S trange             A. J. Clough                     R. Tandy                      J. M.Wood                     C. M. Pollard              R. K. Godden
C.Eng., F.l.Struct.E.       B.A„C.Eng.,M,CI.B.S.E,,          C.Eng., F . I . S | M | ^ f l ^ B.Sc., C,Eng., M.I.C.E.,    B.Eng., C.Eng., M.LC.E.,   A.S.C.A. (Accountant
                             M.I.Mech.E.                                                      M.I.Struct.E.              M.I.Struct.E.              & Administration
                                                             W m^ 4 •!                                                                               Manager)
                                            An Unlimited Compa^BHpKred in England - No, 1833144
ASTWOOD » PARTNERS                                      SHEET 2



     The rail on barrier 133 is badly corroded and should be
replaced now.    There was also a lot of movement of the rail on
barrier 144, when tested,and we also recommend that that rail
is also replaced.
     As agreed we have arranged for the clip on barrier 124 to
be replaced together with rails on barriers 133 and 144, before
the start of the coming season.
     Enclosed are single copies of our record sheets showing the
results of the barrier tests.



                                Yours sincerely,




c.c. Mr. A. Butler
     M r . D . Bownes

                           Qjj)
                                1      4        7       U 8              U9Co«ft
                      |-       -t — ■ !-   j-      >■1 —.I     f—
                           \        -—•-'3--'-:------ V-------- -3




                                                                       12M«ea


           &


                     S.W. PEN = 2 6 0 0 persons                          CENTRAL PEN= 2 2 0 0




. ^ ‘h *                                                               PLAN         ON WEST TERRA;
                                                :       -.   ..   *•
                                           IK
                                                                                ■   ?.r 5*:

                                                                                              v £» '“ •£»'         -
                                                                                                             H,:



               <£m
                                                                                      k2

            in ft---




2 2 0 0 persons            N.W PEN= 1600 persons


                       *                                                                                                       N.WCOkNER
                                                                                                                               (LOWER)
                                                                                                                               8 0 0 persons.


                                                                                                       *V,.. ^                  ■«
                                                                                                                                .v.f;t e t : :. - t o ^.-.                                   i*'* .A
                                                                                                                   ?   ' . * * * ■                      •




                       . J^r   .   . .« .   —.. . ’■   t-    jw“      ■    ■*   ■4-*: f v- " ■* ii, « f_r»''\'Hl
                       v*l                    '             ... • *
                                                                  '             *»?i SU    \          --JE    .S                                                     '
                                                                                                                                                                     K a a l ,^     t >%>r*
                                                                                                                                                                               ■*■< jjJfjJ*' ■ - ’*> 7“•

                                                                                                                                                             •l:-.-:.^V'   tf
                                                                                                                                                                            2*r^•*'
                                                                                                                                                                    .• £ Jfcv*?--  v**«r-
iMfe'      -*---i.-                                                       ,"■■■•/                 ■ - . # ' | l . i W '                                                           ' ' ,
 E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                                  St. Andrews House
                       ( C o n s u lt i n g E n g in e e rs )                                                                                23 Kingfield Road
 Directors :
                                                                                                                                             Sheffield S11 9AS
 W. Eastwood                               F.Eng., B .E ng., Ph.D ., D .Eng.,
                                                                                                                                             Tel.: (0742) S83871
                                           C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P .P .I.S tru c tE .,                                                           Telex:       547266
                                           F.I.M ech.E.. F.G .S., M .C ons.E .
                                                                                                                                             Fax: (0742)554330
 A. A. Wood                                B .E ng„ Ph.D., C .E n g .. F.I.C.E.,
                                           F.I.Struct.E., M .I.W .E.M ., M .C o n t.E .                                                                                     and a t :

ft. C. A. Eastwood                        B.Sc., C .E ng„ M.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                                Premier House
G.Spir                                    C.Eng., F.I.C.E., M .I.M ech.E.                                                                       12/13 Hatton Garden
C. S. Greaves                              B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E .                                                            London EC1N 8AN
S. Preston                                B.Eng., C .E ng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E .
                                                                                                                                                Tel.: (01) 242 7436
                                                                                                                                                Fax.: (01) 404 5424
G. M. Seaman                              B.Sc., C. Eng,, M.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett                             G .M .,B .S c.(E ng.), C.Eng.,
                                                                                                         O ur R e f:                            WE/KB/10481
                                          F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                         Y o u r R ef :




The Building Surveyor,                                                                                                                          19    April 1989
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council,
Building surveyor's Department,
Department of Land & Planning,
Town Hall,
Sheffield Si 2HH.


For the attention of Mr. D. Sheriff


Dear Mr. Sheriff,
                                                 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                                    Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
                                                                Barrier Testing 1988
                       Following your telephone call I am very pleased to enclose
a copy of my report to the Club concerning the barrier testing
at the West end of the ground in July, 1988.                                                                              You will see from
the carbon on page                                        2     that a copy of the letter part of our report
was certainly sent to Mr. Butler in your department and to
Mr. Bownes in the Legal department.                                                                   I know it is our normal
practice to send you all the record sheets but if we did not do
so, a full set is now enclosed.
                       I             also enclose a copy of the test certificate from Sheffield
Testing Works who checked the calibration of the testing equipment
the previous week.


                                                                                          Yours sincerely,



c.c. Mr. D. Bownes
A s s o c i a te s :
J. A . S tra n g e               A. J. Clough                            R.Tanj             J.M . W ood                   C.M . Pollard               R. K. G odden
C .E n g ., F .I.Stru ct.E .     B.A .,C .Eng.,M ,C .I.B .S.E .,         C .E ng., F.|      B.S c., C .E ng., M.I.C.E.,   B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,   F.S.C.A . ( A c c o u n ta n t
                                 M .I.M ech.E.                                              M .I.Struct.E .               M .I.Struct.E .             & A d m in is tr a tio n
                                                WE/JAS/SEB/10481



Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic,          2 August 1988
Hilisborough
Sheffield
S 6 1SW

For the attention of Mr. G. Mackrell

Dear Mr. Mackrell,
                     Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975
                           Barrier Testing 1988
      Over the four days 14,15,18 and 19 July 1988, the fourth
part of our five yearly cycle of barrier testing was carried out.
The barriers tested were numbers 121 to 124, 124A, 125 to 128,
128A, 129 to 136, 136A, 137 to 153 and 187 all of which are on
the lower area of terrace at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.
The location of the barriers tested is shown on our drawing
1610/64E, a print of which is enclosed.
      The load testing was carried out in accordance with the
procedure set out in Appendix C of the 'Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds*.
      In all but one case the barriers tested, successfully
withstood the applied load. A clip over the rail of barrier 124
broke before reaching the full test load.
      Visual Inspection of all the barriers on the ground revealed
that some of the ends of the rails are corroded although those
tested on the Spion Kop last year and also those t rsted on the
Leppings Lane terrace this year all safely supported the test
load.


                               EE)
     The rail on barrier 133 is    badly corroded and should be
replaced now. There was also a     lot of movement of the rail on
barrier 144, when tested, and we   also recommend that that rail
is also replaced.
     As agreed we have arranged    for the clip on barrier 124 to
be replaced together with rails    on barriers 133 and 144, before
the start of the coming season.
     Enclosed are single copies    of our record sheets showing the
results of the barrier tests.



                              Yours sincerely.




c.c. Mr. A. Butler
     Mr. D. Bownes
                                                BARRIER TESTING RECORD SHEET
                 SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C.PLC.                                                                                          EASTWOOD & PARTNERS,
                 HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                          CONSULTING ENGINEERS,
                 SHEFFELD
                                                                COMPLETED BY                                                           ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
                 S6 1SW                                                                                                                2 3 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                                   DATE      ('ir‘< 3",___                                             SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                                       Sll 9A S .
                                                                   JOB NO    10461


                                            TEST LOAD                                        ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
ARRIER           BARRIER SIZE
OST              ft No. OF             KN/M      APPLIED              TEST 1                              TEST 2                             TEST 3
0.               SPAMS                           LOAD
                                                 TONNES               REST      LOAD     U/LOAO   % REC   REST       LOAO   U/LOAO   %REC    REST   LOAO       U/LOAO   7.REC


1W - 8                       1 -2       Co              /• 4-Lf.       C                     o     loo    o          15      O       1C O     O       IH-       O       Joe

                            2-3.        &                1 M-tf        o                     CJ   ICO     o          II      o       /GO      o         II      o       IOC

         G



             r                Z-3>
                                        c?

                                        Co
                                                            /

                                                            I'<+*+■
                                                                      o

                                                                       o
                                                                                 >1

                                                                                 /^
                                                                                             o

                                                                                             o
                                                                                                  /CjO

                                                                                                   loo
                                                                                                          o

                                                                                                          c
                                                                                                                     /g

                                                                                                                     11
                                                                                                                             o

                                                                                                                             o
                                                                                                                                     /OO

                                                                                                                                     (OO
                                                                                                                                              o

                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                        n

                                                                                                                                                        /'Z-
                                                                                                                                                                o

                                                                                                                                                                c
                                                                                                                                                                         /cc

                                                                                                                                                                         /Cc



 /                           l-'Z       Qd              f • M-f-       o         11          p    1C O    o          1        o      /OO      o     n           c       lOc

                             2 -3       &               1              o                     o    zoo     o          9        o       1G o    c                 c       /cc



 ISi                        \~ z        Co              1-             c         >S          c    /oo     c          'H-     o        ICO    o        /q-           o   Joe



                                                                                                                 1
                                            BARRIER TESTING RECORD SHEET
             SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C.PLC.                                                                                           EASTWOOD & PARTNERS,
             HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                           CONSULTING ENGINEERS,
             SHEFFELD
                                                       COMPLETED BY                                                                 ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
             S6 1SW                                                                                                                 23 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                       DATE           3                                                             SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                                    Sll 9A S .
                                                       JOB NO     10481


                                      TEST LOAD                                    ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
JtRIER       BARRIER SIZE
1ST          * NO. OF               KN/M     APPLIED       TEST 1                                 TEST 2                                 TEST 3
^*           SPANS                           LOAD
                                             TONNES        REST      LOAO        U/LOAO   *4REC   REST           LOAO   U/LOAO   7.REC   REST   LOAO     U/LOAO   •/.REC

 ifSZ                               G            ( Lb Lh   O                       O       (CO     O                     O       /oo     CD       13       O      loo
                       i - 2_

                                    G                      o          1io          c       1C O    o             |(o      o      IOO      o       l(c>    o       IOC

         j

                                     Co           1-t+M-   c              /Zf_     c       /oc     O             /4~      o      /oo     o        iLf-    o           1Cc
JJ53

                        2-3          Co                    o          /            Co      /oo     o             /5      o       Ic o     o       tfD     o       IOC




                                1                 1         o        n            p        loo    o                      o       ICO     O        \lo     o       lex
jai                                  (u

                                                                                                                                                                  -

                                                                                 ------




                                                                                                         •
                                                                                                             1
                                                 BARRIER T E W I N G RECORD SHEET
                  SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C.PLC.                                                                                              EASTWOOD & PARTNERS,
                  HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                              CONSULTING ENGINEERS,
                  SHEFFSLD
                                                              COMPLETED BY                                                                  ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
                  S6 1SW                                                                                                                    2 3 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                                 DATE                                                                       SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                                            Sll 9A S .
                                                              JOB NO 10481

                                           TEST LOAD                                    ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
RRIER             BARRIER SIZE
)ST               ft NO. OF             KN/M       APPLIED         TEST 1                               TEST 2                                   TEST   3
%                 SPANS                            LOAD
                                                   TONNES          REST     LOAO      U/LOAO    •AREC   REST          LOAO      U/LOAO   •AREC   REST       LOAO     U/LOAO   •/.REC


 121                                     Cy              1 Lht~h    O        /<*       o        ICO      O                        C       1C O   C           t(+       o          ICO
                               f-Z                                                                                    'V

                                                         1 M-+-     o                  o         /GO    o                         o       )co    o              15    o           IOC
                               2-3        Co


              *1

 122      P                               u>             1 M-q-     o        IS         o        loo     o            n           o       ICo     o         n          o          lex
              1                   2
              m



 IZ3                            i-z      ic>            l           o                   o       ICO     o             ,ct         o      loo      o         V          o          IOC




 J2 .M-                        /- 2      (o             l M-4 -         ai -ip     e 2o k £ .                G<—Ji^       £<S
                                                                                                                                                                              -




J Z <+-*                       1- 2 .    6?              I-M+-      o       2 C1       /£        S <1   o                        5       7^       o         n                     foo
                                                                                                                                                                      o


                              Z-h         (p            1•w* .      o        2 i        5               0             IS         O       /oo      o         i(£>      o           too

                                                              1                                                  r
                                         BARRIER TggTING RECORD SHEET
           SHEFRELD WEDNESDAY F.C.PLC.                                                                                      EASTWOOD & PARTNERS,
           HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                     CONSULTING ENGINEERS,
           SHEFFIELD                                   COMPLETED BY
                                                                                                                            ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
           S6 ISW                                                                                                           2 3 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                        DATE      ^       ^                                                 SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                            SII 9A S .
                                                        JOB NO 10481


                                   TEST LOAD                                    ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
 \RRIER    BARRIER SIZE
 OST       A No. OF             KN/M      APPLIED           TEST 1                             TEST 2                            TEST 3
10.        SPANS                          LOAD
                                          TONNES           REST       LOAD    U/LOAO   •AREC   REST       LOAD   U/LOAO   MREC   REST   LOAO     U/LOAO   7.REC

  I2S                   1-2      (*                         o                   o      /C O     o         iq      O       /oo    O        R       O       ICO




  I2.G                     1      6?            1   u-q_    o         n         o       too     o                  O      ICO    O        /<*      O       /oo


          E1
                                                1 i+Lf-     o                   o      ICC     o          13      O       /oo    O        15       C       IOC
                                  Co




  12 8 _              1-   Z      (o           1            O          /4-     p       loo     o          '4*     C       loo    O                 O       /oc
                                                                                                                                          Iq-

                     Z-2>        G             1   ti-Lf    O          liv     o       IOO     o          l(o     O        loo   O        l(c>    O       /oc




  I2Sa                1-2.        c?           ! 4-4-       o          Zt      o       IO C    o          23       O      IOO     O     23        O       loo



                                                      •*
                                                                                                      I
                                        BARRIER T E S R N G RECORD SHEET
         SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C.PLC.
                                                                                                                              EASTWOOD & PARTNERS,
         HILLSBOROUGH
                                                            COMPLETED BY                                                      CONSULTING ENGINEERS,
         SHEFFIELD                                                                                                            ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
         S6 1SW                                                                                                               23 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                            DATE              19“’
                                                                                 ’3 ^                                         SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                              Sll 9A S .
                                                            JOB NO    10481


                                 TEST LOAD                                              ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
.MRIER   BARRIER SIZE
         * No. OF             KN/M       APPLIEp               TEST 1                               TEST 2                         TEST 3
         SPANS                           LOAD
                                         TONNES                REST       LOAO     U/LOAO   ItREC   REST   LOAO   U/LOAO   %REC    REST   LOAO     U/LOAO   7.REC


iz°i                  I '2      G                ) U-if                                      So              £5    3        m      o                o       /oo

                                G                                                            IC O            %     o       loo     o                o       /oo

                     3-M-                                                 23                                       o       IC O    o        2J      o       /oo




         I           S -G
                               _G


                                G
                                                 I M-   h       o         2Z


                                                                              n
                                                                                             lo o

                                                                                             lo o
                                                                                                    o

                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                           Z.4-    o

                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                           lo o

                                                                                                                            lo o
                                                                                                                                   o

                                                                                                                                   o
                                                                                                                                            Z<+-

                                                                                                                                            19      o
                                                                                                                                                            loo


                                                                                                                                                             lo c




 /So                            Co               j q-q-         O             15        O   loo              n      o      lo o     O       2o      C       IC O




 /2>i                1- 2.      Co               /•
                                                               O                        C    /o o   o      2.1      o       /C O    o     32-               ice;




                                             i    U-<f-         O             n     O       IOO     O        n             IOO     c        /7              io c
                                 Co
                                                  BARRIER raBTING RECORD SHEET
                   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C.PLC.                                                                                              EASTWOOD & PARTNERS,
                   HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                              CONSULTING ENGINEERS,
                   SHEFFIELD                                        COMPLETED BY                                                             ST. A N D R E W S H O U S E ,
                   S6 1SW                                                                                                                    2 3 K I N G F I E L D ROAD,
                                                                    DATE                  [<i&$                                              SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                                             Sll 9A S .
                                                                    JOB NO 10481


                                             TEST LOAD                                    A L L D I M E N S I O N S A R E IN M I L L I M E T R E S
ARRIER             BARRIER SIZE
OST                * No. OF                KN/M    APPLIED             TEST 1                               TEST 2                                   TEST 3
0.                 SPANS                           LOAD
                                                   TONNES              REST    LOAO     U/LOAO    *4REC      REST       LOAO   U/LOAO     •AREC      REST   LOAO    U/LOAO   V.REC

  )33                              l-z      (c?      1 M-f-                c              o       loo         o         3q-      o         loo        O       <*o     o      ICC



   /   34-                          1-2_    <b        /•*+<+               o   Z o        o        loo        o         n         o        loo           c>          o       loo

             C a               ..

   1 3 5 ^     i                            (o         y tnf-              O   ez        o        loo         o                   o         loo          o    30     o       1O O



                                   1-2     (a            1 M-H"        o           2%    A-        6 (o       o         LU        £5       S I        o               o       IOC.

                               Z 'S        Co            »'V4-          o          2A     <4-      81         O                   Z        °lo        a       2o     o        IC c


                               3-q-        (o                           o      Zjo                 So         O         \Ur        o       /oo        o              o        /O t


                                            (o           / •4"4f-       O      z\         z        9o         o         19        o        loo        o               O       ICC
--- ... _ .

                               5            (o           I 4-i   -      O      Zo         f5       ■75        o                  o         /CO       o                o       /c c
                                                                                                                                                              l(o
                                                                 ^'
                                                                                                                    1
                                         BARRIER TESTING RECORD SHEET
           SHEFRELD WEDNESDAY F.C.PLC.                                                                                              EASTWOOD & PARTNERS,
           HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                             CONSULTING ENGINEERS,
           SHEFFIELD                                     COMPLETED BY          ____
                                                                                                                                    ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
           S6 1SW                                                                                                                   23 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                         DATE                                                                       SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                                    Sll 9A S .
                                                         JOB NO      10481


                                     TEST LOAD                                   ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
ARRIER     BARRIER SIZE
>OST       * No. OF             KN/M      APPLIED             TEST 1                            TEST 2                                  TEST 3
'0.        SPANS                          LOAD
                                          TONNES              REST      LOAO   U/LOAO   •1REC   REST           LOAO   U/LOAO   %REC     REST   LOAO   U/LOAO   V. RE C

 )3>(^A                 /-z       (o             / 44-         O         /2      O      /OO      O              >s-    o       1o   o    O             o       /^o



 131                   i-Z       Co              1, q_4_      o          32      4-     63      o              3o       4-     SI        o       25    O       IOC


          ta
                                  (o             1 w-t-f       c        Z1               as     o              Z m-        I             c       ZZ    O       /OC



 J3°l                     i      Cp>              1            o         )S      o      JOO      o             15      o        IC O     o       15     O      /cc



 14 0                 )-Z        &               / H-4-       o                  z               o             n        o      /oo       o       11     o      /cc




 t 4-/                           Co              1 > Lf-li-   o          ZZ      e       si     o              Zo      o       /oo       o              o      /oc
                     i-z                                                                                                                       Zo
                                                                                                       1   '
                                         BARRIER TESTING RECORD SHEET
          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C.PLC.                                                                                           EASTWOOD & PARTNERS,
          HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                           CONSULTING ENGINEERS,
          SHEFFIELD                                  COMPLETED BY
                                                                                                                                 ST. ANDREWS HOUSE,
          S6 1SW                                                                                                                 23 KINGFIELD ROAD,
                                                     DATE                                                                        SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                                 Sll 9A S .
                                                     JOB NO      10481

                                  IE ST LOAD                                   ALL DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETRES
ARRIER    BARRIER SIZE
OST       ft No. OF            KN/M       APPLIEp          TEST 1                                TEST 2                                   TEST 3
<0.       SPANS                           XiUAO
                                          TONNES          REST      LOAO    U/LOAO    *4 REC      REST      LOAO    U/LOAO    •AREC       REST            U/LOAO   7. REC
                                                                                                                                                   LOAO

  I^y-e                          &             i           O         2-1      O        ICO         O                   O        /OO        O       Zl       <o      loo




                      i-Z        6             / if-M-     o       2-2        o        lo o        o       23         CD       lo o       o        2%      o       1C C



                                                                                                                                  *
                                 (o            /            o         2 o       3       R o    o           aq         Zi      2S           O       31          j
                                                         C(-2o\,1 :f. C.I lp*3 no/- Ir> ^cocl Cci-icl'f*•<o , nzy ■fenced L
                                                                                                                          ‘j',Uy rife;,



 I                    l- Z       Co            1*          o         je       o        lo o        <o       /6        O        lo o        o        IS     O       IOC



 ILj-Q?                  1       (o            1-          o         n        c        lOO         o        /e        o       too         o        /9       O      /cc


J+l                  1-2_        G                 iqjt o            ){        o       /OO
                                                                                                  o         n         o        /CO        o        /2      O       /cc
                     2 -A                                  o         l(o      o        /CO        O         >(o       o        /oo
                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                   /Cp     <9      /cr
CERTIFICATE OF CALIBRATION

  • SERIAL NUMBER   N0154




        0)
                                                                                                                    DATE OF           ISSUE

                CERTIFICATE OF CALIBRATION                                                                               15th J u ly 1988
                                                                                                                    SERIAL NO.
                                                            SHEFFIELD TESTING WORKS LTD.                                      N01 54
                                                            N u rsery Street                                        PAGE OF PAGES
                                                            Sh effield S3 8GP                                         1      2
                                                            Telephone (0742) 726581/2
                                                            Telex (547676 Chamco G) STW




            ISSUED TO:                               Eastwood & Partners
                                                     23 Kingfield Road
                                                     Sheffield
                                                     S11



           ORDER No.:                                Verbal, K.E.Pinhorn.


           MADE BY:                                  Enerpac


           DESCRIPTION:                              One hydraulic pump complete with two hydraulic cylinders.
                                                     The force on the cylinders, under an applied force is
                                                     measured by a pressure gauge mounted on the pump.


           IDENTIFICATION:                           Pump: D948005
                                                     Gauge: BGF 168 SR
                                                     Cylinder 1: 04773                      Model RC 53AF9N
                                                     Clyinder 2: 04772                      Model RC 530J8N


           METHOD

           The calibration was carried out in a Grade 0.5 lever arm testing machine                                                        in
           terms of the Technical unit of force the ton force (tonf). The uncertainty                                                      of
           the forces applied during the calibration is +_0.5%•

           Three tests were made on each cylinder.

           Tests were made to determine the reading indicated on the gauge at fixed loads.




           DATE OF CALIBRATION: 8th July 1988




                                                                       ES
This certific ate is issued o n th e understanding th a t it m ay n o t be rep ro d u ced
o th er th a n in full ex cep t w ith the p rio r w ritten approval of the Issuing
L ab o rato ry . All figures are a correct record of th e m easurem ents m ade and                C ertified .
are traceab le to U nited K ingdom national standards and to the units of
m easurem ent realised a t th e N ational Physical L aboratory.                                                  A uth o rised Signatory
                                                                         SERIAL NUMBER
  CERTIFICATE OF CALIBRATION
                                                                                  N01 54
                     SHEFFIELD TESTING WORKS LTD.


RESULTS
                                      Cylinder 04773

            Force                        Reading on Gauge inner scale

              Tons                               Tons

          Compression           Test            Test 2       Test 3       Average

               0.5               0.5             0.5          0.5         0.5

                1                 1               1            1            1

               1.5               1.5             1.5          1-5          1 -5

                2                 2               2            2            2

               2.5               2.5             2.5          2.5          2.5

               3                  3               3            3            3

              3-5                3-5             3-5          3-45        3-5

               4                  4               4            4            4




                                      Cylinder 04772

            Force                        Reading on Gauge inner scale

             Tons                                Tons

      Compression               Test 1          Test 2       Test 3      Average

              0.5                0.5             0.5          0.5         0.5

               1                  1               1            1            1

              1.5                1.5             1.5          1.5         1.5

               2                  2               2            2           2

              2.5                2.5             2.5          2.5         2.5

               3                  3               3           3            3

              3.5                3-5             3-5          3-5         3-5

               4                  4               4           4            4




                                                                    PAGE 2 OF 2 PAGES
                                                                                                                                                     POLIC E HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                                                                                     SN iG 'HILL
                                                                                                                                                     SHEFFIELD S 3 8LY
                                                                                                                                                     TELEPHONE (0 7 4 2 ) 7 8 5 2 2
                                                                                                                                         C
                                                                                                                                         ^
                                                                                                                                           t                     I
                                                                                                                                                                 •
                                                                                                                                                     TELEX ^ 4 4 9 5
                                                                                                                                           O ’t                  1

    A L L C O M M U N I C A T I O N S S H O U L D BE A D D R E S S E D T 6 T q £ £ * « e F V O N S T A B L E




                                                                                                                                                      YOUR REFERENCE              DV/MB/583/5
       F.A. Mallett, Esq., LL.B.,
       Chief Executive,                                                                                                                                                           OPS/BLM/JED
                                                                                                                                                      O U R REFERENCE
       South Yorkshire County Council
       County Hall,                                                                                                                                   DATE                        26th March 1980
       Barnsley,
       S70 2TN.



       Dear Sir,

       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

       I refer to your letter dated the 14th March 1980, concerning the above
       subject and would inform you that so far as our primary responsibilities
       are concerned, we do not have any current problems in respect of access
       for emergency ve hic les , terrace to touch line area or communications.

       The only matter outstanding so far as the Police are concerned is the
       provision of a suitable Police room and I understand that an -undertaking
       has already been received from the Club that this will be constructed
       in the closed season of 1980.  Xn dealing wi th this particular aspect,
       it would also be advantageous for a site to be made available, whereby
       ground control could be maintained from a position overlooking the play
       area and this is a matter which m ay be properly discussed at future



        [Yours faithfully




           Chief Constable




                                                                                                   ED
        THE O FFICER D E A L IN G W IT H THIS C O R R E S P O N D E N C E t S ............................................................... E X T E N S IO N


A O M /1
  ■a ;        VV O D D tr           a H f iMc R S                                                                         St..-Andrews ttous&       85
                           L nc inaer s )                                                                                 S : Kingfield Road
Directors:
                                                                                                                          Sheffield S11 3AS
W. Eastw ood          F.Eng,, B.Eng., P h.D ., D.Eng.,                                                                    ¥«§.: (0742) 583871
                      C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P .P .I.S tru c t.E ..                                                            Telex:       547266
                      F.I.M ech.E., F .G .S ., M .C ons.E .               CO:
A. A. Wood            B.Eng., Ph.D .. C .E ng., F.I.C.E.,                                                                                 and at:
                      F.I.Struct.E., M .I.W .E.S., M .C on s.E .

R. C. A. Eastwood     B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.S truct.E .                                                              36 High Holborn
G. Spir               C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.M ech.E .                                                                       London WC1V 6AA
                                                                                                                             Tel.: (01) 242 7436
Associates:
C.   S. Greaves       B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                            WE/KH/6648
                                                                                                       Oor R e f:
J.   A. Strange       C.Eng., M.I.Struct.E.

S.   Preston          B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.                                         Your R e f:          DV/AA/58 3/5
R.   Tandy            C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.

G.   M. Seaman ,       B.Sc„ C E n g ., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.

J.   M. Wood          B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.

Consultant:
A. G. Burdett         G.M., B.Sc.(Eng.), C.Eng.,
                      F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.




Department of Administration,                                                                                               2 9 November 19 85
South Yorkshire County Council,
County Hall,
Barnsley,
South Yorkshire,
S70 2TN.


For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan


Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                          Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975
                          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
              Thank you for your letter of 14 November setting                                                               out the
comments of the officer working party on the proposals for the
new roof over the Kop.                               Our response is as follows


1.            Disabled Facilities
              First it should be emphasised that the disabled will have
to be accommodated at ground level.                                                   No other arrangement is
possible at reasonable expense.                                             The choice is between putting
them in front of the North stand or in front of the Kop.
              Considering first the Kop, you will know that the terracing
drops down below the level of the perimeter track.                                                                         I t would
therefore be necessary to place the disabled slabbing and seating
behind the line of the present perimeter fence.                                                                      Each disabled
chair including manoeuvring space and also a runway in front
of the chairs occupies the same space as about                                                                  20      standing
spectators.           It would therefore be necessary to sacrifice the

                                     nlim ited C                   is t e re d   in   E n g la n d -    No.   1833144
E A S T W O O D £i- i'AilTwSrt




 equivalent of about              1000   standing spectator places to accommodate
 50 disabled people and their attendants.                  This would be
 extremely costly.               The Club has decided to increase the
 capacity of the Kop by 5000 people and the additional cost
 compared with merely roofing over the present Kop is in
 excess of £500,000.                Thus, if 1000 standing places were
 sacrificed the cost to the Club would be £100,000 at least.
 Ancillary expenses would include moving the boundary fence
 and reconstructing it to safety barrier standards plus the
 cost of the concrete hardstanding.                 We also have to keep in
 mind that not only would the spectators be in the firing
 line if anywhere near the goal but that in addition the new
 Kop roof only extends to the front of the terracing so that
 the disabled would be virtually unprotected from rain.
         The alternative proposal of leaving the disabled in front
 of the North stand has the advantage that the cantilevered
 roof extends some way in front of the seating so that there
 is some protection from rain except when the wind is blowing
 from the South.                 The Club would like to give complete
 protection from rain and is prepared to consider the cost of
 the glazed roofing which we have suggested as a possible way
 of increasing the comfort of the disabled.                  The glazing
 would of        course be of toughened glass.
         If the working party has strong reservations about the
 glazing then obviously it will                 not be carried out.     However
 I should stress that there is no possibility of the disabled
 being placed in front of the Kop because of the exorbitant
 cost.        The Club will continue to use the present location and
 the only question to be decided is whether it should t>e under
 cover or not.
         I should add that new toilet facilities for the disabled
 are an integral part of the scheme for the Kop and will be
 conveniently placed under the North                  end of the Kop.
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




2.     Enlarged Spion Kop
       laf   111 exit routes will have 2.4m clear head room
       fapproximately    8ft.).



       ibi   We will need to discuss the proposed barrier
       adjacent to the new ladies toilet.           The exit route
       widens- out very considerably from 4.1m wide at the
       location where the six unit width has been calculated
       and is approximately       6m   wide alongside the toilet block.
       We therefore believe that there is no bottleneck effect
       ami that a barrier might merely provide an unseen
       obstraction which could create difficulty.          We will
       forward a larger scale drawing of the area so that
       o u r .c e m e n t s can be considered in more detail .


       Ic4   W e will of course provide the landings in front
       of the existing emergency gates in the pitch perimeter
       fence but you will know that there have been changes of
       view on this particular matter in the past and we would
       not wish the Club to be put to the expense of taking
       them out again when members of the present officer working
       party axe replaced with the passage of time.


       (d)   Therewill be four new turnstiles on Penistone
       Road and six new turnstiles at the South end of the Kop.


       te)   Gates with a tnrn-bar arrangement will be provided
       at the exits and the Club will of course provide stewards
       to control them.


3.     Roofing of Spion Kop
       The gables will be sheeted on the outside face only and
will    not be lilted.    This is normal in Kop buildings and we
think it extremely unlikely that there will be any difficulty
with hooligans climbing.          The horizontal rails are at such
wide spacings that it would be difficult for even the most
     We are very mindful of the need to complete the areas
open to spectators before the start of the new season.        It
is conceivable that the contractors will have difficulty
in completing the new terrace steps at the rear of the Kop
before the first game.   In that event secure fencing will
have to be provided as a temporary measure. However we
are reasonably confident that the whole of the terrace
area of the Kop will be complete by the due date.      We
also intend to have all the new exit arrangements completed
but it is possible that work will still be going on In toilet
areas, particularly the new toilet for the disabled.


4.   Crowd Flow at the Leppings Lane End of the Stadium
     The Club is aware of the difficulties which the Police
have to contend with at the Leppings Lane end and,has of
course been very pleased to help the problem by the major
works which were undertaken during the last close season.
We find it very difficulty to envisage anything more which
could be done at reasonable expense.


5*   Fire Brigate Access to the Front of all Stands
     As part of the works on the Kop, we are completely
remodelling the area around the existing tunnel.      The
head room is being increased to 2.4m and the width of the
tunnel is being increased also.    A considerable amount of
earth shifting will have to take place and this
presents an opportunity to widen the gangway so as to
enable say a fire engine to pass between the North stand
and the retaining wall of the Kop.      If the Fire Service
think this is of value, I should be pleased to know the
width they would like so that we can see whether it can
be provided at reasonable cost and without sacrificing too
many standing spaces.

                          Yo-urp   sincerely,
EASTWOOD a                         P A R T N•' E R S                                                                      S t, A n d re w s House
              (Consulting    Engineers)
                                                                            •^ V                    -
                                                                                                                          23 Kingfield Road
                                                                                                                           Sheffield-.S11 9AS
                                                                                                                                                     86
Directors:
W . Eastwood            F.Eng., B .E ng., P h .D „ D -E n a ,                 '        ■ C                                Tel.: (0742) 583871
                        C .E ng., F.I.C.E., P .P .I.S tru c tE .,                                                         Telex:        547266
                        F .I.M ech.E ., F .G .S ., M .C ons.E .

A. A. W ood             B .E ng., P h .D ., C .E n g ., F.I.C.E.,                                                                          and at:
                        F .I.S tru c tE ., M .I.W .E .S ., M .C ons.E .

R. C. A. Eastw ood      B .S c., C .E ng., M .I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E .                                                       Premier      House
G. Spir                 C .E n g ., M .I.C.E., M .I.M ech.E .                                                               12/13 Hatton Garden
                                                                                                                            London EC1N 8AN
Associates:
C . S . Greaves         B.Eng., C.Eng., M .I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                            T el.: (01) 242 7436
J . A. strange          C.Eng., M .I.Struct.E.

fiL J . Clough          B A ., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Meeh.E,
                                                                                              Our Ref :             WE/JAS/SLW/76 72/759 3
& Preston               B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.                              Your R e f:
IK. Tandy               C .E n g ., F.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                             ■ ?V   ' ;    v T' ;
& Me Seamen             B.Sc., C .Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
J i M. Wood                             , M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.




City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,                                                                                      18 December 19 86
Administration and Legal Department,
TowjrHall,    .
Sheffield,
Sfe' 2HH v ■■
                                                                                                                    • •

For the Attention of Mr. D. BoWnes


D e a r M5r.
                                      ■■ ■■■■' •                     '
                                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                                             Safety at Sports Grounds Act 19 75
                                                New Entrance on Penistone Road

              Stan® months ago we applied for Planning                                                    Approval on behalf of
Sheffield-Wednesday                            Football Club, for a new entrance on Penistone
Koad.           Approval was                   granted last September.
              Ctee;purpose..of                 the entrance is to provide access for the public
tEsincg-.tlse-.'Spocts 'Hall so that they will no longer have to use
Gate *©*              also leads to. other parts of the ground. Another
purpose Is to j|tovide a separate access for police vehicles, ambulances
and vehicles for the disabled which park at the back of the gymnasium
cm xoatcfi dayai| This effectively reduces any possible dangers which
may result frda vehicles having to pass through queuing spectators
whilst trying, to gain entry through Gate 'O'.
              BacIosed'’fare. six prints of our drawings 759 3/1 and 7593/2
showing the layout and details of the proposal.
              The comments of the Officer Working Party would be welcomed.
Tenders have been invited for the work and it is hoped that demolition



                               An U nlim ited Com                         ered in England -    No. 18 33 144
                                                   ..........................                        ...... . S H£ fc5 .
                                      ■■■■:■   ■                                • ” •'   ..   ..v ...-. .........




    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




    of the two terraced houses can start towards the end of
    January 19 87.
                                 Yours sincerely,




f




                           ©
                                                                                                                           87
           SHEFFIELD                         Westbrook House • Sharrow Vale Road • Sheffield S 1 1 8EU. Tel: 0742 686911


                A rea M edical O ffice r
             W ilfrid H. P arry , M .D .,
   F .F .C .M ., D .P .H ., D .T.M . & H.    Area Health Authority (Teaching)




                         h b /c a b                                                                31st May, 1979



                         Mr. D. Vaughan,
                         South Yorkshire County Council,
                         County Hall,
                         Barnsley*
                         S70 2 ™ .



                         Dear Mr. Vaughan,


                                            Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975


                              Since you spoke to me yesterday by telephone, the St. John's
                         Superintendent rang and I have today had a very long discussion
                         with him ahout the requirements at the Hillsborough Football
                         Ground* I have put my observations into a separate report which
                         I attach for your perusal* Perhaps you would contact me if you
                         require any elucidation of the points and I would esteem it a
                         favour not to get involved in any long meetings with the Club
                         Officials as there are so many demands on my time that I cannot
                         afford to be away from the office for any length of time.


                                                              Yours sincerely,




                                                          H.            BAILEY.^
                                               Specialist in Community Medicine
                                                      (Social Services)




                                                    m
G .1512
structure:


The existing facilities are much 'below an acceptable standard and I
would suggest the Club consider providing a more permanent structure
which is not likely to require up grading for a very long time. The
internal finish particularly of the Treatment area should be of an
impervious nature so that it can be easily cleaned and rendered
fairly sterile and require no decoration* This can be achieved by
the use of tiles or formica type finish etc....

WAT TillG AREA

The Vfaiting Area could be arranged within corridor space to minimise
the cost, where sitting cases could wait for attention on chairs.

TREATMENT AREA

The Treatment Area should be sufficient to accommodate two or three
patients at any one time and consideration should be given to the
needs for privacy within the treatment area, bearing in mind that
the three patients may well be lying on couches.

LIGHTING

Good lighting is essential ard at the present time strip lighting
is very much in vogue and would be satisfactory. The provision of
a power point would also appear to be a basic requirement.

WATER

A supply of hot and cold water is essential^ the cold water suitable
for drinking. It would also appear reasonable to request provision
of a hand basin and a large Belfast type sink. The Club should
consider whether it would be cheaper in the long run to provide
stainless steel basins which are not subject to chipping.

TO 11ST REQUIREMENTS

The Club should provide at least one male and one female toilet, for
the use of the public and should consider whether they should provide
an additional toilet for the use of the staff.

STORAGE

Storage facilities are required for six stretchers, and    for two sets
of wheels for stretchers, blankets and other bed linen.    This storage
should be lockable.

EQUIPMENT

The following is a minimum list to provide a basic service.

Treatment couches with lift up ends, two or three in number depending
on space available and/or number of cubicles, if the accommodation is
cubicledo

Six Stretchers.

                                                          (CoT^t e* e© e}
Two sets of stretcher wheels.

20 Blankets<.

Six Pi H o w s «

One Minute-Man Resuscitator.

m g P H P K E FACILITIES

A telephone facility would appear to "be basic in 1979* This can be
achieved by an extension from the main switch, or sharing with police

CAR PARKI1TG

The Club may also consider what facilities should be extended to the
St« John's personnel for the parking of staff carse

AMBULANCES
—        I
         IIIIHB«
               III«»■»




Access for ambulances at the present time appears to be adequate but
must not be overlooked in any redesigning. It is understood that the
perimeter track is insufficient in dimension to easily run the
ambulance around the football pitch.




h b / c ab

1/ 6/79
                           sa
    M
I

                                                                                    88


                                                                    422

                DVAB/583/5              EE/CB             21st December, 1979.



        Dear Sir,

        Safety of Sports Groimds Act, 1975

        Following approval by the County Council and clarification of certain
        structural aspects of the South Stand construction, I am now able to formally
        issue the attached General Safety Certificate in respect of the Hillsborough
        Stadium.

        As previously mentioned to you, the fee payable haz yet to be determined by
        the County Council and I will, of course, contact you further on this point
        as soon as possible.

        I would particularly draw your attention to the following paragraphs of
        Schedule 2 of the Certificate:-

        8(1)   - the existing First Aid facilities are accepted on an interim basis
                 only pending the erection of purpose-built facilities in the 1980
                 close season;

        12(1) - the arrangements for Emergency Lighting in the South Stand (as set
                out in the letter from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners to the South
                Yorkshire County Fire Service dated 12th Deosnber, 1979) are
                 regarded as acceptable only for the duration of the existing
                battery life;

        14     - the existing Police facilities are accepted cn an interim basis only
                 pending the erection of purpose-built facilities in the 1980 close
                  season;

        30     - use of the Stadium in excessively high wind conditions
                                            and
               - use of the Stadiun in excessively high snowfall conditions.

        Perhaps you would also treat this letter as the formal notice of issue required
        by Paragraph 7 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976.




        Mr. E. England,                                         /Should you have.
        Secretary,
        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
        Hillsborough,
        Sheffield,
        South Yorkshire.
        S6 1SW
                                       GO
'1




     Mr. E. England                       -   2-                     21st Decerrfoer, 1979.


      Should you have any queries on the Certificate, Mr. D. Vaughan of ray staff
     'will be happy to discuss them with you.
     Finally, I would like to take this opportunity of recording the County Council's
     appreciation of the co-operation and goodwill which the Club and its Consultants
     has extended to the Officer Working Party over the months of the necessarily
     Involved detailed investigations.
                                                       Yours faithfully




                                                       Chief Executive




            o f c o u r se , c o n d itio n a l on payment o f such fe e a s nay be determ ined by
            th e County C ou n cil.
                       DV/KA/583/5             fW c *                   20th April, 1982.


   Dear Sir,

   Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

   I refer to your letter dated 5th April and to the recent ’phone conversation
   which you had with Hr. D. Vaughan of my staff.

   I confirm that the Officer Working Party has now considered the Club’s outline
   drawing of the new police and first aid facilities and, subject to the following
   points and consideration of detailed drawings, regards the proposals as
   acceptable in principle

   (i)      the walls of die first aid room to be lined with suitable non-
             combustible material to enable the room to be easily cleaned and
             also avoid the need for re-decoration;

   (ii)     lockable storage facilities for blankets, stretchers,etc. to be
             provided in the first aid rocea;

   (iii)    in v i e w of the location of the G . T . O . iack point in the police room,
             the telephone facility to be extended into the first aid room also;

   (iv)     the    floors of both the first aid and police rooms to be. of easily
                  -.nable material (such as quarry tiles, etc.)}

   (v)      w--i aoor of the detention roon in the police roan to be at least
             2" thick and fitted with a 5 lever mortise lock, and to open outwards
             in the direction of the top of the plan supplied;

   (vi)     the roof ever the two rooas to be of suitable non~cosil>ustible
            material;

   (vii)    the need for the building to be robustly constructed, (especially
             the detention roon) without reducing the internal dimensions to be
            borne in mind;

   (viii)   the building generally (and the toilet accomodation particularly)
             to be adequately ventilated, and suitable drainage facilities to be
             provided.

                                                           •../Gont.



Mr. E. England,
Secretary,                                                             ~U     - £' • c f D ,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,                                •>;.
Hillsborough,                                                                  ~     4
Sheffield,
S6 1SW.
Us:-


v--';••• IfS*                                                  20th April, 1982.
                                                      ,,... ..VU..V' ' ..   ■

        (ix)    adequate natural ^artificial lighting to be provided;

        (x)     simple fire fighting- equipment (such as a fire extinguisher) to be
                Provided in botl|ribif first aid and police rooms;
                               r
         (xi)   the Club to be reminded of the necessity of seeking formal Building
                Regulation approval from the Building Authority.

        Additionally, two other matters were raised at the Working Party    meeting. The
        first relates to the subject of temporary structures. This was,     of course,
        referred to in my letter dated 31st March, and no doubt you will    let me knowj
        in due course, what progress is being made on the preparation of    the proposals
        for semi-permanent or perfiianent facilities.

        The second matter relates to the concern felt from a public order and safety
        point of v i e w by spectators (particularly during evening fixtures) spilling out
        on to Penistone Road whilst trying to gain admission to the Ground. As you are
        aware, the Penistone Road at that point is both the main A61 Sheffield/Barnsley
        road and a feeder fcoute from the city centre to the ML Motorway at Tankersley
        and, as such, carries considerable volumes of traffic at all times. There is
        a very real fear th«rfc *. serious accident will result unless something can be
        done to enable spectators queuingto gain access to the Ground       "that point to
        enter more rapidly than is possible presently.

        This was, of course, a matter discussed at the Ground Inspection on 4th February,
        1932.  It was understood at that time that the Club intended to carry out vork
        in the close season to rectify the problem.   In this connection, it is suggested
        that the mo st viable method of improving the situation is to re-site an existing
        toilet block to the rear of the Spion ICop to enable an additional minimum of
        six (but preferably twelve) turnstiles to be installed, together with an
        additional exit pate.   The exit vidths on the Penistone Road side of the Ground
        are, of course, just acceptable and an extra exit would relieve the situation..

        The County Council feels justified in requesting most firmly that the Club
        si"o-       action in the forthcoming close season to relieve the admission
        (and to a lesser extent, the egress) problems at the Penistone Road side of the
        Ground, should a decision to do so not have already been taken by the 61-’':.

                                              Yours f&ithfylly,




                                              Chief Executive.




                                      32
                                                                    tc            90
                                                                            to
                                                                            fct




              CP/26?/DM*



              *tb Decenber, 19*17


Mr. C. Mackrell,
The Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PI,C,
The Stadium,
Penistone Road,
SHEFF1FLD.
8 6 1SW



Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
Annual Inspection of the Sheffield Wednesday Stadium -
feth August. 1987__________________ ________ _

I enclose for your attention a list of comments wade by Officers arising fro®
the above inspection.

I anticipate that during the course of your Clubs* normal isaintenar.ee
arrangements eany of the items listed will have already been attended to.    Would
you please let re have your comments on the points raised in due course.

If you require any clarification of the individual comments «ade you will see
that on the right-hand side of the sheet an abreviation of the title of the
Department/Authority concerned. At the end of the list is a Schedule shoving
the appropriate Officers to contact if necessary.

The Fire Service has recently reminded me that no reply has yet been received to
my letter of 22nd April enclosing their letter of 18th February. Vou vi 11
recall that you were asked in that letter to cowwent on the points raised by the
Fire Service and I would appreciate those coawents as soon as possible. T take
the view that it is appropriate for a Certificate Holder to have tbe opportunity
to coBinent on the views of Officors before final decisions are taken on works
that are required. If, however, you do not wish tc avail yourself of this
opportunity to comment please let sm> know so that appropriate require»ente can
be framed.

I have passed a copy of this letter onto Messrs. Fastwood and Partner*.

Tours faithfully,




Fead of department

AF                                                  734005 - Mr. Bownes

                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                             9
SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE A N D CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H.    E. Wright, M.l. Fire E., F.B.I.M.                                             Sheffield (West) Division
          Chief Fire Officer                                                        Division Street
                                                                                    Sheffield
Divisional Commander                                                                South Yorkshire S 1 3FG
                                                                                    Telephone Sheffield
                                                                                    STD (0742) 7 3 1 6 4 5 /6 /7

Our Ref: DCM/C2088/EB                       Your Ref:                               Date: l8th February,                     19

This matter is being dealt with by . .Station_ P r i c e r ,D; C. Miles             Ext. No.. . .? ? .....................




     City of Sheffield Metropolitan
       District Council,
     Administration and Legal Department,
     Town H a l l ,
     SHEFFIELD.     SI 2HH



     For the attention of M r . D . M. Bownes



     Dear Sir,

     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

     Thank you      for your letter dated          3rd November,    1986,    in respect       of the above
     Club.

     Please find below my observations in response to outstanding matters.

     An inspection of the ground was carried out on 17th November, 1986.        The
     comments appended below do not take into account the numbers of persons using
     individual areas, lateral and radial gangways or units of exit widths, as
     it is assumed that from previous correspondence and documentation that the
     various working parties and committees have adequately dealt with these items.

     MEANS OF ESCAPE IN CASE OF FIRE

     North Stand

     Timber framed and clad buildings are constructed and located under the stand.

     The only     reference as to         the acceptance is minuted in meeting dated 7.8.85
     in which     one large store         for bulky items was agreed on a temporary basis.

     There is also no record to indicate whether these buildings have been treated
     with fire retardant paint or solutions. Confirmation is required as to treat­
     ment of these buildings.

     Spion Kop

     A.    Timber framed and clad unit located on main central exit                         route has not
            received any approval, no approach has been made by the                          Club for its
            installation, this should be removed immediately.

     B.    It is understood that the gates in the pitch perimeter     fencing form
            part of the emergency exits. The gates for reasons of security, fasten


                              All communications   m m sed to the Chief Fire Officer.
     with barrel bolts secured to the gate both top and bottom and open in
     a sideways direction.    It is doubtful that if it were necessary to
     evacuate the stand onto the pitch in an emergency that the gates would
     open if pressure were generated by a      crowd.  No record can be found
     in respect of discussion on gate fastenings.      It is recommended that
     a satisfactory security device easily openable from the pitch side should
     be found and fitted to all perimeter gates.

C.   During the inspection it was observed      that several concrete steps on
      the lower terracing were in need of repair and in one case the complete
      step had erroded away.    Every endeavour should be undertaken to ensure
      that all steps are kept in a good state of repair.

D.   The wire mesh protecting the stanchions and bracing supports from being
     climbed is ineffective.    It has been observed that patrons visiting
     the Kop can, in large numbers from the back of the Kop, climb into the
     lower half of the roof.   The mesh should be extended to alleviate this
     situation.

E.   It was observed that where the terracing is above 1 m higher than the
      lateral gangways wire mesh infill* had not been located along the full
      lengths.   Where the mesh had been provided this had been spot welded
      but the mesh had not been given an additional vertical support.

F.   Exit gates should be unlocked and keys            held   by    stewards   manning    the
      gate before patrons enter the stands.

West Stand

A.   Timber framed and clad units located under this stand have                 been    there
      for some considerable time. No record exists of:~

     (1)     acceptance of these units or,

     (2)     that they have been treated with fire retardant paint or solutions.

B.   Exit gates to the pitch perimeter as item B under Spion Kop above.

South Stand

The accommodation is divided into four a r e a s :-

A.   Ground floor     offices,   directors    suite,   players     area,   function    suite,
      kitchen etc.

B.   First floor, upper stand      walkway,    press   lounge,     players   lounge,    paint
      stores, disused bar area.

C.   Lower stand, uncovered stand seating.

D.   Rear stand,    covered seating.

With respect to the four areas, the following observations are made:-

A.   Ground Floor:-

           (i)   During normal working hours most doors from the office area
                 are kept locked shut.   All  doors  marked  'Fire  Exit'  should
                 be made readily available for use by any person within the area.
  (ii)   A number of rooms at this level i.e. kitchen, laundry, stores
         and directors' suite ventilate via openable windows and/or extract
         fans into the long corridor between areas A and C above.       It
         also appears that a number of the openable windows are protected
         by corrugated, lightweight plastic sheeting.

         The separation between the corridor and such ground floor areas
         should be to a minimum half hour fire resistance, any ventilation
         requirements being met by ducting to outside on the South Wall.

 (iii)   All storage should be removed from stairway enclosures and these
         areas always maintained free from such storage.

First Floor:-

   (i)   Again, a number of rooms i.e. players' lounge, press lounge,
         the store room previously used as a licensed bar and the paint
         store ventilate into this area.     Any ventilation requirements
         should be met by ducting to outside on the South wall.

  (ii)   Valves should be fitted to the gas     supply line to each       of   the
         five refreshment positions in order    that the supply can       be   cut
         off should an emergency arise.

 (iii)   All timber construction within this      area   should   be   suitably
         treated so as to be flame retardant.

  (iv)   The paint stores contain a quantity of flammable paints and
         mixtures and present a hazard which it is considered should
         be removed from this    area.  Proposals to relocate the stores
         should be discussed with the Fire Authority before any work
         is commenced in order    that suitable siting and any need for
         licensing under Petroleum legislation can be ascertained.

   (v)   The timber constructed cupboard and     the   portable   sales   kiosks
         should be removed from this area.

  (vi)   In the cleaners'     cupboard to this area, the fire resisting
         separation between    the ground and first floor levels is breached
         by the passage of     cables through a wall.   The area around the
         cables should be     infilled with material to ensure a minimum
         fire resistance of   thirty minutes.

 (vii)   All rooms onto the upper stand walkway should be separated from
         it by minimum half hour fire resisting construction, any doors
         being to the same standard and made self closing onto 25 mm
         re bates.

(viii)   Spaces above toilet accommodation are being used for storage
         purposes. Again, these areas must be maintained clear of storage.

Uncovered Seating Area:-

The  means of escape from this area is along the corridor in front of
the rear part of the stand. Should this route not be available then
evacuation onto the pitch is possible subject to persons having the
ability to climb over the front wall on to the pitch perimeter track.
This wall is approximately 1.5 m high at the Spion Kop end decreasing
to 1 m high at the West end.
       To facilitate easier forward evacuation on to the pitch it is recommended
       that openings be provided in the wall at the foot of radial gangways.

D.     Covered Seating Area (Rear Stand)

       The means of escape from this area is not considered to be satisfactory
       in that escape is possible in one direction only, this being down through
       areas described in A and B above.

      Subject to all the recommendations outlined in A and B above and made
      later in respect of automatic fire detection being implemented, the
      means of escape from the covered seating area would be acceptable.

AUTOMATIC FIRE DETECTION

In 1979 the working party discussed the provision of automatic fire detection
in the South Stand.

It is recommended that such provision should be made in all areas beneath
the seated area of the stand as soon as possible.    The system should also
cover the Tavern Club which has a direct link on to the first floor corridor
of the South Stand.

The automatic detection provided should be tied in to the existing fire warning
system.

In order that persons using the Spion Kop can receive early warning of any
fire occurring in the "Stands" Club, it is also recommended that automatic
fire detection be provided in that Club.

EMERGENCY LIGHTING

Spion Kop

The   emergency   lighting   has   yet   to be tested   - no test   certificate   received.

South, North and West Stands

,In letter dated 12th November, 198-0, from Eastwood and Partners, it was
 suggested that following test certificates dated 11th August, 1980, a period
 of 5 years should elapse before re-testing for South Stand and 2 years for
North and West Stands.   As of today no record appears to exist  as to whether
 these areas have been re-tested or that the test certificates together with
maintenance records have ever been re-presented.       The emergency lighting
 system should therefore be re-tested for the whole of the ground and test
 certificates produced.   In addition the whole of the system should conform
 to B.S. 5266.

FIRE ALARM

West Stand

Existing call points to be relocated to accessible positions outside of
franchise areas and be increased to cover the upper areas of the stand.

North Stand

As West Stand above.
South Stand

This stand appears to be well covered with regard to the provision and siting
of call points.

Indicator Control Panel

The indicator/control panel is situated within the Police control centre
between South and West Stand.    Whilst this is reasonable for match days it
is not considered to be practical for the majority of the time.

This panel     should   be   duplicated   with   control   at    each   location   which   should
b e :-

1.      Police control box

2.      Main office reception area

FIRST AID AND FIRE-FIGHTING EQUIPMENT

The current standard and displacement            of   First     A id   fire-fighting    equipment
is considered satisfactory.

GATES

The sliding gates already in situ in the ground have been accepted by this
Authority after due consideration and account being taken both of their location
and the fact that they are of existing construction.     I would wish, however,
to point out that it is the view of this Authority that doors required for
means of escape should open outwards and it is recommended that notice be
given to the Club to the effect that when any such sliding gates are to be
replaced then their replacements must open outwards even if this involves
structural work to recess the opening to avoid impinging over footpaths.
While the sliding gates remain in use however, they must be immediately avail­
able for use from the inside by any person should an emergency situation
arise.  Any method of securing the gates against illegal entry from the outside
must be by way of a simply operated device not requiring the use of a key,
additional security being afforded by the presence of a steward who should
be familiar with the emergency evacuation procedures for the ground.

If there are any queries        on these matters please          do not   hesitate     to contact
the Officer concerned.

Yours faithfully,




Divisional
-------    Commander
        s±------- ^
 Minutes of Working Party 30-3-79

 PagfJ 2 item B para.          1 line 3 Spion Kop
p 0gr 2      item B para. 2 Exits

Pago 3 item G para. 2 South Stand

M-tnotes of Working Party 13-4.79

Pajrp 1 item 2 South Stand

Rniil.ti Yorkshire Fire Service 16.6.79

p fJf/r 2    para.    4 (South Stand) internal      layout

PnK<* 3      General Requirements

Mi miles of Working Party 8.6.79

Pntff* 1 item A       Sec. 4

Pnjjrr 3 item F       Sec. 5   South Stand

Pojrc 3 item F        Sec. 6   Paint Store

p Qf/f. 4    item J   Fire Extinguishers

pnp.i*   ^   item K South Stand

M :in u I-os of Working Party 12.11.75

PnRc 3 item 1 Fire Alarm System

Patf«' 5 South Stand

Mj nnI os of Working Party 18.12.79

p ofre ] item 3A Emergency Lighting

South Yorkshire County 31-3-80
Tilt- whole contents

Ea!*tw ood & Partners 11.8.80

Con Ionts Emergency Lighting
                 GP/DMB


                 22nd April, 1987




The Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday       Football Club PLC,
Hillsborough,
SHEFFIELD.
S6 1SW

Dear Sir,
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1973 ~ Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
In Noveaber 1986 I aaked both the Police and Fire Service to consent on the
condition of your stadias having regard to the provisions of the 1975 Act. I
have also asked the Building Surveyor to make similar consents but I have not
received then as yet.
The Police have indicated that as at 6th January, 1987 they are quite satisfied
vitb the stadiua and have indicated that the degree of co-operation vhich they
receive is very satisfactory.
The Fire Service have, however, made a nuaber of consents and I attach for your
information a copy of their letter to me of 18th February. Some polnta in the
letter have now been further clarified as follow*
(a) The timber buildings referred to ahould (if still required) be re-sited away
froa the walkways.
(b) As far as the locked doors in the south stand are concerned they will be
dealt with by the Fire Service under the Fire Certificate.
(c) Cates aust be unlocked and stewarded at all tiaes, during aatchea: if this
cannot be arranged, panic fastenings would probably be inalated upon.
1 think the rest of the letter ia largely self-explanatory but I would
particularly like to refer to the coomenta which are aade in respect of final
exit gatea. As you can aee froa the letter the Fire Service are concerned about
the eliding gates and have indicated that aa and when they reach the end of
their useful life they aust be replaced with outward opening doors. The Fire
Service have also produced a drawing (a copy of which 1 encloae) to show a
better arrangement for securing the alidlng gatea against forced entry froa the
outside during the course of the game. The Fire Service feel that this hook
type arrangeaent will be more easily used in the event of an eaergency than the
current locks, about which they are very concerned.
Encs.
BH                                                  734005 - Mr. Bownes
                                          -2-

    Would you please let ne have your coaments on the Fire Service letter as soon as
    possible.
    Tours faithfully,


    Head of Departsent




*
 EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                           8t. Andrews House Q Z
                      (C o n su ltin g Engineers)                                                              23 Kingfield Road
 D Ireeton:
                                                                                                               Sheffield S11 9A5
 W. Eastwood                     F.Eng. B.Eng., Ph.D.. D.Eng.                                                  Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                  C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.StructE.,                                            Telex:       547266
                                  F.I.Mech.E.. F.G.S.. M.Cont.E.
 A. A. WOOd                      B.Eng.. Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E..
                                                                                                               Fax:    0742 654330
                                  F.I.StructE., M.I.W.E.S., M.Coni.E.
                                                                                                                                              a nd a t:
 R. C. A. Eastwood                B.S c., C.Eng.. M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.

 G. Spir                          C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.                                                   Premier House
 C. S. Greaves                    B.Eng., C.E ng, M.I.C.E., M.I.StructE.                                          12/13 Hatton Garden
                                                                                                                  London EC1N 8AN
 5. Preston                       B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.. M.I.Stm ctE .
                                                                                                                  Tel.: (01) 242 7436
 G. M. Seaman                     B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.                                          Fax:     01 - 4045424
 C onsultant:
A. G. Burdatt                     G .M ., B.Sc.(En».), C.En*.,                     Our R « t   : WE/JAS/PB/9854
                                  F.I.C.E., F I.Stru ct.E .
                                                                                   Your R e f :
                                                                                                                                               HU,
                                                                                                                                                 ‘ii
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,                                                            3 February, 1988
Administration & Legal Department,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD SI 2HH.                                                                                          A D ? » ? a A t ! 0 N & LEGAL ]
                                                                                                                              S H O T .                       1
                                                                                                                j--,                                      i
                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                  cVrr.        j                     «<
                                                                                                                                                      •• j
For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes.
                                                                                                          B       - 5 FEB            1S B 3          f i ,
                                                                                                                                             <
Dear Mr. Bownes,                                                                                             |p.S.M .|       UB      j   EUS jPSO
                                                                                                         OS jj '                                 J CC
                                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic
                                           Safety at Sports Grounds Act 19 75

                     As requested in your letter dated 8 January, 1988 we
reply to your letter dated 2 2 April, 1987 and the letter
from Yorkshire County Fire Service dated 18 February.                                                                 We
reply in the same order as the letter from the Fire
Service, for easy reference.


                     Means of Escape in Case of Fire

                     North Stand

                            With the exception of a small hut and the steel
                     clad groundsman's accommodation, which are both
                     located under the ramp and not the stand, the timber
                     clad buildings have been removed.
                            We believe that the reference in the minutes
                     dated 7 August, 1985 was to storage facilities and
                     not to buildings.

                     Spion Kop

                     a)     The small timber programme kiosk will be


A ss o c ia te s :
J. A. Strange                        A. J . Clough                          R. Tandy                      J . M. Wood
C.Eng., M .I.Struct.E.               B.A., C .E n j., M.C.I.B.S.            C.En*., F.I.Struct.E,         B.Sc„ C .E n j., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.


                                        An Unlimited Company, Registered in England - No. 1833144
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                       SHEET




     removed so that the width of the exit route is not
     r e d uc ed .
     b)     This item has already been dealt with in our
     letter dated 15 January.
     c)     Some of the concrete terrace steps have been
     repaired but, as has always been accepted,    the
     repairs will continue to be a regular maintenance
     job.
     d)     The intention of the mesh was not to prevent
     people from climbing onto the steelwork but to act
     as a guard preventing spectators damaging and
     possibly loosening the rear sheeting.
            We disagree that spectators climb onto the
     steelwork in large numbers although we do not deny
     that the police have, at some matches,    had to tell
     a few spectators not to sit on the steelwork.
            The cost of erecting a full height fence
     would be several thousands of pounds.     The Club is
     not at present contemplating that magnitude of
     expenditure just to protect a few spectators from
     their own foolish behaviour.
     e)     There are four or five lengths of barrier
    where the drop in front is just over one metre,
     but as far as we are aware this has not created
     any hazard.     In fact to the contrary, because
    people can leave the ground by going under the
    barriers onto the lateral gangway.     This is a
     common feature of most league grounds.
            The welding is performing well and it seems
     that any additional vertical support is
    unnecessary.     However, the welding can be inspected
     at regular intervals to make sure that it con­
    tinues to hold the mesh securely.
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                          SHEET




     f)    Exit gates are unlocked before spectators enter
     the ground.    The keys then remain in the possession
     of the steward(s), given the responsibility of
     unlocking the gates, until after the end of the
     match and all spectators have left the ground.

     West Stand

     a)   Do we understand correctly that the
     reference to 'timber framed and clad units' is to
     the bar fittings at first floor level?        If so, then
     those fittings were part of the original construction
     for which Building Regulations Approval has been
     granted.    There has not been any previous comment
     about the presence of the bar fittings in that stand
     or other stands.     We do not consider that they
     present a hazard.
     b)   This item has already been dealt with in our
     letter dated 15 January.

     South Stand

     a)    (i)   We note the comment about the doors and
     this point has been dealt with under the regular
     procedures of obtaining a Fire Certificate under
     the Fire Precautions Act of 19 71 for the offices.
     Fire Officer Roger Woodhouse has been dealing with
     the matter.
          (ii)         We see the principle behind the creation
     of fire compartments.     That is sensible.    Sealing
     off the windows is not difficult but the provision
     of ducting to the south wall is, and furthermore
     very expensive.     A major exercise such as providing
     ducting would by necessity have to wait until the
     redevelopment of the South stand in 1991.
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                            SHEET




          (iii)    We agree that stored materials should be
     removed from stairways and exit routes.      There is a
     particular problem outside the kitchen area, at
     ground floor level, but the caterers have been asked
     to clear that particular area well before the public
     are admitted on match days.
     b)      (i)   It was agreed in 1979 that the fans
     ventilating the lounges at first floor level should
     be fitted with intumescent grilles with smoke
     controlled shutters.      Those grilles and shutters
     were fitted although we see that two recently
     installed fans do not appear to have similar grilles
     and shutters.      As the form of fire protection from
     those lounges has already been agreed with the Fire
     Service, the Club are not prepared to have ducting
     installed, although the new fans should perhaps be
     fitted with intumescent grilles and smoke controlled
     shutters.
           (ii)    A close inspection of the gas supply pipe­
     work in the five bars revealed that four bars have
     valves fitted to the feed pipe or to the appliance
     when there is only one appliance in the bar.         The
     pipework in the bar nearest to the Spion Kop has
     been replaced recently but without a valve.
                   However, there is a master valve, at
     ground floor level, which isolates the gas supply
     to the whole of the first floor.     That valve was
     installed at the request of the Fire Service in
     1980.
          (iii)       We confirm that all the timber facing onto
     the public circulation areas was treated with an
     intumescent paint during the work carried out in
     1980.    Since then the walls have been re-decorated
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                       SHEET




     but this does not reduce the effect of the
     intumescent paint underneath.
            (iv)       We cannot understand this comment because
     the paint store was constructed in its present
     position on the advice of the Fire Officer.      A
     special 'non-sparking' light fitting was even
     installed on his recommendation.      It is not contem­
     plated to move the store again after spending money
     to build the store in its present position.
             (v)   We do not consider that the two laminate
     covered toilet kiosks present a hazard.      As for the
     wooden cupboards, they have been on the first floor
     for many years and no previous adverse comments
     have been made by the Fire Service about their
     presence.
            (vi)   We agree that the holes round the cables
     should be plugged with an appropriate fire resisting
     material.
           (vii)   As far as we are aware all doors leading
     onto the first floor and ground floor circulation
     areas were provided with 25mm rebates and the doors
     made up to a nominal one hour standard.      That work
     was done in 1979-80.
          (viii)   We agree that the spaces above toilet
     accommodates should not be used for storage but
     believe that the Club have now removed the stored
     materials.

     c)      We believe that clinfoing over the existing low
     wall does not present any difficulty in the event
     of an emergency.      Spectators will go over the wall
     whether there are gates or not.      We do not consider
     that the installation of gates is necessary.
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                        SHEET




     d)   Escape through the rear of the stand has always
     been accepted by the Officer Working Party.     Further­
     more, it has been readily accepted with the
     protection which has been provided so far to the
     escape routes.


     Automatic Fire Protection

          We will suggest to the Club that proposals
     should be put forward for the provision of a fire
     detection system but the system is not likely to be
     installed until the major re-development of the South
     stand which is planned for 1991

     Emergency Lighting

          Testing of the emergency lighting system is
     being organised and we will be contacting the Fire
     Service in the next day or so to agree a date and
     time for carrying out the test.
          The testing of the general electrical circuits
     will also be organised over the next few weeks and
     a current IEE Certificate produced.

     Fire Alarms

          The Club was told by the Fire Service to put
     the call points in the bars in the stands.    Moving
     the call points again is out of the question.

     Inidcator/Control Panel

          The Officer Working Party was asked, at the
     time of installation, where the indicator/central
     panel should be placed.     The Club was told that it
     should be located in the Police control centre,
     where it is now.     No duplicate panel was asked for
     and it is not considered that one is necessary.
      EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                      SHEET   7




           Gates
                   The comments about the gates are noted.


           The Club have expressed to us their increasing con­
      cern that with the introduction of each new member of the
      Fire Service to the Officer Working Party new or
      different recommendations are put forward by that officer,
      which in some cases openly contradict the recommendations
      offered by his predecessors.     Whereas we agree that   many
      of the observations and recommendations are of a
      subjective nature the Club cannot be expected to continue
      spending money on matters which are purely a matter of
      personal opinion.    Some consistency in the comments
      offered by members of the Officer Working Party would be
      appreciated.




                                                 Yours sincerely,




# •




      c.c. Mr. G. Mackrell,
           SWFC




                                  m
                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           :222'222'':-^r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -V '-•-V.
                                                                                                                       V       . - . .......
                                                      ;                       -                                                                                                                                                                              ::V;:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ' '      2am      .           2
                                            .   --   '.j                      .
               ,   .. ..   ..       .   .                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.; V-      ,


                                                                                                                   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2:^222:-:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .^
...
                                                                                                                                 .                                                                                                                ■/:                                    .V'
                                                                                                        ■..    ■        ■
                                                                                                      wpcz/mm'




                                                                                                  ,     Ti "           *

                                                                            ■ 1 .     .
                                                                                                                           .         .    ■                :                                   :
                                                         ,i                 ...


                                                                                                                       /fSmmicti 1st .If*©/
                                                               ;;r SElIlaSS-
                                                                                                                                                                                    ; . 1'
                                                                                  2 'i*-"                 "r-              •                                                        %liW,
                                                                           5,     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '
                                                                        ■> ’ > ^                                   '       ~                                                                                                                                                    : '
      :        ^                                                                  srfcm^M.                                                     2         ..'- i                                                                                                                     • V--

                   r            ■                                                 ,;r '
          i.                                                  ; ■, . i c . • r .                                                                                                          ~ a
                                                                     I ru                                                        .                                            r                  ..»
                                                               '                                                   i       I    t i r          t v   c     r      c   ,           ' P   s r   i s p   i r j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mi m 'Mvq
                                                                        ■     &                  ■.:£          .la tte r                                          2       m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '    -•
                                                                                                                                                                                                        y :p            v.            .    •. •
                                                                                  I       lo o k t o v is a A i'-s-■                                                  fr o a you                                        -ic/j^der -sf*
                                                                                                          letter la tfcs ftarly ■mm.Tr
                                                     '         :   '■                     .



                                                                              Tiurn.f£ifM'aiiy® ';;




                                                                              Eaad o f -Ttep&xIwasHi ■                                                                                                         / •
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ■.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ■■ :




                                                                              E213                                                                                                                    ?34o§C *. 5!r--3own*s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tKgm**
                                                                                                                                                                      P ..    # f » V f V i j v i T l f /V                                    tv»                           -xfn
                                  95
SOUTH YORKSHIRE FiRE AND CiViL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H.   E. Wright, M.l. Fire E., F.B.I.M.                                                    Sheffield (Wsst) Division
         Chief Fire Officer                                                               Wellington Street
                                                                                           Sheffield
Divisional Commander         K . L. Mettam, J.P., Grad             I Fire E               South Yorkshire S A 3FG
                                                                                           Telephone Sheffield
                                                                                           STD (0 7 4 2 ) 7272^?

Our Ref:       W2088/RW/BB                   Your Ref:                                    Date:          25.5.88

This matter is being dealt with by . ..Staticpn Officer            Woodhciuse R.               £xt fgQ    .357........




The Licensing S e c tio n,
Legal & Administration D e p a r t m e n t ,
Town H a l l ,
SHEFFIELD.
SI 2HH

For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes




Dear Sirs,

SH EFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB -
SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUND ACT

Following the inspection at the above sports ground on 19th May 1988, the following
items are forwarded for your attention.

Spion Kop

Rubbish is accumulating under the new structure and requires removing.

South Stand

a)    The extractor fan from the laundry has an accumulation of fluff and requires
      cleaning.

b)    The new Sponsors Lounge on the first floor has been fitted with an extractor
      fan that breeches the fire resisting wall.  At the time of the inspection it
      could not be determined whether it is fitted with an automatic heater detector
      operated shutter or not.  If not, some such device will be required.

West Stand

There were only two small EXIT signs situated above the exits from the covered
walkway which could not be seen from the extremities of the walkway.  As this
stand is used by visiting fans it is recommended that larger signs be fixed,
in a more prominent p o s i t i o n .




                                               EE3
                             All com m unications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
Mr. D. Bownes                             - 2 -                            25.5.88




Fire Safety

It is recommended where gas cookers are used in the snack bars that a fire blanket
be provided.

Should you require any further information concerning these m a t t e r s , please do not
hesitate to contact me.

Yours faithfully,




D iV Ib lU Ild i   V^UUUUcUlUUX.
                                  CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      Director of Health and Consumer           To    Head of Administration & Legal Departme

                                                          For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes
Date      3rd June, 1988
Ref
Tel Ext
          EPU/DRM/YG
           4621 - Mr. Moore   j
                                   V\
                                                    Ref                                    96

          THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

          ANNUAL INSPECTION OF SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
          ON THE 19th MAY, 1988

          I write with reference to the above and following our recent site meeting
          and safety inspection of the named premises.

          I would confirm that while the general standards of health and safety
          being maintained were found to be satisfactory a number of points did
          require attention.  I have itemised these below for your convenience.

          Spion Kop Development

          1.   The pylon situated to the left-hand side of the kop was not suitably
               protected from unauthorised access and climbing.

          2.   To several locations around the kop, accumulations of associated
               builders wastes and stonework that could easily be obtained for use as
               projectiles were noted.

          3.   At some positions within the new development, there is a difference in
               height between a terraced area and radial gangway of over 600mm.  I
               would advise that these areas be protected by a suitably constructed
               pedestrian guardrail.

          4.   An area of stair nosing    was found to have become defective upon the
                "new" part of the spion   kop and a similar defect was located upon the
                older radial gangway.

          5.   Some areas of the front terracing were found to be in need of minor
               re p a i r s .

          6.   A loose rainwater pipe and length of guttering were located to one of
               the Penistone Road turnstiles.

          7.   An area of glazing serving one of the Penistone Road turnstile huts
               has been broken.

          8.   The club might consider the now combustible nature of much of the
                vegetation situated immediately behind the spion kop and take the
                appropriate remedial action.

          9.   The rendering to the entrance gate side wall was still found to be in
               a loose and defective condition.

          West Stand

          1.   In a number of cases terrace nosings require to be repaired.



                                                             /Contd.
2.   A number of seats were defective and require to be renewed or
     repaired.

3.   To the left-hand side of the stand, some pieces of old barbed wire
     were found to project over a walkway at head height.




D. R. Moore
Environmental Health Officer
                SAFETY OF SPOBTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

Note of a meeting between the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) and the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited

Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield: 18th December, 19 79

PRESENT:

Representing the Club
R. Whitehead (Director)
E. England (Secretary)
Dr. W. Eastwood )
A. J. Clough      ) Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
J. Strange        )

Representing (he Working Party
F. Davis (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
D. G. Duckenfleld (South Yorkshire Police)
A. Mills (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
B. Mole (South Yorkshire Police)
W. O ’Neill (South Yorkshire Police)
A. K. Seaman (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
D. Sherrlff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
D. j. Shlrtcllffe (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration Depa rtment)
D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration Department)
H. E. Wright (South Yorks hire County Fire Service)

1_.____ Purpose of Meeting

The original Intention of the visit had been to check that the outstanding matters
referred to In the Note of the meeting held on 12th November had been completed
or were In the course of completion prior to the anticipated issue of the Certificate
by the County Council this week.

2.____Minor Matters
An Inspection of the ground showed that a number of minor matters still required
attention, but the Club undertook to ensure that these were attended to in the re xt '
few days.

3.    Major Matters

A.    Emergency Lighting - South Stand

The meetings which had taken place between the County Fire Service and Messrs.
Eastwood and Partners since 12th November on the South Stand Emergency Lighting
had produced agreement on an interim arrangemert which would be regarded as



                                      *00
acceptable for the duration of the existing battery life. Further modifications at
that time would remedy the shortcomings of the existing Installation. Details were
contained In the letter dated 12th December which Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
had addressed to the Fire Service.

B.     South Stand Construction

The Building Authority expressed concern as to what they saw as a lack of structural
integrity in the South Stand. In their opinion, corrosion was contributing to the
progressive deterioration of the Stand which, it was felt, could only be properly
determined by a full structural survey. The report forwarded by Messrs. Eastwood
and Partners in the last week was not considered to be sufficiently comprehensive
to provide the required Information, and the basis of calculation used could not be
agreed as appropriate. Whilst It was agreed that there had not been a specific
written request for such a full structural survey of the South Stand, the Building
Authority felt that it had been inherent in the detailed discussions which had taken
place that such a report would be forthcoming. The Building Authority were
concerned at the possibility that the requirements of the Building Regulations and
the Code of Practice Safety Factors could not be met; in particular the Structural
stability of the South Stand In conditions of gale force winds and heavy snowfall
was mentioned.

For the Club, Dr, Eastwood agreed that the Stand would obviously not be built to the
same specification or the sans construction standards nowadays, but pointed out
that, for Instance, none of the buildings In Sheffield built before 1970 could meet
the latest wind pressure requirements. Even the Building Research Station was \
evidently thinking In terms that these requirements were unrealistlcally high. In
his professional opinion, the Stand was structurally safe and able in practice to meet
the loadings demanded. In any case, the conditions which had been described as
being possibly dangerous would mean In practice that a match could not be played
and consequently no spectators would be present.

Experience of the corrosion of indoors steel in the Sheffield area showed this to be
minimal, and the Stand was regularly test loaded by spectators. Structures such
as this would show obvious external signs, such as cracks, well before there was
any possibility of collapse, and would be readily apparent on even a superficial
visual Inspection. Even though he did not consider It essential, pla ting of the
front steel columns had been carried out as a compromise to try and meet the
Building Authority’s concern. He agreed there might well be a continuing
maintenance problem with the stand, but this was a different matter to saying there
was a structural problem. Reference was made to the Guide’s advice that when
assessing whether existing situations provided adequately for the safety of spectators,
the criterion to be used Is that of a reasonable degree of safety. In Dr. Eastwood’s
view, It would be unreasonable and unnecessary to insist on a full structural survey
of the South Stand or to delay the issue of the Certificate. It was his professional
opinion (which he was most jealous of and would not put in jeopardy) that the Smuth
Stand was structurally safe and that the basis of the calculations provided was
appropriate. He was prepared to advise the Club to use the appeal procedure open
to them should this be necessary.
IT W A S A G R E E D that:

(a)    as there was no obvious deterioration In the South Stand structure of such
        a nature as to be of immediate concern, no objection would be raised to the
        continuance of the derby game with Sheffield United on Boxing Day morning
        provided that no extreme weathe r conditions occurred In the Intervening
        period, and

(b)    a further meeting should be held as a matter of urgency between the Building
         Authority and Dr. W. Eastwood to discuss the structural integrity of the
        South Stand and the appropriateness of the calculations used (Mr. D. Vaughan
        to be present at Dr. Eastwood’s request).

N O T E As the discussions on the South Stand Construction hinged on structural
        theories and practices, the Fire Service and Police representatives felt
        there was little they could contribute and left the meeting prior to its
        termination.




                                       QQO
                           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

              Note of a meeting between the Officer Working Party (Sheffield D istrict),
              and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

                                     Hillsborough Stadium : 10th A pril, 1980

PRESENT:

Representing the Club

E . England (Secretary) .
Dr. W. Eastwood, (M essrs. Eastwood & Partners)

Representing the Working Party

F.     Davis                           (South Yorkshire     County Fire Service)
K.     Mettam                          (South Yorkshire     County Fire Service)
A.     Mills                           (City of Sheffield   Metropolitan D istrict Council)
B.     Mole                            (South Yorkshire     Police)
D.     Sheriff                         (City of Sheffield   Metropolitan D istrict Council)
D.     I. Vaughan                      (South Yorkshire     County Council - Administration Dept.)

  _______ Purpose of Meeting

In view of the F . A . Cup Sem i-Final at Hillsborough on 12th April and following recent
v is its by the disciplines represented on the Working P arty, the Chief Executive of the
South Yorkshire County Council had raised with the Club by letter dated 31st March various
m atters which apparently were still outstanding.

A letter of reply dated 3rd April had been received from the Club, as w ell as le tte r s dated
4th and 8th April from the Club's Consultants, M essrs. Eastwood and P artn ers, giving
details of the present position.

2.          Inspection of Ground

The Working Party inspected the ground in company with the Club's representatives.

 (i)        Training of Safety Stewards

            The Club had felt there was little point in pursuing the training of the Safety
            Stewards until the fire warning sy stem had been completely installed, but with
            agreement the County Fire Service had instructed some stewards yesterday.^
            A schedule specifying the duties and responsibilities was handed to the Club's
            r epr e se ntative s .

 (ii)       Exit Signs

             The Club’s representatives felt that the exit signs generally had been sited where
             required and were of adequate size and/or illuminated.

             It was agreed that there were a number which could be more advantageously sited
             and/or illuminated, and some which might be more effective with larger lettering
and/or direction arrow s. The County Fire Service undertook to lia is e with
M essrs. Eastwood and Partners.

Emergency Lighting in the South Stand

As was evident, complete re-w irin g of the South Stand with separate circu its had
already commenced, and the County Fire Service undertook to let M essrs. Eastwood
and Partners know their detailed requirem ents.

Fire Warning System

The Fire Warning System had been installed, except for the trickle charger and
battery equipment. These item s had been subject to delivery problem s, but the
system should be complete by the end of the month.

It was agreed that as regards the F. A. Cup Sem i-Final, the Police Communications
base which would be at the ground would also be used for Fire Service purposes if
n ecessary.

Sealing of Fire R esisting Fram es

The sealing of the fire resistin g door fram es against the supporting walls had generally
been carried out, but there were a sm all number which were now showing signs of
sm a ll gaps.

Fire Retardent Paint

The Club pointed out that "Nullifire" fire retardent paint had been specified on the
partitions within the South Stand but, as the Contractors were on holiday until
14th April, it was.not possible to say with certainty at this time whether it had actually
been used.

Wired Glass

The Club pointed out that to the best of their knowledge wired g la ss had been used
wherever required by the County Fire Service.

The County Fire Service and the Police were generally satisfied that the sm all panes
of g la ss in the upper half of the wooden partitions within the South Stand would not in
normal circum stances be regarded as a fire and/or safety hazard. The Club agreed in
the longer term to consider the fitting of wired g la ss and, in the short term , to
consider fitting wooden battons a s an interim m easure.

Sharp Edges to Steelwork on South-West Stand

Whilst there were a number of sharp corners on the supports, these were at a height
of at least seven feet. However, the Club undertook to round them off.

P erim eter Fencing on the Spion Kop

The Club pointed out that this had been tested where feasible and the resu lts forwarded
to the Chief Executive in January. A copj^ had been passed to the Building Authority on
30th January.                    ___
P ossible Step Obstruction on Upper Exit Area on Spion Kop

Whilst it was agreed that the erection of the barriers at the Upper Exit Area had left
a sm all adjacent area of approximately one foot wide by four foot long at a lower level
than the rem ainder of the ex it, it was felt that its position coupled with the crowd
flow at that point meant that it did not unduly create an hazard. However, the Club
undertook to give attention to it in the longer term .

Mesh Fencing under North Stand

In view of the normal crowd flow rates on the public side of the m esh fencing and the
fact that there was no public a c c e ss to its r ea r , it was felt that the timber framed
mesh fencing under the North Stand providing security to storage areas was acceptable.




                                  m
              South Yorkshire Police                                                                                               99
                                                                                   D IV IS IO N A L H E A D Q U A R T E R S
             ggk                                                                   HAMM ERTON ROAD
                                                                                   S H E F F IE L D        S6 2ND
                                                                                   TELEPHONE            (0743) W XDBX
                                                                                                                      852211
         A L L C O R R E S P O N D E N C E T O BE A D D R E S S E D T O
         " T H E C H IE F S U P E R IN T E N D E N T "

r   Mr David Bownes
                                                                                   YOUR REFERENCE


    Sheffield District Council                                                     OUR REFEREN CE
    Admin and Legal Department                                                     F/RM/AG
                                                                                   DATE
    Town Hall
L   SHEFFIELD                                                                      2 December 1987


    Dear David,

    SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB - PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM

    Enclosed herewith is a copy of my letter dated 2 December
    1987 to Graham Mackrell. The letter is self explanatory
    and it is understood that work will coirmence irrmediately
    to remedy the deficiencies exposed in the operational
    trial on 14 November 1987.

    Should .you require any further information, please do not
    hesitatp to contact me.       /

    Yours sincefely.                                                        .I \



                                                                                                         u                 th
                                                                                                                           n //
    Si^r^btSnd^nt                                                                                                          y t-i
                                                                                                                              7 l'i 'f->
        T H E O F F I C E R D E A L IN G W IT H T H IS
ADM/4   C O R R E S P O N D E N C E I S .................................                   E X T E N S I O N ..............................
                                                                                                                                                                                                 COPY
        South Yorkshire Police

                                                                                                                                       D IV IS IO N A L H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                                                                                                       HAMM ERTON ROAD
                                                                                                                                       S H E F F IE L D          S6 2N D
                                                                                                                                       TELEPHONE              (0742)852211



        A L L C O R R E S P O N D E N C E T O BE A D D R E S S E D T O " T H E C H IE F S U P E R IN T E N D E N T "


                                                                                                                                       YOUR REFERENCE

        Mr Graham Mackrell                                                                                                             OUR REFERENCE                           F/RM/AG
        Secretary
        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club                                                                                              date                                    2 December 1987
        Hillsborough
        SHEFFIELD




        Dear Graham,

        SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM

        You will be aware of the shortcomings in the public address system installed
        at Hillsborough, which were highlighted at the trial of emergency evacuation
        procedures which took place during operational conditions on 14 November 1987.
        The emergency evacuation instructions proved to be inaudible in the concourses
        at the rear of the Stand, at the rear of the Spion Kop, and in the club reception
        and office areas. Plainly, this situation detracts from the overall safety of
        the ground and there is a pressing need for the deficiencies to be remedied as
        soon as possible.

        You will know at the meeting which took place                                                                         on Thursday 26 November 1987,
        which was attended by your contractors Messrs                                                                         D P Sounds Ltd, that it will be
        necessary to substantially upgrade the public                                                                         address system. I would be
        grateful therefore, if you could proceed with                                                                         this work and notify me when
        this has been corrpleted.

        I am copying this letter to Mr David Bownes of the Sheffield District Council
        Admin and Legal Department.

        You/slsincetrelv.                                                        /\




                          tendent




ADM/3   T H E O F F I C E R D E A L I N G W I T H T H I S C O R R E S P O N D ^ C ^ ^ - ^ . ..................................................................................................   E X T E N S IO N



                                                                                            o n
                                                                                                                                                               100
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                      St. A n d re w s H o u s e
                  (Consulting Engineers)                                                                                        2 3 K in g f i e ld R o a d
                                                                                                                                S h e ffie ld S11 9AS
D ire c to rs :
W . E a s tw o o d               F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., D. Eng.,
                                                                                                                                T el.:     (0 7 4 2 ) 5 5 4 5 5 4
                                 C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.i.Struct.E.,                                                             T elex :                547266
                                 F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                Fax:       (0 7 4 2 )   554330
A. A. W ood                      B.Eng., Ph.D., C. Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                                 F.I,Struct.E-, M.I.W.E.M., M.Cons.E.                                                                                      and at :

R. C. A . E a s tw o o d         B.Sc., C-Eng., M.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                  Premier        House
G .S p ir                        C.Eng.. F.I.C.E., M.i.Mech.E.                                                                    12/13 H a tto n G ard en
C.      S. G re a v e s          B.Eng., C-Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.                                                          L ondon EC1N 8AN
S.      P re s to n              B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                  Tel.: (01) 2 4 2 7 4 3 6
                                                                                                                                  Fax.: (01) 4 0 4 5 4 2 4
G.      M . Seam an              B.Sc., C. Eng,, M.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.

C o n su ltan t:
                                                                                              Our Ref :                            WE/KB/10481
A . G. B u rd e tt               G.M., B.Sc.(Eng.|. C.Eng.,
                                 F.I.C.E., F.i.Struct.E.
                                                                                              Your Ref :




                                                                                                                                   2 August 1988



                             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
                  Annual Inspection of Hillsborough Stadium as required
                               by the Certificate of Ground Safety



                  On 18 July 1988, I made an inspection of the ground
during the time that this year's quota of crush barriers
were being tested by my firm.
                  The results of the crush barrier testing are given
in a separate report of today's date.
                  I made a visual inspection of all the main structural
features of the ground.                                          Particular attention was paid to
gates and entry and exit routes and to boundary walls and
fences.                 No significant defects were noted.
                  The roof of the South stand was inspected from the ground.
No deterioration in its condition was observed.
                  I certify that in my opinion the various structures on
the ground are in a satisfactory condition and appropriate for
the stadium to be used to the full capacity as laid down in
the Certificate of Ground Safety.




Associates:
J. A. S tr a n g e        A . J. Ciough                      R.Ta                    . M .W o o d              C .M . P ollard                R. K. Godden



                                                                                                                                                                      i
C.Eng., F.i.Struct.E.     B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.8.S.E.,                                 Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,   B.Eng.. C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,      p.S C.A. (Accountant
                          M.i.Mech.E.                                                 .I. Struct. E,           M.I.Struct.E.                  & Administration
                                                                                                                                              Manager)
                                                                           n   :   ____
