                    tiftst
                                                                                  liflfflllSl
                                                                                        #           r-
                                                                        i     i         :
                                                                              i     i       #




                                                i
                                                                                    ■               Hi ■
                                         %$«#




                                                               iiiiil
M   H                                                                                                     EllliSlS




                                                                                  —             M        ■« ■
                                                          1IBMI1MI11I1I


                                                                              wmmimmm.
                                                                               igi^g
                                                           mm.
                                                                        . a
                                                    Stllfi^jllttl
        iSlSlllSl
          mm
                                                                                                     mm              WXMm



                                                         imWgi

                                         &MM




                                                     mmimmm
                             pppftppji
 W ORDS
     of
T R IB U T E
Lest W e Forget

People sat watching in tears and sorrow
as the news began to unfold,
something was happening in Sheffield today,
to Liverpool fans, we were told.
The disaster is known to everyone now,
to dwell on it would only cause pain,
but we must rem em ber what happened that day,
for fear it may happen again.

Liverpool people w ere sad, though loyal,
to the families of those that had died,
men, women, children stood at the Kop’,
heads bowed, they quietly cried.
Nobody grieved or mourned selfishly,
to the Sun’ a sea of flowers said,
are we the hooligans you say do not care?
Crying for those that are dead.

Outside the cathedral a memorial's placed
saying to everyone there,
w e ’ll never forget those 95 fans
and grief with their families we share.
A simple message, a fateful date,
laid on the pavement in stone,
we in this City will always remember
not one of us walks alone.
Robert Littler
Hillsborough *89

At 2.45 it started
outside of the gate
little did I know
inside people await their fate.
People with no tickets
surging in the ground
trapped in there, no escape
like dogs in a pound.
 You’re choking m e ’ someone said
with my elbow in her throat
I’m finding it hard to breathe now
smothered up in someone's coat.
People getting pushed onto the floor
hundred of them try to escape
through one tiny door.
People clambering
over the fence
as I look back it's getting tense.
95 R.I.P.
I will never forget this tragedy.
David O ’Reilly; age 13




Hillsborough

They waved good-bye and went their way
Their hopes and dreams come true
They went all the way to Hillsborough
To watch their team come through
They stood and cheered before the game
On TV waved to wives
But did they know that later on
They’d be fighting for their lives
Some w ere pulled over
Some w ere pulled through
But 95 unlucky died
And that is when all the people of Liverpool
Came together and cried
Lindsay Carrol; St Julies School
I was there that day at Lepping Lane end,
With my father, a brother and a childhood friend.
Had two cans apiece before the match started
Then from the ‘Owl’ pub, very quickly departed.
The game was the thing for us Liverpool men,
With anticipation we entered that pen
Right at the front, w e ’d been lucky we said,
But in less than an hour one of us would be dead.
The surge grew stronger, a bit of a crush
You expect it, late comers, last minute rush,
But this wasn’t so on further inspection
And panic engulfed with awful perception.
Breath being squeezed out of bodies galore
Pressure exerted from behind to the fore.
‘Christ, let us out,’ as the thrust bruised our flesh
I looked at my friend, skin sliced by the mesh.
‘Hang on Kev, I'll give you a lift’
But not bone or muscle am I able to shift.
I see him slump, ‘Kev, don’t go down.’
In a mass of humanity, I watch him drown.
Half conscious, I struggle to gasp for air
‘Please God help us, is anyone there.’
Strong arms lift me above and away,
I don’t know his name to this living day,
But if you ever read this simple account
My gratitude to you is an undying fount..

Will lessons be learnt from the tragedy?
They say they will - well, we shall see.
One thing is certain, a heartbreaking fact
It won’t bring all those loved ones back.
So, i vow as a son of Merseyside
To w ear my colours with extra pride.
No more will I suffer the slur of the press
No more be cowed by uncalled for redress.
For what happened at Hillsborough - WE DO NOT
   TAKE THE BLAME,
True Scouse fans have respect for the game
But this I will shout from the highest steeple
‘FOR GODS SAKE GIVE SOCCER BACK TO THE PEOPLE.’
Hillsborough

Their Epitaph is written in our hearts,
Their Monument is in our memories;
Our consolation, when the weeping starts,
Love conquers Death; It never ever dies.
D.M.C.




A pril 15th 1989

‘What’s the score lah?’ someone said
T h e games called off mate, people are dead.’
 You’re jokin’ a r’nt yeh?’ came the reply
 It's a football match, people can't die.’

 Oh yes they can lad, w here’ve you been?
A couple of tragedies I have seen,
The Heysel stadium to name but one
Now 39 Italians gone.'

And now Hillsborough, Wednesdays ground
95 of our own fans found
Men and women, children too
Football fans like me and you.

I ask this question, Who’s to blame?’
And hope they hang their heads in shame,
For now we face the medias slur
Are they perverted? Don’t they care?
There’s families grieving throughout this land
The Sun newspaper must be banned.

At Anfield you can feel the grief
Of sorrow and beauty beyond belief,
Fans united at the ground
Scarves and flowers all around.

Let’s stay together, let’s show our love
They’re watching us from up above.
So let’s stay friendly, let's stay sane
Our loved ones Did Not Die In Vain.
Not forgetting Bradford, Munich, Ibrox too,
You’ll Never Walk Alone, we all Love you.
Mick Stuart
Were you there at the ground
Did you go to the game
Did you tear at the fence
While the trapped screamed in pain?

Did you kneel on the grass
And cradle a head
Did you try to breathe life
To the lungs of the dead
Or tear out the hoardings
Make stretchers for friends,
On your strength and courage
Did their life depend?
If you were not there
How dare you claim
They were just drunken yobos
And sully the name
Of all the brave fans
Who just went for a game.
M. Hodges




Get O ff The Pitch

I trod the turf of Hillsborough ground
I screamed at people all around,
Please help my friends in there dying
It seems to me no one is trying.

The powers that be just stand and stare,
There’s no one to say Go here, go there.’
We grab the boards and start to run
Our friends are dying one by one.

I see a policeman and ask him why?
Why he is standing idly by.
 Get off the pitch’, he said to me,
Or you will lose your liberty.

  Please help them, please,’ I scream and shout,
,‘Get off the pitch or you’ll be out,’
 I trod the turf of Hillsborough ground,
 No more to have those friends around.
 R. Brien
For my ‘baby brother’ Gary Philips Jones
(w ho died at Hillsborough aged 18 years)

Gary, when you went out of my life a light went out too
A light went on in heaven, a new life for you
My heart has been broken, torn in two
No words can comfort me, I will always miss you.
The memories of what we did together will never go
We sang, danced, listened to each other
But most of all laughed together.
Gary protect us now, as we wanted to protect you
You are at peace now, no worries,
Help us who are left grieving on earth.
I can’t touch you anymore
But I feel your presence around me and I know you care.
Gary when we leave this world
Meet us and take us to your new room
We all love you, Goodnight God Bless
Your loving sister Cathy



To all w ho died, particularly my wife Christine

Our colours lie unmourned
Gathering dust in forgotten drawers
No more to w ear on Glory Days
W e’ll never stand to watch
Shirts of red on grass of green
Or shimmering trophies
That glitter and gleam
In springtime sun
S. Jones




Forever

‘Where have all the flowers^gone?’
To dust, to ashes, on the Sea:
Swift fleeting as Life itself
But ever loved in Memory.
M arg aret Ross
Grief

We have to have time to mourn
And yet when Nature
Sends blue skies and sunshine
Our Grief seems out of place.
We look at those around us
And we are angry
That the one we love is gone.
No more that sweet smile,
No more the beloved voice,
No more their laughter.
When they went young
We wonder, why the waste.
As the time passes
We never forget them.
Yet, the sunshine
The blue skies,
The turning of the seasons
All are working to help us.
Those mourned are there forever
Preserved in a precious
Part of our memories.
There is a time to Live
And a time to Die.
Who knows why that is so?
And yet, through our mourning
We grow, then accept
Immortality is within us
For those we love.
Grieve a little while
Then let go of the Grief.
Store the memories
We will be happy again
One day, sooner or later.
It does not mean that
The Beloved is forgotten
Just that the Life
And Death have
Touched our Souls,
 Found their proper place
 Making us a stronger being.
We who Mourn
 Do not forget.
    From a wife whose husband was there

    He woke up this morning, this weekend day, to the hustle and bustle - it’s
    Saturday. Excited and singing, it’s not far away, he’s off to the match -
    it’s Saturday. ‘What shall I wear?’ he pesters me, ‘A shirt or a sweater,
    what shall it be?’ Decisions, decisions, don’t make a fuss, go on your way
    and don't pester us.

    Off he goes, ‘T arra,’ he shouts ‘See you later I don’t doubt.’ Hustle and
    bustle, I go my way to get the shopping with his hard earned pay. Hurry
    back home to pack it away, hustle and bustle - it’s Saturday.

    Hurry round not thinking of time,
    Oh check on the score, is it half time?
    My eyes stare in horror, several are dead, the pictures don’t lie,
    a disaster ahead.
    My God, my heart, the beat getting louder, my stomach is churning, how
    can this be, they went to a match, Liverpool F.C.
    The death toll is rising, tears fill my eyes, why is this happening, God
    hear my cries.
    The day lingers on, my mind in a whirl, the telephone rings.
    It’s not his voice I hear, Oh God hear my pleas, let him be alright.
    No hustle and bustle, it’s now Saturday night.
    A key in the door, he stands there alone, tears fill his eyes.
    He’s glad to be home, our tears pressed together, he silently shakes.
    No words are spoken, feelings take place, no laughter in his eyes, no
    smile on his face, ninety five perished because of a gate.
    Maureen Bradshaw



    The Football Game

    Thousands of fans gathered on the day
    Full of spirit which was to end in dismay,
    Like an army of soldiers looking for victory
    But for 95 victory was not to be.
    There was no escape, the crowd was dense
    Though some scrambled the wall and the fence,
    Even when free the fans did not run away
    They stayed and helped in every way.
    The courage of the people was a sight to see
    They pulled together like a family,
    Though for ever we will play the football game
    Liverpool will never be the same.
    J. Boase




8
Saturday, 15th A pril 1989

Red scarves fluttering gaily on their way
Unfamiliar accents in the local takeaway
Hillsborough people realise that it’s very plain
It’s semi-final day, and Liverpool’s here again.

Coming home from shopping through a silent throng
They’re out much too early - surely something’s wrong?
T h e match has been abandoned, dozens have been
   killed'
Suddenly my heart stops beating and my blood runs chilled.

Walking home so slowly, seeing grown men cry
Sitting on the pavements, car radios nearby
Others cling together as their friends they see -
Doors begin to open, offering telephones and tea.

O Liverpool, w e’ll not forget no matter come
  what may
When your joy turned to anguish on that awful,
  fateful day.
The media may argue what men did, or didn’t do,
But we, the folk of Hillsborough, we weep and
  pray, with you.
A Hillsborough Housewife




For a Liverpool Supporter I tried to revive

      You made me promise you wouldn’t die.
Well now you know I told a lie.

       I didn’t even know your name. I’m sorry
my efforts were all in vain.

      So if you’re looking down from heaven
above, you will know I send these flowers
with my love.
A Sheffield Nurse
      To the families o f Liverpool Supporters

     We just wanted to hold them and tell them that we care
     Byt we couldn’t at that moment because we w eren’t there.
     Yes afterwards we went to try and help them all
     But afterwards w e ’re human and not ten feet tall,
     We felt so helpless to see them all so broken,
     Our help and love was just a token.
     Liverpool be proud of all these young people
     They were very brave, tall as any steeple.
     Yes we know because we were there
     The sorrow that they bore was more than we could bear.
     They say that parting is such sweet sorrow
     But then they say, it’s another day tomorrow,
     But even though the days may come and go
     You citizens of Liverpool we want you to know,
     Be proud and let them know you care
     Yes we know because we were there.
     A Sheffield helper




     The Sadness That Is Merseyside’s

     The sadness that is Merseyside’s is near too much to bear
     You can see it on the faces, you can feel it in the air.
     The sense of loss is everyone’s, down every single road
     The greatest people in the land, just want to share the load.
     The pilgrimage to Anfield must be seen to be believed
     And the tears that flow so freely, are not just from the bereaved
     They’ve come from every single part of this great land of ours,
     With scarves and trophies red and blue and multitudes of flowers.
     The grief is there for all to see, completely unashamed
     W e’ve not had time to really think of those who should be blamed.
     But in this Merseyside of ours its very sad to say,
     We’re all too used to tragedies that seem to come our way.
     Its just as if w e ’re singled out. Is it something that w e ’ve done?
     The honours that are Merseyside’s, have all been fairly won.
     Time of course will heal the wounds, but still there’ll be regret
     But one thing that is certain, Merseyside will not forget
     The Liverpool supporters, the lasses, lads and men,
     Who went with pride to cheer their side never to return again.
     Alan Barrowdale

10
A supporter’s lament

To Sheffield we went expectant and proud
With faces aglow, singing aloud,
Grand dads and kids and ordinary blokes
Full of patter and Merseyside jokes,
That hide the pain of struggling for bread
To follow the feats of our boys in red.

Through the turnstiles, gates and tunnel
The excited crowd began to funnel,
Though pressure grew good nature prevailed
But some felt faint and others paled,
The small and weak were spared some pain
By stronger protectors who took up the strain.

As the reds appeared we swelled our song
Which carried outside to the waiting throng,
Whose frustration burst as the whistle blew
To start the match they’d paid to see too,
As life started oozing from some being pressed
Gates were flung open to ease their distress.

The dam was breached, the flood swept in
Increasing the pressure on those within,
Trapped like animals in an iron cage
Solidly built to contain the rage,
Of hooligan, punk, thug and brute
Who have brought our nation to disrepute.

Distress changed to panic then despair
As loved ones crushed, gasped for air,
Spring sweet, abundant just inches away
But denied by a cage on that terrible day,
We’d gone to count goals by our boys in red
But shed bitter tears as we counted our dead

Now a city in shock mourns those who have died
And nobody knows who should be tried,
For the carnage, pain, grief and sorrows
That must be faced through endless tomorrows,
But of this I am certain, history will say
There were more saints than sinners on that dreadful day.
A supporter’s elegy for the Hillsborough dead

We came to sing,
We stayed to weep;
We came to clap,
We left to grieve.
Coming to enjoy a game
We stayed to endure a conflict,
For this became a contest
Both sides lost.

They lost their lives,
We have lost them -
Would that those innocents
Had had the victory.

We thought to shake the terraces with our shouts,
We stayed to stain the soil with our tears;
They are our tears.

Time mocked us there:
Seeming to stand still
It ran away with the loved ones.
It had no likeness to a fisher's line
Which, being overcast, is reeled back.
Would that we could re-call that ingenuous day
Before their young bodies drowned
In that torrent of bodies.

We had been glad,
Now we are stunned;
We shouted,
Now we are subdued.
This was to be a game to pen epics about;
Expecting to compose a song
We wrote an epitaph:

ALL WE WHO GRIEVE WILL SAY
THOUGH THEY ARE GONE AWAY
THEY WILL FOR EVER BE
CLOSE IN OUR MEMORY.
Philip Ennis
Red and Blue spell Merseyside

R   is for RED the colour of your team
E   is for EVERTON your friendly rival team
D   is for DEDICATED, the fans of both our teams.

A    is for ANFIELD across from GOODISON PARK
N   is for NO more barriers at our football grounds
D   is for DOWN come the fences on Merseyside.

B    is for BLUE, the other teams colours
L    is for LOVE shown in flowers and tears.
U   is for UNITED in our grief on Merseyside,
E   is for ENTWINED the hearts and scarves of both teams on
    Merseyside.
Evertonian Family




Dedicated to the Liverpudlians

The scousers looked forward to a really good game.
I was at Villa and I felt the same.
We w eren ’t aware, hadn’t heard a thing,
Who could’ve known the horrors that this day would bring.
At 4.45 we left the ground.
There were no jubilations, hardly a sound.
We left for home, not a word was said.
Then over the radio 84 dead.
I shook my head in disbelief.
My fellow supporters all shared in my grief.
I feel for each person, family or friend.
How I wish all the suffering and sadness could end.
Shattered lives and broken hearts are what this day has brought.
 YOU’LL NEVER WALK ALONE M Y FRIENDS, WE'LL GIVE YOU OUR
SUPPORT.
A. Bromilow; a broken hearted Evertonian




                                                               13
      April 15th 1989
      At Villa Park the weather’s fine
      The Blues are in command
      But I’ve no thought of glory
     ^As I sit stunned in the stand
      My radio tells the story
      I support the Blues
      My neighbour’s Red
      The radio brings the news
      My neighbours dead.
     Kieron Sloan




     Hillsborough

     The grief of Liverpool was there for everyone to see,
     It was in the papers, on the radio and on the TV,
     As the mother of a son who is still with me, safe,
     I grieved for other mothers and felt my heart would break.

     We watched the doomed match with horror, and frustration too,
     TV showed it unfolding, such tragedy and nothing we could do,
     Our lovely youth and their fathers lost forever today,
     Just for going together to watch their beloved team play.

     It seemed the whole world queued at Anfield this week,
     They layed their treasures and floral tributes, without speech,
     The Blues and the Reds of the 'Pool united in grief,
     As you gazed at the ‘KOP’ you could do nothing but weep.

     As we stood, gentle rain came down like tears from the sky,
     While in silence we remembered those who did not have to die,
     We remembered the kindness of people we did not even know,
     But this is Merseyside with the greatness of its heart on show.

     The tragic stories are told in so many different ways,
     Of the dying, and the heros, all closed in that cage,
     Their names will live forever as the lesson will be taught,
     Give working folk their dignity and no battles will be fought.

     The Football games will go on, for all the fans sake,
     And the banter will start, ‘Are you “ Blue” , no I’m “ Red” m ate’,
     ‘We are Great, no we are best’, but for those gone above,
     Always rem em ber that linked coloured scarfline of love.
     Mrs T.M. Bradshaw; An Evertonian’s Mum


14
They w ill never walk alone

They are the red army who love the game
For the disaster at Heysel they took the blame
They carried it with them, for four long years
The guilt, the shame and many fears.
They w ere jUst getting over this awful ordeal
The wounds of Heysel had started to heal,
This disaster was part of the past
They could put it behind them now, at last.
Liverpool F.C. is the team to support.
The fans are the best, and a really good sort
They follow their team where ever they go,
They all went to Hillsborough, but they did not know
This ground was inadequate to tackle the strain.
The Liverpool fans are not to blame,
Packed like sardines very tight in a can
Caused the death of many a young fan.
Crushed, suffocating, screaming with fear
The officials around them did not seem to hear.
The semi final had begun
When over the fence came a distraught fan
A policeman told him to go back in
Because he thought he was a hooligan.
The lad pleaded, ‘Don’t send me back,’
But communication they seemed to lack.
Fans were dying behind that fence
This awful carnage did not make sense.
Officials were very slow to act
Medical facilities they also lacked,
The fans tried hard to save their mates
If only they hadn’t opened those gates
By doing so ninety five fans perished.
Their memory will live and always be cherished
They died in terror and fear and pain,
So when you walk down memory lane,
Sing out loud and let it be known
Those fans who died will never walk alone.
J. McKeown
 My Thoughts
  A scouser is human like everybody else. He has arms and legs and
 sometimes a big head, but scousers are different in one or two ways.
 They have a thing called a heart that's bigger than the rest. A scouser
 will stick by you in triumph and tragedy, we have this undying affection
 for each other, we hold an arm out to each other and a shoulder to cry on.
 I shed tears I'm not ashamed to say, we love life and love living. We have
 two football teams, one blue, one red. We love ourfootball deeply but not
 as much as each other.

 It’s sad to see a scouser cry. I can’t imagine myself anything other than a
 scouser. I wouldn't want to be anything else. I'm certainly not a savage,
 how can I be with all the feelings I have for my fellow scouser, ‘You'll
 never walk alone’, not when you’re a scouser.
 Nigel; an Everton fan



 Thinking o f our Liverpool
 On a Friday morning going off to work, with the thought of Liverpool.
 Getting two tickets, going through our minds with the thought of
 Liverpool.
 Listening to the radio, finding out tickets are still being sold, quick get
 down there, with the thought of Liverpool.
 What a shame, all gone. Even trying a radio comp with the thought of
 Liverpool.
 Getting up on Saturday morning putting the radio on, busily getting
 things done, listening for the match with the thought of Liverpool.
 Soon the kick off, all the work is done sit down and listen watch the telly,
 with the thought of Liverpool.
 But soon oh no, things go wrong, listening and watching, worrying and
 crying with the thought of Liverpool.
 The phone rings with family asking if we are home ‘Yes’, I tell them, we
 are safe, with the thought of Liverpool.
 A sense of shock, guilt, sadness, numbness has overcome us, reading
 the papers wanting to scream, how dare they print lies about our
 Liverpool.
 Sending cards, making collections, visiting Anfield churches and
 services, wishing, oh wishing to do more for our Liverpool.
 Our hearts have been broken for the people who we have lost, thinking
 back how so nearly it could have been us, thanking God, we say it was
 not. We have no scarfs and banners now, all have gone with the thought
 of Liverpool.
 But soon the football has begun and we think of points and cups, we
 collect our scarves once again and buy our records too-. We stand in
 silence side by side thinking of our Liverpool.
 C. Barton


16
Villa Park fades into insignificance
as news from Hillsborough comes through.
Friends, relations, neighbours,
lost in a sea of tragedy.
Where is I ifes justice?
Children taken without reason,
families forced into despair,
a city weeping for its people.
A city shocked by what it sees
comes together as one.
Reds and Blues together mourn
without having to take sides.
J. Doyle



The Liverpool A ccent
( Thoughts after Hillsborough)
Now words refuse to say
What only hearts can speak,
This accent, so renowned
For its sharp, ready wit
In these sad days
Becomes the accent of our grief.
Yet our true accent
Is no longer heard in speech
But felt in the depth of our being.
Drawn together, across all barriers
We reach out to each other
Just as, at Hillsborough, the scene of our distress,
Those hands reached down to lift
Up to the safety of the stand above,
Any who could be rescued in that way.
As arms w ere placed on grieving shoulders
To give some comfort, if they could,
As doors have opened giving help to strangers,
As scarves of red and blue were linked
In that long chain
Which finds us alone together in our sorrow.
We know such signs declare,
 In ways words cannot say
That this is truly, at its heart,
The accent of our city,
Our ‘village’ city, where even its excited children
Will always be at home,
Together both in laughter and in tears.
Wendy Ross-Barker
     Tears

     I’ve watched this team for fifty years,
     Age does not help me stem the tears,
     Dads, uncles and my sons stood on the Kop,
     Please help me make the tears stop.

     I sat and watched in disbelief
     Where was assistance, help, relief,
     I lived a thousand years that day,
     Please help me take the tears away.

     My sons, thank God, were far away
     On that terrible fatal day,
     Who knows the wherefores and the whys,
     Or why a person continually cries.

     What do we do? Where do we go?
     Do we play? is it yes or no?
     I don’t know the answers to all our fears,
     I don’t know how to stop the tears.
     R.L. Smith




     Footprints

     One night a man had a dream. He dreamed he was walking along the
     beach with the LORD. Across the sky flashed scenes from his life. For
     each scene, he noticed two sets of footprints in the sand; one belonging
     to him, and the oth^r to the LORD.
       When the first scene of his life flashed before him, he looked back at
     the footprints in the sand. He noticed that many times along the path of
     his life there was only one set of footprints. He also noticed that it hap­
     pened at the very lowest and saddest times in his life.
       This really bothered him and he questioned the LORD about it. 'LORD,
     you said that once I decided to follow you, you’d walk with me all the way.
     But I have noticed that during th a most troublesome times in my life,
     there is only one set of footprints. I don’t understand why when I needed
     you most you would leave m e.’
       The LORD replies, ‘My precious, precious child. I love you and I would
     never leave you. During your times of trial and suffering, when you see
     only one set of footprints, it was then that I carried you.’

18
Liverpool’s Tears

 City of sorrow . . . city of tears.
 Full of questions . . . empty of cheers.
Gathering blindly, needing to touch.
 Finding this burden all too much . . .
City of sigh& . . . city of mourning.
Cathedral bell dolefully tolling.
Flags half-masted .. . all eyes reddened.
Voices muted . . . spirits deadened.
City of g r i e f . . . city of prayer.
Cathedrals like magnets drawing folk near.
A sense of loss . . . a sense o f . . . ‘Why?’
An ache . . . and a puzzlement wrapped in a sigh.
Flowers, scarves . . . on Anfield’s ground.
Trailing procession walking around . . . know . . .
‘You’ll never walk alone.’
M ary Cowhig




Words alone cannot express the feelings deep inside,
For the families, friends and neighbours of the the 95 who died
At Hillsborough on that fateful day,
For Liverpool who played away.

A football pitch of flowers and scarves, tears shed in deepest grief,
Thousands paid their tributes in utter disbelief.
Cast off the Mersey ferry, 95 flowers and bouquets
As the Mersey sang their echoes and each petal touched the waves.

Condolences from round the world in media and press
Poured in among the thousands more, in Liverpools distress.
Our dead will never be forgotten, we will remember them with pride
God took them and we don’t know why, our sons of Merseyside.
Mrs M. Summ er




                                                                        19
The Losing Game

They say that life is just a game
Well I don’t want to play
W e’re on the losing side again
Will we ever win the day?

Body crushed and weakened
In sweat soaked misty haze
The memories raced through my mind
Of all those halcyon days.

Times of good and times of bad
The years of joy and strife
From the day I lost a mother
To the day I won a wife.

Please God don’t let this happen
Is it something that w e ’ve done
Is this the day of Last Judgement
What’s happened to my son?

Voices crying out for help
In terror, grief and rage
Policemen standing watching us
Trapped in the Hillsborough cage.

After all is said and done
Do we end up just the same
Like a Bosch style painted fantasy
Set in a gilt edged frame.

Tangled bodies in confusion
Frantic, struggle to steel mesh gate
A father and son, two lucky ones
For others it was all too late.

They kept their pride and courage
Right to the very end
We give our cup of tears to you
Our pals and mates, best friends.

If they had a second chance
Would they do it all the same
Or would they play it different
In life, the losing game?
 H.S. Currie
Anfield w ill miss them

I awoke with the bright golden dawn of mid-spring,
And it bolstered my hopes for what the day could yet bring,
In Sheffield at Hillsborough where w e ’d done it all before,
I dreamt of the grandeur of Wembley once more.

As we crossed through the Pennines our convictions were strong,
With our hearts filled with hope like the proverbial song,
An all-Merseyside final? That was down to the blues,
I was convinced beyond doubting that the Reds could not lose.

We arrived at the ground at a quarter to three,
And the first sign that all was not a s it should be,
Was a melee of people but no orderly queue,
The police stood by watching so the chaos it grew.

We somehow gained access but with thousands outside,
There’s understandable anger as their entry’s denied,
At last a reaction from the police but too late,
In a panicked decision then they opened the gate.

Unaware of the danger the match had begun,
And our colours flew proudly in the afternoon sun,
But as we took up positions right behind Brucie’s goal,
A surge swept us forward and claimed a terrible toll.

There is pushing and shoving we feel the pressure increase,
We can hardly draw breath as we beg for release,
But no-one will help us our please are in vain,
It’s like the nightmare of Heysel all over again.

As the force of the crush becomes far too intense,
Then in fear of our lives we climbed over the fence,
On the pitch someone shouted T h e y ’ve abandoned the game,
Someone else can't find their brother though they’re calling his name.

I will never forget all those horrifying scenes,
And the cries of the innocent still haunt my dreams,
But then at least I’m alive with a story to tell,
A very lucky survivor from the Leppings Lane hell.

The price of disaster is a most tragic cost,
For there’s 95 brothers and sisters w e’ve lost,
And with the leaving of Sheffield I watch the sun slowly set,
I know Anfield will miss them but will never forget.




                                                                     21
And now fingers are pointed apportioning blame,
And in each Sunday paper the headlines the same,
As they fight for exclusives it’s sensation they seek,
And the gross fabrications have emerged by mid-week.

More than one certain tabloids vile soul is laid bare,
As they scavenge the depths of this human despair,
Shame-faced lies they sell papers so they distort the truth,
And pronounce us all guilty even though there’s no proof.

I know I only saw heroes who fought to save lives,
And these warm-hearted fans helped so many survive,
Seems these brave self-less actions hold a lesser appeal,
Than the sick accusation that from victims w e’d steal.

Now just one week later but so grey is the morn,
That even the green fields of spring look forlorn,
I am chilled to the bone the wind cuts like a knife,
And I’ve never felt a sorrow so deep in my life.

As all around Anfield the silence pervades,
The people file slowly in sombre parades,
And old man with his memories just stares into space,
With the cruel lines of mourning engraved on his face.

It’s a lifetimes ambition to tread this sacred ground,
But Lord not like this there is barely a sound,
Just the call of a child who cannot understand,
Why his Father is crying as he holds to his hand.

I am filled with a numbness that is tempered by grief,
But the vision before me is beyond all belief,
There’s a huge sea of colour stretching line after line,
With its carpet of wreaths the Kop’s truly a shrine.

All the hues of the rainbow amassed and it seems,
There are representations from all football teams,
And from across Stanley Park where our neighbours reside,
There's a deluge of tributes in a blue and white tide.

Now time passes quickly and the hour draws near,
And it seems even Heaven is shedding a tear,
For echoing gently in the hush as they land,
Are the soft sounds of rain-drops on the roof of the stand.

With the last haunting strains of ‘Abide With M e ’,
All Merseyside pauses at six minutes past three,
As we stop to remember and show that we care,
In the midst of that silence I offer a prayer.
‘When the light turned to darkness they just drifted to sleep,
Now I pray please Dear Lord that their souls you will keep,
In the beauty of your kingdom and with “Shanks” at your side,
You will lovingly greet them with arms open wide.

As we raise up our voices to heaven we sing,
As I end this entreaty Lord I’d ask one more thing,
Tell our poor fallen angels who did not return home,
They live still in our hearts and they’ll never walk alone’.

Now ‘Hope springs eternal’ is a cliche much used,
But our belief in that faith it should not be abused,
And with dignified grace we must all bear the pain,
Till beyond all horizons we will meet them again.
Lee Charles Walker



‘Tell Bill Shankly about your D ad’

No more tears to shed, my son, too late
For those that pass the Shankly Gate
For when I was a lad my father said
Come along son and be a red
And there we stood proud and strong
Father and son in the Anfield throng.

No more tears to shed, my son, too late
For those that pass the Shankly Gate
For now I am a man and a father too
And like the old fella I took along you
And there we stood side by side
Your soppy old dad eyes filled with pride.

No more tears to shed, my son, too late
For those that pass the Shankly Gate
For when you close those eyes at night
I’d smile a smile of a true Koppite.
Now all I have left is the scarf that you wore
The red and white of the times before.

No more tears to shed, my son, too late
For those that pass the Shankly Gate
For in our hearts you are still here
To sing the songs of yesteryear
And remember it was me who told of that Shankly lad
Do me a favour son? Tell Bill Shankly about your dad.
Terry Carroll


                                                                 23
     The Horror o f Leppings Lane
     The Saddest thing that I’ve ever seen
     Was the Horror of Leppings Lane
     Where dying faces will forever haunt me
     As they twist in indescribable pain

     The Saddest thing that I have ever heard
     Was a child being told the news
     The mother bravely chokes back tears
     While the child just stares confused

     The most wonderful thing that I have ever seen
     Is the Mersey spirit so dignified
     They Will Never Walk Alone
     As I shared their grief, and cried

     The most wonderful thing that I have ever seen
     Is a Community all as one
     We can't bring back those who died
     But we can offer out our love.
     Dave Lunn




      Silent Minute

      Iron, the killing fence stood,
      bedecked with scarves
      of red and blue.

      Around them, beribboned
      flowers of every hue.

      No laughter nor cheer
      filled the air.

      Instead, shuffling past,
      folk paying respects,
      their last.

      All, gazed at twisted
      metal.
      For one minute, there
      was silence.

      Long enough for quiet tear.
      Doris F. Lamount


24
Hillsborough

Here in my home town
Many have died
Shattered are the families
Pain in their eyes
A careless mistake
Took the lives of many
Innocent victims
Of a horrific tragedy
M ary Johnson




Liverpool

On an ordinary Saturday afternoon
Nobody realised that very soon
That time was drawing near
For hours and hours of fear.
Fear for the dead and the living
Fans were generous in their giving
Amid numb feelings and ones of rage
As they saw humans being trapped in a cage.
They appealed, they shouted to anyone in sight
Chaos was rife, so with all of their might
They tore down hoardings, made stretchers of wood
Did everything in their power to be of some good,
Who knows how many they saved alive
The dead are numbered at ninety-five.
You tried, we watched you doing your best
Now your hearts go out to those in despair
To all concerned we offer this prayer,
Walk tall, walk proud, the seeds are sown
You will never, ever, walk alone.
Jean Waring; Derby
‘The Real Match’

We hold our banners, we sing our song.
Wembley won’t be too long.
The mighty reds fight strength with strength.
With world acclaim, w e’ll go the length.
We followed them to neutral ground.
And everything was going sound.
With jokes and laughs, not all that clean.
A bit of fun, but nothing mean.

We gathered round, outside the stiles.
With followers, that came from miles,
We moved forward, forced on by police.
When would this crush of men cease.

Then suddenly without a word.
The opening of the gates was heard,
And when I looked towards the gates.
We surged forward, me and my mates.
Police behind and match in front,
We were herded with a shunt.

Get in the match, a policeman said,
His face of anger, had gone bright red.
Go on, get in, there’s room up top,
We heard them say at Hillsborough Kop.
The rush was great, the crowds came through,
What could one lonely man do.
We saw some fall, we could not help.
And when they did they gave a yelp.
A cry, a shout, a plea for life.
Could this have been somebody's wife.

A boy a man, more people down.
The face of death, turned into frown.
Some tried to climb, up on the rail,
Try to escape, while others fail.

The crush so strong, you cannot breathe.
The game still on, our players weave.
Still not aw are how things are.
A player shoots and hits the bar.
The crowd erupts, and starts to swell.
Down at the front, life sure was hell.
The crush so strong to breath or blink,
Your arms bound down, you only think.
Some fans escape, to save their life.
Their minds elsewhere, filled full of strife.
Police hold them back, while others die.
The screams of pain, a mournful cry.
They’re dying, dying, listen please.
Once more the people begin the squeeze.
Too late for some, for they fall down.
Into the sea of men they drown.

Some little boys, some teenage men.
Are crushed to death within this pen.
Women scream and fathers weep,
Lost in the crowd, like herded sheep.
Loved and followed, this game did cease.
Stephan Tynan




The Unreal News

News reels, unreal,
My brother, a stumbling witness
Told tales of red-scarved bravery,
Rag-doll bodies
Tossed to belated safety;
Make-shift bill-boards
As stretchers skirting the turf of suffering.

Friends searching for friends,
Fathers searching for sons,
Jackets lifted from sleeping faces.
God Bless. Goodnight.

No thorough enquiry, no permed politician
No sympathetic priest
Could console, could answer
When the weeping bereaved asked

Why? For God’s sake, Why?
M iren Lynch
I Never K new Your Name

W e’ve stood at games
Side by side.
We’ve laughed, w e ’ve sung,
We’ve cheered, w e ’ve cried.
                                i
We’ve shared the highs.
We’ve shared the lows.
W e’ve even trod
On each others toes.            x

They scored a goal.
We’ve hugged and kissed.
We’ve shared a moan
When someones missed.

We’ve gone off home
To meet again.
Another ground.
Another game.

But this time, where
You used to stand.
There’ll be a space.
We’ve lost a friend.

More than a friend
At L.F.C.
We were, and are
One big family.

On that day
I lost a brother,
Son, Father,
Sister, Mother.                 *

I'll miss you all
At every game.                  ^
I loved you - but
I Never Knew Your Name.
Linda Robinson
Birkenhead Grief

From my home town to your great City
Just the tears of the Mersey divides us,
But within the double grief, please no pity
We are united, not just your City, not just us,
Nor the reds of Anfield or the Everton blues.
Your City weeps, my town weeps, the world mourns
For those wonderful fans, red through and through.
As towns unite, cities unite, then a new day dawns
As a new meaning comes to that tiny word True,
True people, true friends and Anfield a huge lawn,
It’s now a shrine, a flower garden, scarves red and blue.
People have travelled far and wide,
Not just from my town, not just from your City
To visit that shrine, only the Mersey can divide
Because nothing else can divide us, please no pity.
These Merseyside people, they grieve, but they will ride
The troubled waters of the Mersey and with the help
And love of all the wonderful people, side by side.
All the families, loved ones of my town and your City
We are with you, God Bless, it’s my grief I can’t hide.
Evelyn Power




Today

Today in all this sadness
Why do I feel this way?
Today in all this madness
I find it hard to say
For today I’m very angry
At this tragic loss of life
Today I feel so sad
As a mother and a wife
Today I’m also angry
At the apt named gutter-press
For showing scenes of agony
of horror and distress
When they left they were so happy
But today they’re very sad
As a very selfish mother
I was so pleased to see my lad.
Ann Delve
 The Day I w on’t Forget

 When Liverpool went to Sheffield,
 The fans passed me in the Lane,
 I’ve seen it many times before
 But today was not the same.

 The excited buzz around the ground,
 Could our team get through
 The tragedy that occurred later on
 Could surely not be true.

 So many of our fans were lost
 In April ’89
 T h an k God’ my parents said
 Th an k God it wasn’t m ine.’

 But some parents could not say that
 The future, very bleak,
 Their sons and daughters did not come home,
 Grief stricken, week by week.

 And now the trauma has set in,
 It’s hit me like a stone.
 But to those 95 that died;
 ‘YO U’LL NEVER WALK ALONE.’
 Jane Cliff; A Kopite age 15




 To you all,

        We are all feeling very sad at school after seeing the horrific
 pictures on television, of the disaster at Hillsborough on Saturday.

        We send our love and concern for you at this time of your grief.

        Unfortunately there is nothing that we can do to ease the pain, but
 our thoughts are with you.

 With love
 Joanne Pankhurst & Elangeni School, Bucks




30
The Day Liverpool Wept

Innocent victims once again,
Battled and fought for their life in vain,
Crushed and battered, the pain went on
Even though the bright sun shone.
Rays of peace and proudness bright
Burned the hopeful eternal light,
the light was shattered and evil came,
Brought upon by hurt and shame.

People try to overcome,
They feel all empty, feel all numb
A person they loved has gone away,
Upon the field and path they lay
Alone, cold, full of sorrow
A better day will be tomorrow,
Please be brave, plese be strong,
And wait till tomorrow, it isn’t that long.
A Liverpool supporter a g e d 16




Ferry cross the Mersey

On the Ferry I was leaning across the rail,
And the red ensign kept blowing in my face,
Like a red mist.
I suddenly realized it was at half-mast
(as were all the flags in town)
And it was then the events of Saturday hit home
Me, a Tranmere supporter, a football fan,
A Liverpudlian through and through,
I felt guilty to be alive.
D a v id Roberts
mm
The U nknow n Flower

I remember when, as a seedling
I could see other tiny shoots
which, just like myself, were attached
to long, thin, straggly roots,
I remember being gently lifted
like a baby from its cot,
(while compost soil was packed around me) lies
into an unglazed, earthenware pot.

Alongside hundreds of others
I lived in a house of glass,
through which the rays of sunshine
unmolested, were allowed to pass
and with all this careful nurturing
I grew quickly, hour by hour
until that exhilarating moment
when I blossomed into flower.

But my joy was shortlived
as my stem was neatly cut,
together with an assortment of others
I was carried to a hut
where busy, skilful hands
worked hard for days
mixing and forming us
into colourful bouquets.

Wrapped inside a cellophane cover
transparent to the eye,
we were rushed out to the florists
where countless came to buy,
they queued and waited patiently
to walk into that ground
to add their personal contribution
to those thousands lying around

An ocean of flowers
on a grassy carpet laid,
while from a multitude of mourners
last respects were paid,
we were floral tributes
from those still left alive
to the memory of those loved ones,
the Hillsborough ninety five.
M au rice N e w e y
Field o f Flowers

T h ere’s a field of flowers at Anfield,
Amid a blanket of red, white and blue,
Laid down by the Merseyside people,
For families and friends that we knew.

We walk by the side of those grieving,
We offer you comfort and prayers.
May the sick and the injured recover,
May it help just to know that we care.

May God lead us all out of the darkness,
Once again let us stand in the light.
Let our faith and our unity bond us.
Let pride and love be our might.

We will stand united in sorrow,
For our tears are a token of love,
For those who have no tomorrow,
But who reign with the Lord up above.

Please God, Bless our Liverpool city,
Bless both the young and the old.
For despite the cruel words of others,
You know that our hearts are of Gold.

May the merchants of greed be forgiven,
Their lives must be shallow and sad,
For our city knows greatness and friendship,
The likes of which they’ve never had.

So when you pray for the victims of Hillsborough,
Whether your prayers they be silent or loud.
Remember the great field of flowers.
Hold your head high, Walk on and be proud.
Sue Ainscough
Still Sea o f Flowers

I was surprised to see your tears,
silent tears of manhood diminishing into age.
And you gripped my hand in disbelief
On that freezing February day
On Northern cities’ terracing,
where our roots lay.
And at the service we heard
‘Duncan Edwards died today’.
A golden life crammed into 21 years . . .
But with me you stand there,
in cheap overcoat, threadbare,
the child of your old age and say
‘Duncan Edwards died today’.

 Now in those Liverpool suburbs
pink blossoms drift slowly down,
suspended in heavy air.
As I walk home in stunned disbelief
Fragrance of reflecting Anfields’ fragments
still sea of flowers, still, flowing procession.
And old men with young children stood on the terrace and cried
the tears of diminishing years, but
‘John Barnes can’t play for England’, I hear.
As the cathedral bell tolled mournfully
for the dead of our Northern City.
A single boy desultorily kicks a ball in our street,
But John Barnes can’t play for England next week . . .
Jan S ear
    I made a pilgrimage to Anfield
    On a sunny April day
    To lay a humble tribute, for the souls who’d passed away
    My heart was filled with sorrow
    Tears I couldn’t hide
    I saw tributes in all colours
    Intermingled side by side
    It’s as though a field of flowers
    Had sprung up overnight
♦   All rivalry forgotten, no bitterness in sight
    The sad procession passes in their silent reverie
    Their love and understanding for all the world to see
    As I looked into their faces
    I saw pride as well as pain
    Dear God in Heaven up above
    Don’t let them die in vain
    One family together, united in our grief
    A silent tear, a quiet prayer
    For those who fell asleep
    Rita Soo




    Anfield

    Six minutes past three on a Saturday, April ’89
    From Goodison Park to Anfield, tied scarves stretched in a line
    Red scarves, blue scarves, caps and badges,
    And a pitch knee deep in flowers
    And the grief of a week near a silent peak
    In these remembering hours.
    No cars are moving in Church Street
    A siren marks the time when the young of a roaring city
    Were taken in their prime
    Two quiet bishops together, two clubs in their grief,
    Wives, mothers and fathers and the flowers, sheaf on sheaf.
    Sisters, brothers and lovers, friends and babes in arms
    Hear the words ring out to their comfort
    whatever life’s alarms.
    Through sighs and tears and stifled moans,
    They know they’ll never walk alone.
     Trixie Williams


                                                                      37
Sweet F .A .

You gave us tickets for Leppings Lane,
The lads said, ‘Oh God, not again’
Even John Smith had his say
But what did you do sweet F.A.

You said we couldn’t have the Kop
To re-route scousers was over the top
No advice was sought from the A. A.
That’s what you did sweet F.A.

You want the power and the glory
Rebuke the fans it’s the same old story
Give tickets to ‘spivs’ on Wembley way
That’s what you do sweet F.A.

You’ve seen our injured and our dead
All the tears our people’s shed
But play the semi again in May
That’s what you feel sweet F.A.

You wrote the epitaphs for our lads
And you’ve broke the hearts of Mums and Dads
No forgiveness can I find for you today
But what do you care sweet F.A.




The Leaving o f Liverpool

Too few tickets and too much support
Say what you like, we were 10,000 short
Caged and crushed - 95 have to die
So hard to accept - w e’ll just have to try
No one reason, no one man to blame
We all have to share the anger and shame.

Back at home and all Merseyside waits
For the club to open the Shankly Gates
A million came, none walking alone
Leaving scarves on the terrace that times have outgrown
A city held together by both Red and Blue
W herever they play - w e ’ll be thinking of you.
From someone who was there
‘It’s for Your O w n G ood’

You read it everyday, Papers, Politician and F.A. crap.
‘Keep ’em in line! that rabble in red,’
The times I’ve heard that said.

It’s for your own good,
The message is really quite clear
We’re not really people just statistics with money to spare.

It’s for your own good,
When at the match and your team scores
What better satisfaction than to leap up and shout,
Surely this doesn’t constitute a lout?

It’s for your own good
Get ’em penned in, they mustn’t touch the grass,
We'll use the police to hold them back.
Wire and steel will make them think
But maybe now things will change and my sons
And yours can touch hallowed ground.
D.J. McFee




If we did not regret,
We could afford the loss.
But how we regret!
And how we are poorer.

It is not that we hate the powers that be
But believe ourselves hated by them.
We crave justice not revenge.
Now they pollute the moat we must through
With lies and discredit.

England can gain part of us back
But is in danger of loosing us forever.
The choice is justice or subterfuge,
The choice is theirs.
Liverpool watches.
Andrew Quayle
HellsBorough
The semis’ were upon them,
As the fans all travelled down.
Joyful Liverpudlians,
All set for Sheffields’ ground.

Singing songs of Wembley,
With their brilliance yet to prove.
A happy band of red and white,
The Kop was on the move.

But tragedy occurred that day,
A shadow overcast.
Their laughter it was silenced,
And a sentence had been passed.

The fans they stormed the open gates,
Afraid they’d miss the game.
That error caused the loss of life,
And brought more football shame.

A giant surge of pressure,
Pandemonium broke out.
As people started panicking,
And voices start to shout.

Men and women, children too,
All caught up in the rush.
Climbing over bodies,
As they fought to beat the crush.

They gasped for breath against the cage,
Not knowing what to do.
They died against the barriers,
Their faces turning blue.

Scrambling to free themselves,
Their bodies bruised and cut,
Then sinking in the heaving mass,
Being trampled underfoot.

The lucky ones were hauled to safety,
Grabbed by unseen hands.
Rescued by supporters,
Who held refuge in the Stands.

A massacre in minutes,
Now the horror lingers on.
For Liverpool and Everton
Mourn friends who’ve sadly gone.
Scarlet Angels now in Heaven,
Watch the team that earned their pride,
And the Leppings Lane stands silent,
In respect for those who died.

At Shankly’s Gates, the red and blue,
Lay down their solemn wreath.
For we are apart as rivals,
But as one we share the grief.
Ley Mitchell




The Ghouls o f Hillsborough

Death came on a sunny afternoon at Hillsborough
Whilst some cried out with sheer delight of the game, others
  cried out in pain and despair.

Oh our people how you suffered, but even in death dignity
  was taken away from you.

They, with their obscene flashing lights, and weapons of sickness,
Capturing forever on their hideous celluloid scenes of harrowing
torment,
For grieving relations, no memories of a serene passing.

Oh you fathers, sons, daughters crying out to comfort each other,
Swept along by that tidal wave of death,
Straining with your hearts and minds to share last poignant
  moments together,
But this denied also my suffering people.

Have you no pity, no compassion, no souls?
Could you not have comforted, cared, spoken soft words of final comfort?
Ever present the garish white lights danced their shadow over our
  dying people.
H azel Williams




                                                                      41
Some people living in this land
Have a grand old life,
They make their living telling lies
Of other peoples strife.
Falsifying stories
Twisting statements round,
To some of these reporters
The truth if out of bounds.
Today our hearts are breaking
For the people who have died
For the families who are grieving
For the people hurt in mind,
But we are all united
With our friends from far and wide
And there are many of them
Standing side by side.
So print your painful stories,
For that is what they are,
keep your screaming headlines
This time you’ve gone too far,
 Cos lots of people everywhere
Will find another read,
Your rags will stay upon the shelves
Because of your own greed.
So my fellow Liverpudlians
Hold your heads up high
Keep your pride and dignity
The truth will kill the lie.
Patricia Brennan




Death in the Afternoon

Rosettes on the battlefield
scarves fade as the fences shrill
frightened faces pushed in a cage
tattooed by an iron mesh
staring at a cam era harsh
to see a death, to see a kill.
An empty ball my eye becomes
an airless lung, no last hooray
the ferryman has come for me
and why 95 dies, for sweet F.A.
no cup to mourn my final day.
The Setting Sun

Today I saw the eclipse of the Sun
Because nobody bothered to buy one,
The stand was piled high with copies none bought,
I hope Rupert Murdock is distraught.
Steve Qualtrough




They said it couldn’t happen
After all it’s just a game
No one dies at football grounds
But that’s not what they’re saying
’Cos you’re a drunk, a Yob, a hooligan
Keep throwing, some mud will stick
More Yobs, more drunks, more hooligans
And lay it on, real thick
The truth? Who really gives a damn
Will you stop goin’ on?
It’s life, it’s death . . . and it’s twenty pence
And beside, . . . a great page one.
Stephen Calrow




God won’t let it happen
Never ever again
The slaughter of the innocents
Women, children and men
The needless deaths of all of them
Who came to watch a game
But ended dying tragically
Faces racked with pain
The lessons learnt from Heysel
Were not by the boys in blue
They murdered innocent red fans
Those dumb incompetent few.
H ell’s Borough

Did you see the report, the Hillsborough tidal wave?
gory full colour spread, on the Mirror front page?
all the gruesome carnage, thrust in your face
call this reportage? It’s an utter, bloody disgrace
Fathers, Sons, Daughters, all graphically framed
the petrified screams, the lives, crushed like grapes
to attract the eye, in the Media Rat Race, the Editor
with kerchief in one hand, the other? increased sales?
as Red Fan’s turned blue, in a wire mesh grave
How could this happen? the stunned majority roar, the
life blood of the game, helplessly, crushed once more
Yes! That’s the real tragedy, it’s all happened before
so, wherein lies the blame? Nobody’s sure, as
long standing Fans perish, for the love of Football
herded like cattle, fenced in hoards, while
the fat cats sip brandy, in their plate glass stalls
flash Managers driver Rollers, smoke, big cigars; the
Clubs spend Millions on Players; on the Fans? Fuck All.
 It’s the fault of the Police, those at the top
the Authorities who fenced the escape route off, the
sweet F.A. Brigade, concerned with profit, not loss
the Agents, Touts, the Forgers, who don’t give a toss
and what of the Hooligans? The knife wielding Yobs?
Segregation, Ticket allocation, the Motorway’s blocked?
Then, there’s the Fans who arrive late, on the terraced Kops
can’t leave the Pubs, until they’ve squeezed the last drop
Who’s fault is it? Take your pick, X marks the spot
perm any of the above, and you’ll hit the Jackpot
I heard on the radio, the legal boys have arrived
 like vultures they circle, in sympathetic guise
there’s rich pickings to be had, as they swoop from the skies
to feast on their prey, gathered, at the graveside; Yes!
there will be compensation, the Law will provide
brain damage, crushed ribs? . . . Sign the dotted line
It’s a pity The Law, doesn’t save more lives
there will be fund raising, donations, from far and wide
Yet! While none of this will bring back, the people who died
they’ll end up better off dead, in some people’s eyes
T here’s to be an enquiry; Parliament approved
a collective gathering, of conflicting views, as
they try to determine, what sparked the fuse?
Of the latest disaster, to make Worldwide News
Will safety; once again be ignored, because money rules?
W ill the Inquiry, drag on for years, while nothing improves?
whereby; as the dust settles, memories do too?
How many more faces, charred black, or frozen blue?
before the appropriate Authorities, finally move?
I wouldn’t hold my breath, if I were You.

Although, God forbid; You may be forced to.
B. Curry




N inety Five

I n the city of red
You’ll never walk alone

1    They marched on down the line
     to the battle of the giants
     Would it be a battle
     Or would it just be riots.
     It was the red army against the boys in blue
     What would be the outcome
     Nobody knew.

2    The audience was full
     no more could possibly fit
     But a few careless people thought,
     ‘Well maybe a bit’
     An onslaught of people surged into the place.
     A crowd of disaster.
     The organisation a disgrace.

3    The red army had panicked,
     and walked into a trap.
     A boy with whole life to live
     Lost his red cap,
     ft was lost for ever
     And so was he,
     But now lives a life of peace . . . heavenly.

4    The red army started to shout
     the boys in blue wouldn’t let them out;

They didn’t even try
And the red army lost 95.
Jason Cunningham; age 15
We came in our thousands to see our team
To see if they could fulfill our dream
They are all our heroes, those men in red
The best in the land, it must be said.
It was a bright sunny day when we started out
Fun filled comments you heard them shout
As we made our way down to the ground
Laughter and joy was the only sound.
No one looking for any trouble
Our only thought was for the double
Outside the gates at quarter to three
There were 4000 people stood next to me
But, a little crushed, I got inside
A bit ahead of that human tide
I made some comments, but went to my seat
But there were thousands more out on the street
As kick off approached, it was plain to see
Thousands of fans would not make it by three
That awful moment was only minutes away
The time that would be our very worst day
Wanting to see their team gain a win
In their thousands they all rushed in
No harm was meant, they didn’t know
They just didn’t want to miss the show
But we all know what happened to our brothers in
    red
So many prayers are now being said
I was so lucky, I had my seat
I wasn’t asked to stand on my feet
They wouldn’t want us to give it all up
They dreamed of Liverpool winning the cup
If not this year then maybe next
If we give up now, they would be vexed
We must all stand together to gain our strength
Supporters from all over, the breadth and length
‘Liverpool again, beasts’, he said
What about respect for our dead?
We must stand united to deny that claim
As anyone knows who was at the game
 I have never been so proud of my brothers
As they tried in vain to help the others
 How can people be so cruel?
 How can these men make the rules?
 Our brothers and sisters have lost their lives
 But not through anger or the thrusting of knives
 It was an accident, there was no intent
 No act of violence, no harm was meant
So please, you cruel men of Europe take back what
  you say
And ask for forgiveness when next you pray
This loss of life, of our sisters and brothers
Should never ever happen to others
So for now, our prayers are for them
Until the time comes and w e ’ll see them again




O de to a gutter reporter

Slimy creatures, scavenging over bodies not yet cold
Drooling as they contemplate the stories to be told,
They look like men but they’re not quite whole
They have twisted brains and they don’t have a soul.
They can’t appreciate, (they have no emotion)
A mothers love, a wife’s devotion.

He looks at the bodies and hopes there’ll be more,
He rubs his hands, a great story to be sure.
He hears there’s a little boy, his scavenging goes on,
To him it’s a body not a parents son.
He hears of little girls, young and old men
This frightening creature starts scavenging again.
Not being human he’ll never tire,
He’ll go on searching through the mire.

TELLING LIES IN BIG BOLD PRINT
Piling on the dirt, he doesn’t stint.
Harassing Mother, Father and Gran,
How can this creature look like a man.
Sick Peggy
Even before the Hillsborough dead are buried
and the tears of those bereaved are dried:
Even as there lies a child with damaged brain,
who may not recognise his Mum and Dad again:
Even as John Barnes flinches from the thought,
the empty-minded, greedy salesmen of the game,
who watch it from their ivory-towered fort
Proclaim . . .
‘the show must still go on’.
}n spite of all the grief and loss,
I wonder could they really care a toss?

Yet it is they, the League and far from sweet FA,
Who stand there in God’s d o c k -c h a rg e d with
     unspeakable complacency.
And arraigned beside them there should stand accused
the club directors who’ve refused
To treat their customers with care . . .
. . . and let’s not omit from charge the robo-cop politicos
Who, hands on hearts, declare
It’s the God of crowd control that reigns on top . . .
Just don’t ask us about the Kopl
Just pack ’em in, keep turnstiles clicking,
The more they come the more our picking,
They’ll feel at home behind our eight foot paling,
We'll turn a deaf ear on their wailing.

But look, I say, that shiny pink-faced boy,
laughing m his joy when last I saw
Is lying lifeless on the f lo o r. . .
and there, look there again I pray
See the shining promise of two lovely daughters
Stolen from adoring parents in these needless slaughters.

To those in God’s dock, who order play,
I ask that they do honour to those children now.

Resign, resign, in God’s name go.
Allen M itchell
Hardship

A man appeared in court to-day
accused of working on the side.
Of trying to cheat the government
and obtaining a free ride.

He looked at me dejected
with eyes devoid of hope.
And I felt this m an’s rejection
in the quiet way he spoke.

‘I've always worked’ he told me
my dad and grandad too.
We’ve never had a penny that
we w e ren ’t entitled to.

It’s a bitter pill to swallow
to shed your pride, to bare your soul.
But hardship is no secret
when you’re living on the dole.

I’ve tramped the streets and written
for jobs that don’t exist.
And because I was so desperate
I thought I’d take the risk.

And then he showed a newspaper
and the statement written there.
‘Tax-man Takes Slice of Disaster Fund’
were the headlines bold and clear.

T h a t’s money that was given
to families in dire need.
And now the government help themselves
without thought or heed.

That’s money that was taxed
when it was earned by me and you.
And now they’ll tax it once again
so tell me, who’s cheating who?’
Ann Deegan
     What w ere you doing when Liverpool died on 15th April 1989?
     Were your loved ones there when Liverpool died on 15th April 1989?
     Did you hold your loved one’s hand as you sat and waited?
     Did you look for a sight you did not want to see?
     Did the smile and the wave flash before your eyes as you waited?
     As we waited, w ere we not all bereaved?
     United in grief we waited.
     The waiting and the wondering, keep looking, are they there?
     The lifeless figures, no, no, try over there.
     Oh please phone ring, please ring.
     The sudden shrill, with bated breath you lift the phone,
     Thank God he’s safe, our son is safe.
     Relief for us but grief for many.
     United we grieve, how much more can we endure,
     Liverpool died on 15th April 1989 but we will live again.
     A lf Williamson




     ‘A pril 16 th’

     It was a Sunday, so unlike any other
     man held man, brother held brother
     across the Mersey people cried
     united in grief for those who died.

       It was a Saturday so unlike any other
       man with man, brother with brother
       excited and noisy and then a yell
       the crowds surged forward and 95 fell.

         It was a Sunday, so very unlike any other
         man cried for man, brother cried for brother
         it should have been a happy dawning
         but the city of Liverpool was a city in mourning.

            It was a Sunday, so unlike any other
            man held man, brother held brother
            wreaths and scarves and messages they laid
            upon the turf where the Red Team played.

              It was a Sunday, so unlike any other
              man mourned for man, brother mourned for brother
              if you look around, pain and tears you’ll see
              so let us say Lord ‘ABIDE WITH M E’.
     Sue McGuiness


50
Three O Six

The game was stopped at 3.06
by then the damage was done.

The hysteria swelled at 3.06
there was nowhere left to run.

Heroic deeds began at 3.06
still the crush went on.

Lives were lost at 3.06
loved ones of people, gone.

Sirens wailed at 3.06
time was running out.

People screamed at 3.06
by then there was no doubt.

The country watched at 3.06
with sadness in their eyes.

Accusations flew at 3.06
the who’s, the hows, the whys?

At 3.06, one week to the day
three cities stopped to pray.

They stood and remembered what happened
at 3.06 that day.

But how many 3.06’s must it take
to start to ease the sorrow

Even if we cope today
there’ll be 3.06 tomorrow.

There is one prayer though,
that gets through all the pain
The single plea of thousands

DON’T LET IT HAPPEN AGAIN
Sharron Wright
Hillsborough

I was breathing fresh air in the countryside
Whilst you were gasping in the cage
Your tragic toll rose and rose
I prayed for it to stop
Finally at ninety five

They read your names out a week later
Every one a stab in the heart
There was a minute’s silence
It was so quiet
Like you are, sleeping peacefully

I visited you at Anfield with a million others
Left you a scarf where Kenny stands
Hope you like it
Sorry it’s not your colour

They’re singing ‘You’ll Never Walk Alone’
Why am I crying?
I don’t know you
Yet I’m still crying

Sorrow turns to rage
The Football Authorities say ‘Carry on’
Like nothing’s happened
Who’ll win the Cup?
Who’ll win the League?
Who cares?

Just listen to our plea
Make it safe
On that day in April
Football died with you
And I’m still crying
R.M. Hirst
If the Mersey overflows today
W e’ll know the reason why
For all the folk in Liverpool
Are not ashamed to cry.
When we think w e ’ve cried our hearts out
And think there’s no tears left,
We cry ourselves to sleep at night
But wake up still bereft.
Let us not forget them
Remember them with pride,
For we are one big family
The Pride of Merseyside.
Jean; A heartbroken ‘Reds F a n '




A lone with thoughts

I don’t know a great deal about Soccer,
I don’t know which teams are ahead
I'm clueless who’s playing in goal
Couldn’t tell you who’s in yellow, who’s in red,
I don’t know which division is classed as the best
I can't single out a good player from the rest,
But I know a cry for help was all they could do,
A prayer for breath, strength to pull through,
I know each one of them fought for their lives,
The memory will never fade from some of their minds.
I know their familes will feel anger, confusion and pain
I hope one day only fond memories will remain.
I want to let them know that from deep down inside
Our thoughts are for all those who lost their lives.
And although this tragedy has torn apart hundreds of homes,
It’s a comforting thought to know their loved ones will never -
    WALK ALONE!!!
Jacqui




                                                                  53
Football Fan

Silence brief silence, speak to me,
When there’s a might roar.
Speak of the world I do not know,
That power from a distant shore.
I’ve tied my scarf, I’ve laid my wreath,
I’ve tried to say a prayer.
Is silence enough, will it return,
And speak of my friends not there?




The Midnight Sun (for Simon)

The ceiling closes in
With a claustrophobic thought
A dream, a vision
Unholy, unreal
A tear roles down my cheek
Why the rain?
Pools of blood, ripples of life
Trickle down the window pane
Drips to the ground
With a splash into the ocean depth
The drowning man floats out to sea
And dances with the mermaids
Fishscales sparkle like something of the night
A magical thought, a transparent illusion
Sea green, am ber and red lights
Stop me from moving, running away
Hold me transfixed in a fantasy world
That I just don’t want to be part of.

The four walls shudder and shake
Crumble and fall to dust
The hallucination crushed
The darkness engulfs
The great void that swallows me whole
Nothing in the sky
But a solitary star
It shines and sparkles
Shoots across to black
Then nothing again, but this silence
This unearthly silence
Be still don’t ask questions
Just let Him play his petty games
On which so much depends
Thunder
Lightning burns the hanging tree
A childhood image for an innocent hope
The world at peace, with you, with me
My mind in turmoil
What’s the reason?
Smashed against the concrete jungles
The pain smarts through the body
Thrown between land and sea
Torn between the elements
As the wind lashes at your back
This can’t be real
This can’t be it
There must be something else
The touch, the feel
Ghostly voices, laughter,
Hatred of a better place
Drink tonight, drink till your dry

Your life a passing second
Your role a passing thought
So many before and many more after
Don't count the bodies
Because one day w e ’ll meet the midnight sun
And on that day w e ’ll all be free.
Jonathan Westaway




Life Goes O n

Destiny has dealt a deathly blow,
Destruction and despair left in its wake,
The bereaved can do nothing
But pick up the pieces,
They at the epicentre
Of their own emotional earthquake.

But pick up the pieces they must do,
As life relentlessly pushes onward,
Yet is time the healer
Or the cold blooded killer
Of the feelings and emotions
That are our very life cord.
K.L. Williamson

                                                55
In Memory o f those who died at Hillsborough

I write this simple message
In a bid to clear my head
But most of all I write it
As a tribute to the dead.

Although not personally affected
I feel so much pain
The only consolation is
They won’t have died in vain.

This may not be much comfort
To those who grieve and weep
For there’s a hole inside their hearts
A hole that's oh so deep.

For those who lost their loved ones
Their families and their friends
The pain is bound to ease in time
But the bitterness will remain.

Football is a religion
‘A way of life’ they say
But sadly it became
‘A way of death' on Saturday.

Upon those crowded terraces
They died so tragically
It could have been my family
It could have been me.
K aty James




If tears could mend I’d cry an ocean,
If words could mend I’d write a book.
My hearts so sore for you my friend
The void that’s left when dear lives end.
Kate; Belfast
Tragedy

The death of so many,
Yet everyone a friend,
We bear no grudges,
Need no revenge.

Fear no more,
The anguish and the pain,
Our thoughts to the heroes,
Who tried in vain.

We the fans must point no fingers,
Deliver no blame,
Always to love our football game.

Shed our tears,
Share the grief,
There is no shame,
Peace and safety and honest claim.

Always in our hearts,
And always on our'minds,
To the Hillsborough dead,
You’ll never walk alone.
Dave B.




For Jim & Matthew (w ho came back)

I drove you up to Priory Road,
To catch the coach for Hillsborough.
There was laughter
Hopes were Derby high,
The Street had flowered blue and red.

The youth of Merseyside was on the move,
Plastic bags in hand,
Butties packed by loving mums and wives,
Such precious lives.

I drove you back to Anfield
The Kop was draped with blue and red,
Across the pitch, the flowers were spread
Like Flanders field, for youth now dead.
S hirley Tomlinson
Colours

A field of Green; rich springtime’s hue
Now painted Red and White and Blue
As loving hands with tender care
Gently place their Colours there.

No cheers or chanting, there is no sound
In Anfield’s hallowed Football Ground
Our City’s heart is draped in Black
As we rem em ber those who won’t come back.

Banners and scarves, from ‘Brighton’ to ‘Rangers’
Are Colours brought by unknown strangers
Who come in friendship, not in pity
To pay respects to our mourning City.

The Kop is shrouded in Colours too;
As people with their tributes queue
To rem em ber with honour our friends now dead
Swept away in a sea of Red.

On the Shankly Gates so tall and proud
There are more Colours, bright and loud
But why did it take such a Black tragedy
To show how Colourful we can be.

When the reporters and newsmen give up and move out
To find something else to write cruel lies about
Liverpool will still care for, and tend to its own
We have those Colours to prove that we won’t walk alone.
D. Donaldson
‘W alk O n ’

It's raining in the paddock,
No shelter from loved ones tears,
Heartbreak caused by disaster
Beyond our upmost fears.
The air filled with excitement,
Red and White splashed on each fan,
As turnstiles failed to devour them
Humans surged at Leppings Lane Stand.
Panic stricken, a road of no return
Trying to escape the human tide,
Fans gasping, reaching for life.
Here to cheer, in innocence died,
Liverpool, their beloved team
They will never cheer again.
Sadness strikes at every heart,
Rolling tears, those drops of rain.
They will always be with us
Although having sadly gone
But from a heavenly stadium
Will echo ‘Walk on, walk on.’
H arry Boyle ex Southport and Rochdale F.C.




Oh my brothers, my sisters
My friends from my poor town
My prayers go out to all of you
My heart is sunken down,
Although I live now far away
My thoughts are just for you
I share your sorrow and your grief
The pain you’re going through
Peter Cameron; Bradford
I'm alright Mam, I’m OK,
I’ll be well Mam
In a few more days.
Don’t worry now
Don’t be afraid,
I'm alright Mam,
I was saved.

Save your tears Mam,
For those who died,
I couldn't help Mam,
I was paralysed.
They died around me
One by one,
I was helpless
And they were gone.

Please don’t cry Mam,
I’m homeward bound
Far away from
That bloody ground.

I am lucky Mam,
I walked away
Not like others Mam,
Who are there to stay.

So please Mam
Spare a thought,
For those who died
in the name of sport
and Honour those, Mam
Who gave their lives
Daughters, Dads, Sons and Wives.
They linger in our minds each day
They went to watch their heroes play
Instead they were in an awful fate
When people came into that gate
In heaven they will sing in a happy tone
You will never walk alone
Paul Malcolm; age 9




To my sister Janette

When I heard the news
   That so many people were dead
All my happy feelings
   Suddenly turned to dread,
What if you were one of them
   Those unlucky 95
What if you were one of them
   Who tragically lost their lives.
I watched it on the television
   The people turning blue
And all that I was thinking
   Was that one of them could be you.
But you were on your way home
   You w ere safe and sound
You had managed to escape
   From that football ground,
And though I tried to sympathise
   And share in people's grief
All that I was experiencing
   Was overwhelming relief.
 Relief that you w ere coming home
    Relief tht you w ere alright
 Relief that I could see you again
    I was never more grateful for that sight.
 Julie Barrett; Age 15
Anfield in April

People showed how much they cared,
about those who lost their lives, friends and families
at Hillsborough
not long ago
 I thought I'd tell
Just how much they brought.
Flowers
scarvfes and teddies
were there most
but here it is detail;
Lots of flowers
(red, white and blue)
Everton and Liverpool scarves
tied together.
Peoples treasured possessions
things signed by all the players
 Liverpool teddies with Everton hats and caps on,
or of course, visa versa.
There were scarves from all round Britain,
from north to south, east to west.
Bradford too, we all know what fell on them,
but this is the worst,
worse than Ibrox
but people really cared.
There were;
shorts
shirts
jumpers and cardigans.
things like that
these w ere all at Anfield,
And now I think we should know
that all of Liverpool is sad
but soon they will pick themselves up
and all the pieces again
and start all over over again.
Cathy Boardman; age 9
Walk on, walk on, with hope in your heart,
Get across the railings to the greener part
And if you fall and things go dark,
You’ll always have Liverpool deep in your heart,
And you'll never walk alone.
P. Chadwick




Come on the reds
and play again
Don't let your loyal fans
who died, die in vain.
They'd want you to carry
on the name
of Liverpool.

They followed you
with glowing pride
To see you play
they bravely died,
None who died would
put the blame on you lads.

So carry on because
you now never will
walk alone,
Their souls will be
forever more
willing you on,
Come on the Reds.
Alan




To all those people who died in vain
Only wanted Liverpool to win that game
They now have gone their time is up
Now lets see Liverpool win the cup.
Paul Beard; age 17
     V ^o$Le ^



        u




64
Special thanks to all those people on Merseyside who sent in poems. There is an
archive in Central Library, William Brown Street, Liverpool, which contains all the
poems collected.


These poems are a selection from over 9 0 0 poems received.


The anthology is published by the Liverpool University Community Resource Unit in
collaboration with WALL (Writing Activities in Liverpool Libraries), MAWW
(Merseyside Association of Writers Workshops) and Fringe (Centre for Arts
Development Training).


Special thanks to Katy James and Robert Littler, for their work in collecting
poems, Billy Butler, Radio Merseyside and the Liverpool Echo for their assistance.


The publishers are particularly grateful to:

August Filmsetting, Haydock, St Helens, (Typesetting)
Centaur Press, Lily Road, Litherland, (Printing)
E. Fish & Co. Ltd., Orwell Road, Liverpool, (Binding)
Willow Paper, 9 2 /9 6 Bank Road, Bootle, (Paper)

who supplied their time, labour and materials free of charge.
 11 • I   ‘ kCl         I IIIa f~ !                   I J >• I

•S y x U iV iC io   _   j   ^ $ < a (v   j   U G S

                                                     fcsf         a?-

                                                     'VVf


                                                      VV      3




                                                       ?T_Lr




                                                     5 ^ -1
                   HILLSBOROUGH

THE PERSONAL THOUGHTS OF A PERSON WHO WAS THERE


      I WAS THERE AT HILLSBOROUGH,
     ON THE LEPPINGS LANE,
     THAT FATEFUL SATURDAY,
     APRIL 15 1989,
     I WAS CRUSHED AGAINST A BARRIER,
     NO ESCAPE,
      NOWHERE COULD I GO,
      I COULD NOT BREATHE,
      I FELT I WAS GOING TO DIE,
      A FELLOW SCOUSER PULLED ME AWAY,
      AWAY FROM THAT BARRIER,
      WE STILL WERE IN THE CRUSHING HELL,
      FOR MORE THAN TWENTY MINUTES,
      I SCREAMED IN PAIN,
      OH GOD, OH NO,
      NOT LONG, NOT LONG, HE SAID,
      HANG ON, DON’T FALL,
      HANG ON, HE SAID,
      HE KEPT ME GOING UNTIL THE TINY GATE,
      I GOT OUT,
      OUT, ONTO THE HILLSBOROUGH TURF,
      I WANDERED ROUND IN A DAZE,
      I WANDERED ROUND IN PAIN,
      ARE YOU ALRIGHT MATE?,
      KOPPITES SAID,
      I ’LL BE FINE I REPLIED,
      AS I WANDERED AROUND HELPLESSLY,
      THE LIVERPOOL HEROES I SAW,
      SUPPORTERS LIKE YOU AND ME,
      USING BOARDS AS STRETCHERS,
      SAVING LIVES AS WELL,
      I WANDERED ROUND, ON THE PITCH,
      I SAW DEAD BODIES LYING THERE,
      CRUSHED OF EVERY OUNCE OF LIFE,
      PALE FACES OF HORRIFIC DEATH,
      ONE WAS A LITTLE BOY,
      THE SADDEST THING I'VE EVER SEEN,
      NUMB SHOCK IS WHAT I FELT,
     FOR HOURS ON END,
       IN THE HILLSBOROUGH HELL,
      MY FRIENDS WERE SAFE,
      THEY HAD SEATS THAT TRAGIC DAY,
      AS WE WALKED AWAY FROM HELL,
A SHEFFIELD COUPLE SPOKE,
THEY SPOKE WORDS OF COMFORT,
THEY SPOKE WORDS OF SORROW,
THEY TOOK US TO THEIR HOME,
WE RANG OUR FAMILIES,
TO SAY WE'LL BE COMING HOME,
WE'D BE COMING HOME,
BUT SOME WOULD'NT BE,
THEN WE HAD A CUP OF TEA,
WE THANKED THE KIND FOLK,
BEFORE THE JOURNEY HOME,
ARRIVED HOME, I WAS SAFE,
I WENT DOWN TO THE HOSPITAL,
I WAS NOT BADLY HURT,
JUST BRUISED AND ACHING RIBS,
I DON'T KNOW HOW,
I DON'T KNOW WHY,
BUT SOMEHOW I SURVIVED,
SATURDAY NIGHT I COULD NOT SLEEP,
SUNDAY CAME AND WENT,
THEN THE ACCUSATIONS FLY,
ALL THOSE TERRIBLE, TERRIBLE LIES,
THE TRUTH, SAID THE SUN,
 IT WAS ALL BLOODY LIES,
THOSE BRAVE FANS WHO SAVED LIVES,
 WHERE BRANDED YOBS AND THIEFS,
 95 PEOPLE DIED THAT SATURDAY,
 BUT THE SUN DID'NT CARE,
 THEY WANTED A STORY TO TELL,
 SO RUPERT MURDOCH,
 GO TO HELL,
 THE F.A. COULD'NT GIVE A TOSS,
 ALL THEY WANTED WAS THE BRASS,
 A LYING POLICEMAN,
 TO SAVE HIS JOB,
 SAID IT WAS THE YOBS,
 WE ALL KNOW IT WAS NOT TRUE,
 THOSE LYING BOYS IN BLUE,
 BRAVE LIVERPUDLIANS LIVED AND DIED,
 BRAVE LIVERPUDLIANS SAVED LIVES,
 WE’VE BEEN RUBBISHED,
 WE’VE BEEN SHIT ON FOR FAR TOO LONG,
ON WEDNESDAY NIGHT WE WENT TO THE ANFIELD SHRINE,
TAKING SCARVES, HATS, AND FLOWERS,
A SAD SIGHT,
BUT BEAUTIFUL AS WELL,
REST IN PEACE THE 95,
THEIR IN HEAVEN WITH BILL SHANKLY NOW,
SCARVES AND HATS FROM EVERYWHERE,
TO SHOW THE NATION REALLY CARED,
EVERTON, SPURS, MANCHESTER UNITED,
RANGERS, PLYMOUTH, BURNLEY TOO,
AS I THINK BACK TO THAT DAY,
I FEEL SAD, VERY SAD,
I FEEL BAD, VERY BAD,
FOR THE 95,
THE POOR 95,
 I MISS THEM ALL,
 THEY WILL ALWAYS BE,
 IN MY THOUGHTS,
 IN MY PRAYERS,
 AND CHERISHED IN MY HEART,
 YOU’LL NEVER WALK ALONE,
 YOU BRAVE 95-




     BY CHRISTOPHER WHITTLE FROM BURNLEY


    A LIVERPOOL SUPPORTER AND KOP SEASON TICKET HOLDER
          interlink
           9                            A                                 “^ k    HILLSBOROUGH




JULY1989              A NEWS LETTER FOR PEOPLE AFFECTED BY THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                     Number 1



Why                                         a message from Kenny Dalglish
Start a                                                                   L iverpool boss Kenny D alglish,
                                                                          w ho w ith his w ife Marina,
Newsletter?                                                               other players and their w ives
                                                                          did so much to help the be­
The idea of a newsletter for people                                       reaved and injured, has sent his
affected by a m ajor disaster is not                                      best w ishes for the newsletter.
a new one.
Publications of one sort or another                                        Mr D alglish w elcom ed the
were started up after the incidents                                       extra support the newsletter
at Piper Alpha, on the Herald of
Free E n terp rise and at the                                             may g iv e to those w ho suffered
Bradford Football Stadium.                                                in keeping them in touch w ith
In all these cases there was a good                                       each other and new s that may
response from those who received
the newsletter. People seemed to            be important to them.
find it helpful to share their expe­        The manager and his w ife continue to receive w el­
riences and opinions and to be kept
                                            com e letters from bereaved and injured people they
up to date with the latest news.
There is no set format for this news­       m et at the hospitals and at A nfield during the initial
letter - it will depend entirely on         aftermath.
the contributions we receive. So
why not drop us a line?                     “A lthough the initial flurry o f activity may seem to
 Putting things down on paper can           have dissipated,” said Mr. D alglish, “it’s obvious that
sometimes really help. You may
                                            a great many people w ill be suffering from the shock
want to write a poem, a short de­
scription of your own experiences           and g rief o f all that happened for a long tim e and w ill
or an appeal for help. You may              need continued support."
have an idea which you would like
to share with others.                       "Marina and I get letters from people w e got to know
 Whatever it is, try writing it down        after H illsborough and they let us know how they are
- we’ll be glad to hear from you,           doing and voice their thoughts som etim es about what
and so will the readers of this news­
letter.                                     happened. It’s great to hear from them. The w hole
 You can be assured o f complete            experience has underlined how m uch Liverpool F oot­
confidentiality. No names or ad­
dresses will be published without
                                            ball Club m eans to so many people.
consent.                                    Marina and I send our very best w ishes for a full re­
drop us a line!                             covery for everyone and continued good health.”



                                        ® Hillsborough Helpline 051 - 225 3413/ 3414
                                                                      You do need to keep your life in balance, resume your normal
a Hillsborough survivor writes                                        activites but still have space to talk and meet your own needs.
                                                                      Even when the rituals are over it is important to face reality.
                                                                      Memories will remain and should be accepted not denied.
"I lost my father at Hillsborough and was injured myself. My
mum and the whole family were obviously devatated.                    Talking is still important for you. Your feelings do need to be
                                                                      expressed and shared, events discussed and pieced together.
Going to Anfield for the first time on the Monday was heartbreak­
ing.                                                                  The following list of do's and don'ts was published in the "Coping
                                                                      After Hillsborough" leaflet. You may find the suggestions are
But after talking to the players, their wives and other bereaved      worth thinking about again.
families throughout the week it did become easier and more bear­      THINGS TO D O ... AND NOT TO DO
able.
Walking around Anfield each day, seeing the scarves and flowers
and reading some of the verses showed us that there people who        DON’T bottle up your feelings. Make sure you ex­
really cared - from Merseyside and all over the country.              press your emotions.

I was always very proud of my dad and, apart from his family,
                                                                      DON’T expect the memories to vanish - they will
football (especially L.F.C.) was his life. His ashes are now in a
little plot in the Kop goal and that is what he would have wanted."
                                                                      stay with you for a long time.

                       Brian Anderson                                 These are things you should try to do.
                                                                      • Let your children share your feelings and ex­
 News Update : Disaster Fund                                          press their own. They may be feeling much the
                                                                      same as you.
At a meeting on 23rd May the Trustees agreed to make
an interim payment to the next o f kin o f those who                  • Take time to rest, and be with friends.
died at Hillsborough, and also to make an interim
payment to those who were still hospitalised on 21st                  • Tell friends, family or counsellors how you feel.
April. They also agreed to Social Services Depart­
ments continuing to make hardship payments on their                   • As you begin to recover, keep your life as nor­
behalf up to a maximum o f £150 per family. The                       mal as possible.
Trustees are now hoping to contact other people who
may have suffered in some way, but who have not                       • Send the children back to school. Let them carry
received any payment. It is thought this could include                on as normally as possible.
people who have suffered physically, psychologically
or materially. The Trust Fund managers are asking
people to contact them by 31st July if possible. How­                  Legal Matters
ever they say that applications will still be considered
after that time.                                                      Liverpool solicitors representing hundreds of the bereaved and
                                                                      injured are hoping for an early and just settlement of the compen­
                                                                      sation claims.
Moving On!                                                            A steering committee is guiding every move being made by a total
                                                                      of 141 Merseyside law firms on behalf of nearly 600 clients so
                                                                      sfar.
                                                                       Nicola Harrison, a solicitor with Mace and Jones and spokes­
Have you moved on?, or, has the support, the sympathy, or the         woman for the steering committee told us:”We are hoping for an
willingness to listen to you by friends or family now evaporated?     early admission of liability and out of court settlements to avoid a
Are you now expected to have put all the pieces of your life neatly   long drawn out legal battle.”
back together?                                                         "At the preliminary inquiry currently being conducted in Shef­
Does it now feel like everyone has run out of patience and you are    field we have Ben Hytner QC representing the interests of the be­
boring them talking about your feelings?                              reaved and injured. The steering committee regularly sends out
                                                                      bulletins to all the Liveipool solicitors involved to keep them
If these things ring true for you, be reassured you are not on your   abreast of the situation."
own, and that your own way of coping at your own pace, your            "Letters of claim have been submitted on behalf of all the clients
feelings and reactions at the moment are probably very normal         and followed up by an approach to an insurance company, to
and natural.                                                          which we’ve said we represent the interests of 141 law firms
                                                                      acting for the bereaved and injured, "lets talk."
Coping will have had many different physical and mental effects.      “We’re in the process of setting up a meeting with two of the


                                               ® Hillsborough Helpline 051 - 225 3413/ 3414
largest insurance companies to press for an early admission.
The civil action for damages for negligence so far is against
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, West Yorkshire Police and           from a family
Sheffield City Council, who licensed the ground. The steering
committee is also setting up a team of doctors to assess psycho­
logical injury suffered by the bereaved and injured. The un­        Dear Friends,
precedented spirit of co-operation between so many Liveipool law    That is how I received my letter of support from Bradford City
firms has pleased the steering committee. Committee member          Fire tragedy support Services, BRADFORD SOCIAL
Doug Fraser, of Silverman Livermore said: “It’s a measure of how    SERVICES.
deeply affected everyone was by this terrible disaster.”            The caring letters and voices of support over the phone lines
Anyone bereaved or injured in the Hillsborough disaster who has     helped us to cope during those first dreadful, painful yet numbing
still not taken legal steps can contact the Hillsborough Steering   weeks after the Bradford City fire. My husband spent 3 weeks in
Committee,c/o Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool 2.            hospital undergoing skin grafts to bums to his hands. My family
                                                                    and friends and even strangers were all very supportive to us, as
                                                                    you will find so much so very many people do care and want to
                                                                    help. My husband had to speak about the awfulness of what he ex­
                                                                    perienced, I listened over and over and over again, we talked
News Update : Hillsborough Helpline
                                                                    about it especially during the first few weeks, it seemed the only
                                                                    way my husband could come to terms with his experience.
Calls are still being received, and the helpline                    I must say his physical wounds healed much quicker than the
                                                                    mental ones although as time went on and he slowly got back to
w ill continue to operate 24 hours a day, staffed                   “normal” life - going back to work - going out and about again,
by helpers from local authorities and voluntary                     things gradually improved.
                                                                    We are both very aware of our vulnerability in life but now we try
organisations. The helpline is run from Hatton
                                                                    to enjoy life as much as we can. For a long time we felt trapped in
Garden in Liverpool. Anyone who has any con­                        time, feeling unreal and mourning for the bereaved and their fami­
cerns or worries, or who just wants to talk, is                     lies, the survivors I know feel as though they have lost loved ones
                                                                    and we too mourn for you and your families, our thoughts and
invited to use the line. Tel: 051-225 3413/3414                     prayers are with you all..
                                                                    If I can write to anyone who would like to write to me about
                                                                    coming to terms with life after experiencing slich a painful trag­
    From Bradford                                                   edy, please write. Its very difficult coping with the media at times
                                                                    like this as suddenly flashes of your tragedy flash on your T.V.

    "City Link"                                                     screens catching you you totally unprepared, you feel sick to the
                                                                    stomach, even after 4 years now you are still vulnerable, it all
                                                                    comes back.
                                                                    We all wept over last weekend over your tragedy, we know how
For the Hillsborough Newsletter                                     you are feeling. For the ones that survived you will be feeling
Our thoughts have been much with you since                          many emotions, pain, hurt, frustration, helplessness, this will pass,
                                                                    do talk about how you feel.
April and we w elcom e this opportunity, provided                   Try to turn your feelings into helping those who are bereaved and
by your new newsletter, to again emphasise our                      their families, giving them your support. Campaign to get those
                                                                    fences down!! A lot of people do want to help and listen to your
closeness to you throughout these difficult days.
                                                                    anxieties, worries and fears. I feel inadequate in helping anyone
We very much hope that your newsletter proves                       who has lost their loved ones but once again our thoughts and
as helpful as our own City Link which we pro­                       prayers go out to all of you.
                                                                                                 Yours faithfully,
duced for three years.                                                                      Pat & Nick Wood and family.
We found that City Link brought us all, bereaved
and survivors, very close together and, by sharing
                                                                    News Update : Drop-in Centre
our experiences, thoughts and feelings, found
comfort and support in the realisation that we
                                                                    It is hoped that the Drop-in Centre in the Vernon
were not travelling alone on this long hard road.                   Sangster Sports Club in Stanley Park w ill shortly
Please be assured o f our continuing sympathy                       m ove into new accom m odation in A nfield Road.
and understanding and our best wishes to all who                    In the longer term there are plans for a permanent,
produce and contribute to the newsletter in the                     purpose-built Centre in the sam e area o f Liver­
coming months.                                                      pool, preferably run by a m anagem ent com m ittee
        Bradford City Link (editorial group)                        o f people affected by the disaster.


                                             ® Hillsborough Helpline 051 - 225 3413/ 3414
The Sheffield Experience                                               from five men who survived the Piper
                                                                       Alpha disaster:
                                                                        Dear All,
Dunstan Perks, a Divisional Officer with Sheffield Social               Could we first of all express our sympathy for what you
Services, looks at the disaster from the Sheffield viewpoint:           have been, and are still going through. One year ago we
                                                                        were all working on the Piper Alpha when fire and
The disaster of Hillsborough has had a profound effect on               explosion destroyed the rig killing 167 of our friends and
the people of Sheffield. Apart from the the direct effects on          colleagues.
individuals, there is a sense of guilt in the city. “Why and           If our experience of surviving that disaster can be of any
how could it have happened here?” There are very deep                   help then we are glad to pass it on. Obviously there are
feelings of regret and sorrow and compassion for what                  differences between what we experienced but some
occurred and those affected.                                           things will be the same.
                                                                       The first thing to stress is that it is good and helpful to
                                                                       talk about what happened; if necessary over and over
The local newspaper and radio stations have received
                                                                       again. You can’t keep it inside, so don’t try. Talking with
 scores of letters of thanks and appreciation from Mersey­             each other helps a lot.
side and elsewhere, recognising the countless acts of spon­            If you are like us you will find that you can’t sleep, can’t
taneous generosity, particularly by people living close to             stop thinking about what happened, become jumpy and
the football stadium, and especially for offers to use private         nervous in crowds or in crowded places like shops, and
telephones.                                                            get flash backs to that day. As we found out from talking
It is important that there is a bond between our two cities. It        to each other, this is quite normal, you are not going mad
is the the clear wish and intention of Sheffield Social Serv­          or anything.
ices to support their Merseyside colleagues in any way pos­            We found that quite soon after some people, not involved,
sible, and links have been established. In Sheffield a special         started to say that it was time that we ‘got back to
team is being set up at the Hillsborough Library, near the             normal’, some of us felt the same, and it is only over the
                                                                       months that followed that we came to learn that it is not
local Social Services Divisional Office (tel: 0742 734666).
                                                                       as simple as that
The primary focus of the team is the needs of Sheffield
                                                                       Many survivors will feel guilty that they survived while
residents, but it will also act as a support service to Liver­         others did noLThis is h^w many of us felt and you just
pool and other local authority Social Services Departments.            have to by andRigftflfrat feeling. Whoever’s fault the
Many-people? have already found it helpful to either return            tragedy was, it wasn’t yours.
to Sheffield or visit the city as part of the process of griev­        Good luck to you a l l , we’re thinking of you and wish you
ing, re-experience, adjustment and returning to health and             all the best for the next difficult months.
wellbeing. Many have returned in connection with the
inquiry or inquests. Many may still wish to visit in the               Your Newsletter
future, and we will be happy to assist in any way possible
to make these visits helpful experiences.                              This first edition of Interlink has been sent to bereaved families
                                                                       and to many of those who were injured at Hillsborough.
As the scenes of Hillsborough fade from the national
                                                                       If you would like extra copies for other members of your family
headlines.it is important that assurance is given, that the
                                                                       or for close friends, simply contact us at the address below.
distress and suffering is not being overlooked and forgotten           We will send further issues of the newsletter to everyone who
and that help and comfort is still available. We continue to           received issue number 1, UNLESS WE HEAR THAT YOU
have much feeling for the people of Liverpool. We have                 WOULD RATHER NOT RECEIVE THEM. So if you don’t
pride in how Sheffield people responded at that time and                want to continue receiving INTERLINK please let us know.
now we have a duty to ensure that the disaster does not                 Remember this is your newsletter. If you have any thoughts,
have a permanently damaging effect on the mental health of              views or feelings which you would like to share with others,
the Sheffield Community.                                                please send them to:
                                                                       INTERLINK , HILLSBOROUGH HELPLINE,
                                                                       C/O HATTON GARDENS .LIVERPOOL


  a is for #pple   This newsletter was                                  j_ _ j Please Do Not Send Me Any Further Copies Of Interlink
  produced on an Apple Macintosh Desk
                                                                        |       | Please Send An Extra Copy Of INTERLINK To:
  Top Publishing System loaned by the
  Apple Centre, Mount Pleasant, Liverpool.                              NAME..................................................................
                                                                        ADDRESS...................................................................



   No part of this newsletter may be reproduced, hired out, or otherwise circulated in any form without the editors prior consent.




                                              ® Hillsborough Helpline 051 - 225 3413/ 3414
           interlink
           ®                             A                                         ^          h ills b o r o u g h (




                                                  ~i i------- ii-------ii-----ir
~n     n       n   rr                             TT         n        IT      IE       3 i—    n ~ .n —    re
Octoberl 989 A NEWS LETTER FOR PEOPLE AFFECTED BY THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                                            Number 2


 TUB

lk q $M that tift i*jutp ta M *
Nfo \ dtvP wm£ if pby
                                                 Over to you...
 We& M tfo fo U u j           K ffM i'           Surviving a disaster like Hillsborough often leads to a bond
 HW w ever win Uu>dot).
                                                 being established among those who witnessed the events
Pfity crvsfud md- weakened?                      first-hand. Relatives and friends, social workers and coun­
Uo stm t soaked wistu faze-                      sellors can help us cope with the aftermath, but contact with
7iM tmmies raced' fUmy(vmjf tmui
                                                 other survivors can also bring its own comfort, and ease the
Qj     tUfct fvUcycH’ dayi.
                                                 feelings o f isolation that many o f us are experiencing.
Time* rfjjHct'Mul Units (f bid
%c yew s efjty and strife         ‘Interlink” was conceived with this in mind. Our first two
fnt* tbt- dm I t o t t HirtUtr  # editions were produced by professionals who have been
Tp tk* cty 7 wm * tvifr.
                                  involved with Hillsborough in some capacity; but from now
Platte fad dtnfr k t Uus UaweU'   on, editorial control is to be handed over to survivors.
U-     S V M tttm y Uurf/ WfVC' M W
U this tfo dty tf Last Judymud?                  It is important that ‘Interlink’ becomes a voice for anyone
       lutfffiHed U     tew.
                                                 affected by the tragedy, and run by people who can under­
Vewes cuyUy Mfc (-or hip                         stand what it means to be so personally involved.
to tcmv, qritf m d ngt
fttUfimu sm uu^^am lua us ...                    The next edition is due to be completed before Christmas
Trayfed? w the- mUbmuyh'                         which will be a difficult time for everyone concerned, par­
 Aftw aU is i&id' and Am*                        ticularly the bereaved, and it is perhaps fitting that the new
 Pt wp pud nfjn*t tfu> smc                       editorial board should take control for this special issue.
 t ib # * , Petek fbflc fainted fpntaty
 Set In*a- gUt edged' fv/HK6.
                                                 If you wish to become involved with ‘Interlink’, please get
 T/hyUd frtdif* Up (mjusim,                      in touch with the Hillsborough Centre, 1 Anfield Road, Liv­
 Frw iU , ftnyyU ' fy st<d'tH&b $<&&
 4 faffair (nub Snt', iwt lucky mp$          *   erpool 4, or phone us on 051 263 5366. No experience is
 Ttv (tktrs W vtKsnil Urp U fa.                  necessary, just enthusiasm. Aprovisionaldate o f November
                                   **        *
TTtfWkept their pride and wmkao                  10th has been set aside for a meeting o f all those interested
Kiqhfr & Ifo vmi end       *                     at a venue to be decided.
                          U a r s th tfM '
     ' pai* Mid ‘hUttes, kttP mends              We look forward to hearing from you.
 I f tim had ^ seem d duMcxs
 wuw ihty dtifc tdl tk' sw u'
 Qr weald tftM f>ky W A iffctttiP
 fa tlft\tb £ Us+im y tm t *
                                                   ...by T ric ia Longhorn                                                   ,
                        H. Currie, Huyton                          survivor.
       April 1 5 th 1 9 8 9                                      The following extract is from a book
                                                                  about her own experiences called
        They w ent to the semi s, a mated they don't see;
               something Happened that (Cay a t three.                  ‘The Bereaved Parent’.
   W e thought there w as fighting, But w e were wrong,
            that day a t 9lillsBorough we heard no song.         You probably never thought you could live through your child’s
     9{p chanting or shouting fo r theirfavourite teams,         funeral. What could have been more dreadful?
               now we imagine those terriBle screams.            But you did.
              M others and fathers wondered that day,
               are they alright oh please Qod w e pray.
                                                                 Certainly surviving all the grief you felt seemed impossible.
       It s a w fu l w hat's happened; oh please don't a y ,
              they'll Be alright,footBaUfans don't die.          Those days and nights of crying, exhaustion, and pain were
           (But as timegoes on and you don't g e t a call        almost beyond endurance. You were certain, at times, you
               to say we re alright, don't worry a t all.        would never get past that time in your life.
                   Time'sg ettin g on and so naturally           But you did.
  you fe e l something's happened to those close to thee.
           A n d then near eleven o ’clocf^on that night,        There were times you felt great guilt because somehow you had
       you hear something awful, it gives you a fright;          not filled the role of ‘parent’ as society interprets the role. You
             you 're needed in Sheffield, a place so far;        were unable to save your child and keep it alive. As that cold,
          your daughter is then and you travel By car.           clammy feeling would come over you and your back would
                (But on the.journey it sum s fa r away;
                                                                 prickle thinking about what you could have done differently,
         please Qod make her Better is a ll you can say.
                                                                 you were sunk into such a pit of grieving that you never dreamed
       A n d then when you g e t there it seems so unreal,
                                                                 it would be possible to go on.
                it's hard to recall w hat you really fe e l
              yo u w ant to Be near her, never to leave;
                                                                 But you did.
              it seems so unreal; it s so hard to Believe.
           This is our daughter who w ent to the game,           Often, you were beset with anger and a feeling of powerlessness
     and it w as aBout eleven theyfou n d out her name.          because events that should have been in your control simply
It's QlLLlA9{/E(DW A% y)S, herfriends must have said,            were not. You did not think you could overcome these feelings
 and they must have thanked Qod that she w asn't dead.           especially the hopelessness that accompanied them.
   The machines and the nurses we saw on that night;             But you can.
                our daughter lay there, a p itifu l sight.
   She's in the Best hands, they'dCoof^after her there;          Just when you needed your mate most, you would find he or she
           9forthem Qeneralh o sp ita l Intensive Care.
                                                                 could help you least. You expected comfort from someone
                W e don't read a paper or w atch T.'U.;
                                                                 incapable of comforting. You argued. Sometimes you even
           we ju st w illo u r daughter as w ed as can Be.
                  ‘E veryone’s started to rally around,
                                                                 hated. Y ou never thought you would rise from the bottom of the
               it s lovely to see a ll the love a ll around.
                                                                 well of sorrow.
                   Strangers andfriends, fam ily too,            But you can.
               g ive the support to see us a ll through.
                  Qod is w ith her, we (ye w a ll along,         You thought never again could you take an interest in the world
             then a t the service we a ll heard that song        and retain friendships and attend “weddings” and happy
               (¥0<U X L 9 & ‘l& (R jW ALX .AL09& )              occasions for other people’s children. You were certain you
          I t means so much more now than it ever did,           could never live through the trauma.
              Because Qod gave us Bacf^our littCe kid.           But you will.
         'But oh, hourso sad fo r those who have died;
        the millions o f tears that must have Been cried.
                                                                 There was no doubt in your mind that you never again could
         Liverpoolpeople are renownedfo r one thing;
                                                                 enjoy yourself. Never want to travel. Never would give parties
             it isn 't the footBaUsongs that they sing;
  i t ’s something much deeper, a thing they might hide;
                                                                 or attend them. Never have fun. You would only be sorrowful
    it's a sin in some cases, it s a thing called ‘FKJD'E.       and certainly you would never laugh. Above all, not laugh.
         So now w e w ill try to reBuild on this sorrow;         But you will.
  Who knows, Who Cares W hat IHappens Tomorrow?
        W e fatow, We Care, A n d W e 'UTry Our‘B est.           And most of all, you were sure it would be impossible for you
                   It's too Cate now fo r those a t rest.        to function as a whole human being not buffeted by the waves
    “B ut fo r fa n s o f the future, we a ll must mafj. sure,   of sorrow that swept over you in the early days of your tragedy.
        that Mums, (Dads and fam ilies suffer no more.           But you will.

                                                                 You will do all that and you will do more.
                     Tat 'Edwards
   ylilCsBorough !foot6alC(Disaster • 15th A p ril 1989
               W e W ill HfmemBer Them
                                                                                       by Harriet S am ott Schiff
                          Hillsborough Helpline Update
From 2nd October, the telephone helpline service that was operated by Liverpool Social Services,
with support from other Social Work Departments and Volunteers on Merseyside became the re­
sponsibility of the Liverpool Voluntary Sector.

Eleanor Grundy has been appointed to lead a team of experienced telephone counsellors, from
'Walton Relative Support Group' and other voluntary agencies in Liverpool. The changeover will
ensure the future of a service that has proved a vital contact point for hundreds of people over the
past 6 months.

The helpline will continue to operate on its present number.                051 225 3413/3414



 Memorial                            H illsb o ro u g h F ootb all D isa ster — 15th A p ril, 1989


UM L L im ited h a v e
                                                  We W ill R em em ber Them
created a H illsb or­                                 I will never w alk alone
                                                     f o r you are ever there,
ough         m e m o r ia l                          A ltho ’I cannot see you
                                                     y o u r alw ays in m y care.
G arden         in     P o rt
S u n lig h t V illa g e ,                           D addy sends his love to you
                                                     because we love you so,
Wirral.                                              H om e is not the sam e now
                                                     since you h ad to go.
The M em orial is
situ ated at the rear                                Goodbye, goodbye m y darling
                                                     g rief is so h ard to bear,
of    H u lm e        h a ll,                        Here's a kiss from M u m m y
                                                     a n d D a d d y ’s here to share.
close to the War
                                                      H eavenly fa th er up above
m em orial, an d is                                  please help us in our sorrow,
                                                      Please care f o r our loved ones
en tered th rou gh a                                 f o r they have no tomorrow.
P o r tla n d        sto n e
                                                     G oodbye m y darling
arch.                                                D arling I m iss yo u so much
                                                     I will never forget that day
Som e o f th e rela­                                 yo u were so veiy happy
                                                     eager to see Liverpool play.
tives o f th ose w h o
d ied at H illsb or­                                 M u m m y will never forget
                                                     darling y o u r just asleep,
ou gh a tten d ed th e                               M y heart will be with yo u
                                                     the m em ory o f you I'll keep.
d e d ic a tio n     cere­
m ony        on       1 0 th                         A s I read the book o f life
                                                     I turn the page o f love.
A u gu st.                                           There yo u are m y darling
                                                     resting with G od above.
                                    H orncastle                                          D aisy D ickinson
                                 Further Afield                                                                                    . v r J o e ^ L ,'V \\^                                                                           IW    l s                    W o u .A A e < A
                                                                                                                                I                                                   1S
Although the majority o f people affected by the tragedy live in and around Merseyside, there are of                   Sc a m A. S'feuficL                                         i                <sxX G e f(z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l/^y     I                    S (^ \L L       "&Lee<V5

course a number from other parts of the country.                                                             W \W r                                       R n p fe rv s A .
                                                                                                             i ✓c .           H o e -w                    bo        4
Often these people can feel particularly isolated, as they struggle to come to terms with their feelings.
                                                                                                             fo r*           th -e .           ’f i ' r s b             b tv b
Two survivors, one from Stoke-on Trent and one from Coventry, found that ringing the Help-Line was
a worthwhile step.....
                                                                                                                My           h'na-e                                           bo                    VefVfcH^
Here in Stoke-on-Trent we would have been cut off completely but for the kindness of complete
strangers. The many lovely letters and cards containing words of comfort and hope from people in
Sheffield, Liverpool and Staffordshire and many other parts of the country too. The service at the           #>«Vvpj           o / 'e s " < W l o / x s T
Cathedral was beautiful but somehow I felt detached from it, not really part of it.                          fU fc           vw e.             in .            fcovccVn            uAVk          \A
Two of the first letters received came from Liverpool and Sheffield Social Services giving us a number
                                                                                                                                   Vvbx-K'&s"                       fvv               v~
to ring but I put them away thinking it does not apply to us. How wrong I was when time passes and                                                                                                                             sh^LL \\Joh                        ^
friends get back to their routine and we have to get back to some kind o f normality, that is when you
                                                                                                            I         Snw '        U '& r                                     Yrt& uJc
begin to feel completely alone.
Thank goodness I plucked up the courage to ring the Hillsborough Help Line.                                      6      w & eK s                                              ,v         ^   L tr       ;
To anyone who hasn’t yet taken that step, I recommend it. Edna Murray                                           WkvS                                             Ife a -                             o .v \cl I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C° A (ie ^ A f t r            lVfo^ kke
                                                                                                                                        ‘- W s  r                               Oj-C L -fe.W OX/^J
From K eith Martin;                                                                       ________                   ^ L<2     u/brse. S o \                                  Skrcc S&2 .-JZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ^     b U p' <;-i              ^O'^ov

           A Hillsborough survivor living in Coventry                                                            &Lfc           Mow                                                 UhS6         Cf                 ^                w t    vy>UL &£^.ey^<u( 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sov\Ae_ c iw y ; .
                                                                                                                W e e /C s                 i        oust                5 e .-o < A          to b c
Throughout my life I have managed to ‘come to               I thought I was alone in the world whilst                                                                                                               v /e -   v /:\l -      W \e e b
                                                            everyone else had ‘got over it’. How wrong                  *~LiV/i'irVo^                             ftL L                         /■3ojV tA
terms’ with bereavements and always thought I
could handle such events well. Even in my work I            I was!                                              V/htt-b:                                        &         i
have been able to give support to others in difficulty      By pure luck and following another downer,       fft-                                                             i      £>•& £,          >4-
and distress. Trying to be ‘tough’ I went back to
work folio wing the disaster and even gave accounts
                                                            I phoned the Hillsborough Helpline who put
                                                            me in touch with the newly opened Hillsbor­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Returning to Sheffield
of what happened to the morning assemblies at the           ough Advice and Drop-In Centre in Anfield
                                                            Road where I arranged to attend a counsel­                                                                              d re v W c -.           I'k
comprehensive school where I work.
                                                            ling session which was extremely valuable.                                                                                                             Words could never express my gratitude for the assistance, advice and kindness
However, as time went by and Hillsborough disap­
peared from the headlines, I found that I was not           I also joined a group of others who were at          I                         CAn \Jo\>                                                H //           shown to me since my first visit to the Hillsborough Advice and Drop-In Centre
able to ‘forget’ or ‘put it out of my mind’ as those        Hillsborough and experienced much the           v e 'e L f v x o ^ s                 iW               ib              H vvrfes      in s r i-C .       over a month ago. Most helpful is the way that I can speak in the strictest
around me who weren’t there and not involved                same as myself from their places around the                                                                                         ' HLL.             confidence to staff on a one to one basis, or sit down with groups of other survivors
suggested I even stopped talking about what hap­            ground. From being alone, I became one of                                                     - wVU- $hcyy y/i’tA-)                                    who have undergone the same experiences as myself. Not long ago I made a
pened for fear thatpeople would think I was ‘weak’          thousands in the same position and able to
                                                                                                                               <P©v—                                                                Q&             return visit to Sheffield with some of the staff and other survivors of Hillsborough
or ‘boring’ thereby bottling up the feelings of             exchange views with others affected by the                                                                                                             and although a little frightening and upsetting, I can now say that I found the visit
anger, grief, justice, guilt and everything else.           disaster.                                                                                                                                              soothing and comforting and feel the journey was my first big step on the road to
                                                                                                            1MY
                                                                                                             i         ^ eeL           \vm. S lcu /U '                             LcSiVo^ Goitre?L                recovery.
  Fallen Angels                                                                                                                                  l^| If 4^                                                         The centre is open from Monday to Friday, 9.00 a.m. - 5.00 p.m. Five months
                            Fallen Angels your name will live forever more.                                  h-S                                                                                                   have passed since the tragedy but some supporters are still only visiting the centre
                            Don’t worry on this score,                                                                                                                                                             for the first time. Speaking of my own experiences with staff and sharing my
                                                                                                                 (             ~&yeS                      to        express                  i-tou/
                            Shankly once said, we’re hard but fair,                                                                                       Tv*.          (She.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   experiences with others in the same position as myself, has enabled me to come
                            He opened his arms and took you to his care.                                                                                                                                           to terms with what took place last April. It still hurts to speak of the semi-final,
                                                                                                                             enC L co< _                                              (t        Shys               but I can now face what happened without it causing too much pain. Those who
                            “Fallen angels, all the tears, all the rage,                                     So '~V£(j1vV\o^                          I
                            All the blues in the night.                                                                                                                                                            do not understand the scale of the Hillsborough disaster believe we should be
                                                                                                                                       j            h ape.              kola         W 'L L .    PW5£              getting over the effects of last April, like one suffering from the common cold.
                            If our eyes could see you kneeling in the silver light.
                                                                                                             r^y             tijcvo is                     0^\          to                      5cGiH_             This is only natural, but remember that there are many going through the same
                            Fallen angels, twice cast a shadow against the sun,
                            If my eye could see the spirit of the chosen ones,                                                             cbAfL               e s /c o ~ e - h T               fcUd               feelings and emotions as yourselves and there are people at the Centre who
                            In my dreams the pipes were playing,                                             VWvvtv^ S ^ w > \ S t o - Spos^2>                                                                     understand your needs. We all react differently in times of stress and times of be­
                            In my dreams we lost a friend.                                                         kw&.sre.      S jp e o ^ L - H ^ L p -                                                          reavements, but I am sure that with the help and understanding from the staff at
                            Come down Gabriel and blow your horn                                                              K.       Jtom., vQ»c^-v''v^                                                          the Hillsborough Centre, you too will learn to come to terms with the tragedy.
                            Because someday we will meet again.                                                                                                                                                    Here’s wishing you all a very safe and happy football season.
                                                                                                                                                                    ■S i/V v/S 'g l (/•
                            Dedicated to the 95 brave and innocent                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A.D.Haslam .
                            who lost their lives.            Thomas McDonagh
vounq
J^interlinkw
This is your page. Why not fill it in with a story a poem or a picture?
    and send it to interlink we will publish it in the next edition.
  Things to draw adults
      attention to!
 Events organised by the family sup­
 port group.
                                                                                             An
                                                                                                  y   idea.
                                                                                                                         ' y i* eas
 1. Family day trip to Blackpool                                                             An            s fo i
                                                                                                  yone
 Lights 28th October.                                                           T A llh'go                                   e r tiU.
                                                                                                                                        f o r tb{ese
      Childrens’ Pantomime - ‘Cinder-
 2. Childrens
         Empire, Liverpool 14th Janu-
 “ ’ V , Emp
 ella’,                                                                                                               So at tffe° at <****,-J
                                                                                                                                        Wi"g,ages?>
                                                                                                                                   top o f
 ary,, 1990.                                                                        A ll                                                      each
                                                                                             c°ntribi
 3. Childrens’ Christmas Party -                                                   t f ilL               UtiQl'ns
                                                                                                                     to pa
^Vernon Sangster - 7th January, 1990.
                                      '■J                                              s*Poo]                                               af
                                                                                  Tel. 05}                                                       ffte
                                                                                                  ■263                                    °a d
                                                                                                         5 3 <5(5.




                                      %                                               «
                                      <*"«**aroundu                 J    ^   V“ y D ^ s      «



        ! >
                                 | join in.                     a       y or fr»’ends and



                                 i StheSlocal
                                          r press.
                                              . ' s ’ry° —'”
                                                         Ung °,Ubs

                                                    Ad
                    ^ e tv
                                                                              f^ ~ Z T —                         "                                      —
                                                    ■tfv                          Day out at Camelot Theme
                                                                                             Park
                                                                        vk     Day Out at Camelot Theme Park (31st August)
                                                ^          sX>° ~«c,. \%
                                                            ; e evc
v\^c      \tv                          av              &%
                                                        ■>
       >\©                                                                     Nearly 100 children and young people, be­
            j\A-                 vo
                                       «P>A *                                  tween the ages o f 6 months and 16 years,
                                                                               enjoyed a day out with their families and
                   vcvcV*                                                      friends in Merlin’s Magical Kingdom’. The
       CC                                                                      sun shone, there was loads to do and see and a
                             1                                                 good day was had by all (except perhaps some
                                                                               exhausted adults).

                                                                               Just one thing! I wish I could remember who
                                                                               told me it was best to sit in the front going
                                                                               down the ‘Camelot Cascade’ (Water Splash)

                                                                             y^Thanks to Julie and Andrew for the card.
                                                                                                                                                        Jr
                      SHOCK/HILLSBOROUGH
 The shock I faced was the death o f my brother just a few short weeks ago. I have never experienced this
 kind o f shock before in my life and I never want again. Words cannot describe the feelings I had or still
 have as it changes all the time, never the same emotions. ,
 Liverpool versus Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough (the ground o f Sheffield Wednesday), was an ordi­
 nary football match where 95 people innocently died for he sake o f SPORT. One o f those 95 was my
 brother Colin.
 Colin was just 19, a shy and hard-working lad. He had never been to an away match before because o f his
 job as a barman in the Dockers Club. Colin left the Dockers club because it was only a weekend job, and
 he had been promoted in his day job (TSB - bank clerk). He was to celebrate leaving the dockers on
 Thursday but he never did because o f the disaster.
 On the Friday night before he died, whilst he was out girls fought over him, so I left and said”Bye, see
 you tomorrow,” I went home and left him to carry on enjoying the last night o f his life. Whose last words
 “Bye, see you tomorrow,” will always stay in my heart but as the saying goes “Tomorrow never comes”.
 At 3.06 pm on the 15th April 1989, the football match was stopped, but it wasn’t until 3.45 am on the
 16th April 1989, that the tragic news came to us via my brother Ian. Ian is my only brother now, but he
has suffered the worst because he was more like a Mend to Colin than a brother. Those twelve hours or so
in between I felt numb. People have said before that they felt like this, but I did not know what they
meant until now, for there was little I could do except hope and pray Colin would come back. Those
hours were filled with sorrow and grief. I cried with pain, I cried with helplessness, but I also remembered
all the time we had together.
Colin did return, but not until Thursday 20th April 1989, and this was in a wooden box known as a coffin.
Still the numbers never went. He had said the day before I’ll come back home tomorrow and either get
drunk with happiness if they win or with sorrow if they loose. Neither happened. The pain and sorrow the
players felt at that moment (three zero six pm) was practically the same as mine. They were not allowed
to help, nor was I, they were not aware of what was going on, nor was I. There was little I could do, but
much to hope for.

    * That Colin would come back;                                    _____________________

    * That Colin would drive up in his car;

    * That my mum and dad would comfort each other and release their grief;

    * That Ian would express his anger in some way;

    * That the other families who lost someone would comfort each other and manage;

    * That everyone in Liverpool would just be okay, it didn’t matter what I felt as long as they were fine;

I am beginning to experience a lot o f emotions like hurt from the tragedy, but unlike my family I cry in
secret, just as Colin would have, I wouldn’t want to hurt anyone, just as Colin never did, I don’t want to
attract attention, as this was not Colin’s style.
Now my family are starting a fresh life, and trying to carry on from before the 15th April 1989, because
Colin has only died in body but w ill never in soul, he will always be in our thoughts and in our hearts.
“Our” means family and friends because o f the love, support, and affection from everyone we know.
SO REMEMBER “Live today as if it were your last” for who knows it might just be. Colin didn’t know
that the party he was at the night before was going to be his last.
GOD always takes the best 1st and there couldn’t have been anyone better than our Col.

                                                                        - Lisa, Age 16, Liverpool
T he H illsborough F am ily Support Group
                   A Profile                                                                          ■u S B O S f lj,
The group’s foundations lie in the immediate aftermath of that appalling day at
Hillsborough that cost 95 irreplaceable lives. Broken families were brought together
by events such as the Memorial Service at Liverpool Cathedral or by more casual
meetings at Anfield and elsewhere.
Our grief frustration, anger, disbelief, melancholy - even despair, all became a little
easier to understand when shared or just “aired” with someone else - thrown into the
same emotional whirlpool by events of April 15 th. Strangers, o f all ages, from differing
backgrounds, circumstances and geographical locations - found some comfort in
sharing their emotions with someone who really could understand.
Hence our first objective as a group became evident; -
“To support and assist each other”.
The sad “statistics” o f Hillsborough; 95 dead, hundreds physically injured, some very
seriously and permanently, hundreds more psychologically affected, are tragic enough, but when one remembers that those involved
were predominantly young (for example 77 or 81% of the 9.r
deceased were less than 30 years old, with 38 o f them or 4091 Dear Friends,
below 20 years) then the natural justice demands
a thorough investigation of the circumstances leading to and The Social Committee has arranged the following events and
surrounding the disaster. Ultimately, individuals and/or or­       would ask for your help in assessing the numbers of children
ganisations who through apathy, incompetence or neglect            and adults in your family.
allowed this preventable disaster to occur must face up to their    1. Family day trip to Blackpool Illuminations Saturday 28th
responsibilities so that they and others can learn the lessons     October, 1989 Depart Vemon Sangster Club 2.00 p.m. cost
that will prevent a recurrence.                                    approx £2.25 each (under 5 ’s go free)
It was this view that led to the groups second objective;-
“to seek justice”                                                  2. Social Evening for adults Heath Hall, Allerton, Liverpool
I repeat justice, not vengeance, witch-hunts or any other of the    18 Saturday 4th November, 1989. Buffet, Bar Disco approx
emotive labels so popular with the media.                          £3.50 each.
So where are we now! We have a majority “membership” of 3. Childrens’ Pantomime - Empire Liverpool ‘Cinderella’
the bereaved families, we have elected a committee and more         14th January, 1990 3.00 p.m. cost approx £5.50 child £7.00
recently a ladies sub-committee who are doing a sterling job       adult (max) This cost may be reduced.
on organising the “care” side of our activities. Links with
other “disaster” groups such as the Herald of Free Enterprise,     4. Childrens’ Christmas Party - Provisionally booked 7th
Piper Alpha etc have/or are being established and we are January, 1990
making both progress and some mistakes.                             Vemon Sangster Hall.
The high media attention that accompanied the ‘Taylor Re­           (Hopefully this will be free - depending on the results of our
port, the Peter Wright “resignation” and of course the an­          fund raising i.e. raffles etc.)
nouncement of the criminal investigation has abated and while       5. Ladies Night O ut-D etails at a later date.
this gives us more time to get better organised it increases the
isolation that many feel. Add to this the possibility, indeed       Many thanks in anticipation for your help.
probability, of a delay with the Inquests, Civil Actions etc.
then we face an uphill battle on the emotional front. The group
and communications such as “Interlink” will be vital.                Please return to Doreen Jones, 80 Havenna Road,
Similarly our quest for justice is fraught with difficulty. We       Liverpool L19 4TZ
have already experienced apathy, bureaucracy, crass insensi­         Telephone if more information required contact either
tivity and shameless avoidance o f responsibilities. Again we        myself on 051 427 7733 or Sheila on 428 6840.
are advised that this will not get any easier and we are therefore                                       Nos           Ages
preparing for a long struggle - including seeking the advice
                                                                     1. Children for Blackpool         |     | | 11 11 11 11 |
and support of M.P.’s and prominent figures. We are thus on
the threshold of the transition from a purely “care” group to           Adults for Blackpool
that of a care and pressure group, where once again the              2. Adults Social Evening
strength of numbers and the emotional support of the group
will be needed to overcome the setbacks.                             3. Childrens' Pantomime           |     | | 11 11 11 11 |
                                                                       Adults Pantomime
There is much to be done in the pursuit of our objectives and
we all know that life will continue to be very difficult and at        Childrens' Christmas Party    |      | |    11 11   11 11 |
times extremely stressful - we intend to get through it together!      Age limit 12 years
                                                                    5. Ladies Night out
Trevor Hicks - Chairman
Hillsborough Family Support Group                                   Tickets will be available at future meeting.
                                                                                      A third reprint has now been commissioned.
                                                                                      After the Hillsborough Tragedy many people wrote
                                                                                      poems as a way o f trying to express their grief and
   I
         WORDS of
               | j
                   TRIBUTE                                                            feelings. We collected over 1.200 o f these poems and
   I                 A n A n th o ld g y 'o f 9 5 poem s,
                                                                                      published 95 o f the poems in "Words o f Tribute". All
            w ritten a fter th e fiills b o ro u g h tragedy
                                                                                      the poems collected are in a special archive in Liver­
                            -    1 5 th   April,     1989-
                                                                                      pool City Library, William Brown Street.
                                                                                      The book has evoked an exceptionally good response
                                                                                      and many people who were at Hillsborough or had
                                                                                      friends and relatives that were there, have found the
                                                                                      poems to be o f great comfort. Many people have
                                                                                      bought extra copies and sent them to Liverpudlians
                                                                                      living all over the world.
                                                                                      Copies are available from any branch library in
       The Book is available - price £l'.50 in all Liverpool City Libraries and the
                                                                                      Liverpool, Knowsley and Wirral,and available in the
                              Hillsborough Disaster Office.
            Copies can be obtained by post, price £1.75 (inc. p. & p.) from the       Anfield Souvenir Shop also all branches o f W.H.
       Hillsborough Disaster Office, 21/25 Sir Thorias Street,Liverpool L I 6BW.      Smith priced £1.50.
                                                                                      Further information contact;
                                       ^                                       |                               Tricia Jenkins 051 794 2538
                                                                                                               Community Resource Unit,
                                                                                                               19 Abercromby Square,
                                                                                                               Liverpool. L69 3BX

                                                                                         liig -i
                Contact Point
Boys’ Club
I am trying to find some information on behalf of a
family affected by the tragedy.                                                                                                  smsm
                                                                                                                  msm     IB
Were you in the Boys’ Club on 15th April at about
7.20 p.m. when a list of about ten names o f “alive
and well” was read out?
If you were, or you think you can help, please tele­
phone Julie Smith on Runcorn 704484.

A photograph from the Pink Football Echo was left at Anfield,
in the Kop, during the week after Hillsborough. The photo­
graph showed a fan who had helped to pull people out, and a
note was left with it, asking the fan concerned to contact the
leaver o f the photograph. No contact was made at that time,
however, the fan concerned would now like to make contact
if this is still required. If you can give any information about                          PRIORY
this please contact;- SYLVIA BERRY, SOCIAL WORKER
at the HILLSBOROUGH CENTRE, 1 Anfield Road, Liver­
                                                                                                                                        ^msssmmssm
                                                                                                                                              ssssss
pool - 051 263 5366.                                                                                                *x*x*x*


                         a is for tipple
                                                                                          SCHOOL                               mmmwst mm


        Interlink was produced with desk
       top publishing equipment, donated
       by Apple U.K., MBC Apple Centre,
           Mount Pleasant, Liverpool.

 No part of this newsletter may be reproduced, hired out, or otherwise circulated in any form without the editors prior consent.
                                                  On the retirement of Sheffield Wednesday
                                                  chairman Mr. H.E. McGee                             Hillsborough
                                                  Friday 16th March saw Mr H.E. McGee,
                                                  Chairman of Sheffield Wednesday Football
                                                                                                       Memorial
                                                  Club announce his retirement. In doing so
                                                  he found fit to pour forth with the now tired,
                                                  discredited rhetoric of ticketless Liverpool
                                                                                                         Banner
                                                  supporters attempting to force entry to the
                                                  ground being the cause of last year’s
                                                  tragedy.
Easter Sunday 1990. How ironic that the
Christian celebration of the new beginning
should fall on the 1st anniversary of the         Those who read the official match
Hillsborough Disaster.                            programme of the semi-final may remember
                                                  Mr McGee’s comment in his ‘Welcome
However sceptical or religious an attitude        Back’ column.    He wrote “As you look
we have, there is no doubt that in the last       around Hillsborough you will appreciate
year we have had to adjust to a new life;         why it has been regarded for so long as a
whether we lost a loved one or lived through      safe venue for all kinds of important
the horrors of Hillsborough, no-one has           matches.”
been the same since that April day. Our                                                            The Hillsborough memorial banner was
worlds were turned upside down and most                                                            m a d e in t h e w e e k fo llo w in g th e
have yet to find their feet. Time, we are told,   W e wish Mr McGee good riddance and              Hillsborough tragedy as a tribute to those
is the best healer, but love and support are      would like to make a suggestion to improve       who lost their lives on April 15th 1989.
just as important a tonic, if not moreso.         his ‘perfect venue’ which claimed the lives
                                                  of 95 innocent people that day in April -        The material was originally meant to form
At first most of us bottle up our feelings,       BULLDOZE IT!!                  Keith Martin      one half of the celebrational banner for the
not really appreciating how anyone can                                                             centenary of Liverpool F.C. It’s design is
understand our pain.       Everything was                                                          based on ideas for that purpose.        The
“chokka” : we have so much confusion                                                               banner is approximately twenty five feet
milling around in our heads that we can’t
explain to ourselves how we feel let alone to
                                                  Hillsborough’s Regret                            wide and eleven feet high.

someone else.                                     I stood and watched you suffer as my heart       Since the banner was first exhibited at
                                                     was ripped away,                              Anfield a number of mementos have been
How do you fathom out how you have                My reputation stained, my name forever           added. The Everton scarf was added in
changed, the panic attacks, the flashbacks,          grey.                                         thanks to Everton F.C. and their fans for the
the fear that things have altered so              These walls, these blue steel cages, this        marvellous way they conducted themselves
dramatically that your mind can’t catch up?          tarnished turf of green.                      throughout the trauma. The Celtic pennant
Do others really know what it’s like or           A sad and sorry shell for the horrors I have     as a gesture of thanks, the Werder/Dynamo
should you cope alone? What’s going on               seen.                                         pennant as a symbol of the barriers football
for God’s sake? Why me?                                                                            crosses.    The Sorrento (Perth, Australia)
                                                  I killed you on that day with a swift and        was sent by, and represents, exiled
Going through the sudden loss of a loved             shaking hand,                                 S co u se rs.    P erso n al trib u te s   in
one in tragic circumstances, or witnessing        And witnessed how protection was denied a        remembrance of individuals have also been
death on a massive scale, or coming as               travelling band.                              added.      Anybody wishing to make a
close to dying as we are ever likely to, are      Now I stand and mourn for that emptiness         contribution in a similar vein is welcome to
experiences we can share in the knowledge            within,                                       do so.
that people can empathise rather than             The memories are strong and bear the
sympathise.                                          flavour of this sin.                          The banner was displayed at Anfield
                                                                                                   throughout the week following the tragedy
One year on, some of those whose lives            How could this thing have happened to a          and formed a poignant backdrop to the
have been torn apart by Hillsborough have            ground so often used?                         growing sea of flowers.
supported each other through the trauma. A        I saw my structure crumble and your pleas
bond does exist, and a very strong one,              for life refused.                             It was again a focal point at the Memorial
among those who suffered that day. Some           My barriers and my concrete steps could          Service which took place at the Liverpool
friendships formed through this appalling            not be wrenched away,                         Anglican Cathedral last April, when it was
tragedy will last a lifetime. Seeing each         My fences were designed to keep the              draped above the congregation, echoing the
other through, and trying to reach out to            hooligans at bay.                             names of the precious lives which were lost
those who feel they need help but can’t or                                                         at Hillsborough.
won’t take the step, has become an                They would not yield, too tall, too strong,
important part of life.                              too many faces there,                         The banner is currently seen at every home
                                                  My centre pens became a trap and did they        game at Anfield when it is held above the
W e can recognise each other’s experiences          really care?                                   heads of the crowd in a regular place on the
because we have been at the same stage            Too late to save those 95 who perished in        Kop as “You’ll Never Walk Alone” is sung.
many times and will continue to have                 the heat,
setbacks along the way.          But as we        I could only bear the pain and see you suffer    The banner was made by Peter Carney, Fred
commemorate the 1st anniversary and                  at my feet.                                   Brown, John Fay and Tracy Ryan.
remember the waste of life that many of us
witnessed, it is a comfort that we can talk       Time was lost as you were scorned by those       Further information from: 051-708 0468
together, weep together - and laugh                 who should have seen
together. Slowly but surely we can conquer        And now the blame is passed around and
this, in our own way and at our own pace. As        consciences are clean.                            No part of this newsletter may be
often as it has been said it’s true               But are they? No, for I did witness all that        reproduced, hired out, or otherwise
                                                    April day,                                        circulated in any form without prior
        W e’ll n ever w alk a lo n e              These walls are testimony to the truth, and         consent of the editorial group.
                                                    they shall pay...
                              Tricia Longhorn                                 Tricia Longhorn




    Hillsborough Helpline:                                                         ®®1'2^h0^s4a1d
                     Printed by Custom Print Ltd., 1 Great Crosshall Street, Liverpool L3 2AP. Telephone: 051-236 0781
                                                                                                  O ur daughter C hristine always liked
                                                 Nottingham                                       watching football as all the family did. Our



                 x& *
                                                                                                  team is Burnley and the first match she saw
                                                 Remembers                                        w as th e r e , w h e n s t a y in g at h er
                                                                                                  grandparents one Easter. Then later when
                                                 Tragedy brought us together - Nottingham         she was older she went each week with
                                                 and Liverpool.                                   school friends to watch Blackpool, but her
                                                                                                  favourite team was Liverpool. One year as a
                                                 As the first anniversary of the unbelievable     special treat she went to see Liverpool v
                                                 events of April last yeat nears again, our       Man. United.
                                                 thoughts and hearts are joined together in
                                                 loving memory.                                   A fte r com p leting her train ing as a
                                                                                                  radiographer she obtained a post in Preston
                                                 W e remember those loved ones; we                where she met her husband Steve, a
                                                 remember those who gave comfort; we              Liverpudlian so it was inevitable she would
                                                 remember the moving sights of the Anfield        become a Liverpool fan as Steve had been
A recent edition of the Sheffield local paper    pitch, covered in flowers and souvenirs and      going to Anfield since he was a little boy.
“The Star” carried a story of love from          we remember with gratitude those who
tragedy.   Len Norton of Leppings Lane,          survived the ordeal.                             They went to Anfield as often as possible.
Sheffield, who is a       Sheffield United                                                        Then one evening match (I think it was
supporter, travelled to Merseyside after the     Nottinghamshire County Council, through          Liverpool v Tottenham) they couldn’t get in
Hillsborough tragedy to find that Liverpool      its Social Services Committee, has worked        which made them decide to get a season
mates he had made in his local just before       closely with Liverpool Social Work staff,        ticket for the next season.
the match were safe and well. During that        and shall continue to do so. The pooling of
visit he met Helen Jackson, an Everton           advice; the experience we gained following       When Christine rang us to say they hoped
supporter who lives at Birkenhead - they are     the Kegworth disaster, all helped staff to       to get tickets for the semi-final at
to be married on April 7th at Birkenhead         assist those in need.                            Hillsborough, we really hoped they wouldn’t
Register office and will make their home in                                                       manage it. I had a sort of premonition that
Sheffield.                                       Out of tragedy, a bond has been formed. On       something would happen to her, probably a
                                                 April 15 we shall be remembering everyone        road accident. I really couldn’t envisage
This is yet another link in the chain that has   in Liverpool with love and understanding.        anyone being killed at a football match.
bound Sheffield, and Hillsborough in                                                              Around this time I read in the daily paper the
particular, together with Merseyside since       Remember; YOU’ LL NEVER WALK ALONE.              man responsible for policing the match was
April 1989.                                                                                       new to the job and the uneasy feeling
                                                                               Joan Taylor        persisted. Shortly after she rang up all
As the spring flowers are bursting into                                          Chairman         excited having got tickets. I said, “ Do take
bloom in our gardens, thoughts turn back to          Nottingham Social Services Committee         care” and she happily said, “W e’ll be alright
all the myriad of flowers that were placed                                                        Mum...Don’t worry.”
with such loving sympathy both at Anfield
and round the gates at the Sheffield                                                              Living in Lancaster we are out on a limb.
Wednesday ground at that time.                                                                    There hasn’t been anyone around us who
                                                                                                  can fully comprehend the shock and grief
After the match in November, when                                                                 we feel and the agony we went through that
                                                                THE FIRST TIME
Liverpool again came to Hillsborough, the                                                         Saturday until we knew the worst, fearing
                                                  I hope by writing this I can encourage other
island at the top of Leppings Lane, where                                                         the worst but hoping and praying that
                                                  supporters who may not have used the
the memorial stone has been erected, was a                                                        Christine and Steve were alright.
                                                  Hillsborough Centre to come forward as a
beautiful carpet of red and white flowers         supporter and survivor of the disaster.
brought by the fans who came to the match.                                                        People seem to think we should be back to
At the present time, daffodils are in full                                                        “ normal” so it’s good to read through
                                                 Walking into the centre for the first time
bloom in the small garden surrounding the                                                         ‘Interlink’ that we aren’t alone in the way we
                                                 was not easy, and I was never any good at
memorial and still the tributes of red and                                                        feel. We visited Anfield once after the
                                                 asking for help. I did not know what to
white flowers keep appearing there.                                                               disaster and we were overwhelmed by the
                                                 expect and to be honest I could never see
                                                                                                  response and generosity of people in the
                                                 myself talking to a social worker.               wake of the tragedy. Alone with our son-in-
As we approach the first anniversary of the
Tragedy, we Hillsborough folk feel strongly                                                       law Steve, who has been a great help to us,
                                                  But I knew things were starting to go wrong,
forall the relatives and friends of those who                                                     we hope to be at the Memorial Service on
                                                  feeling guilty for being alive, not sleeping,
lost their lives and pray that everyone                                                           April 15th.
                                                  and little arguments I would normally shrug
connected with the game of Football will          off. I knew I would have to talk to someone
resolve that lessons must be learned, that                                                                  Best wishes to everyone,
                                                  sooner or later even if it meant talking to a             Mavis and Ken Alderson
lives are precious, and that our football
                                                  social worker.                                           (Christine Jones’ parents)
stadia should become places of enjoyment
and happiness - not tragedy and sorrow.           Since that day I found the courage, the
                                                  nerve to walk into the Hillsborough Centre
                             Barbara Norton                                                                    YOUR INTERLINK
                                                  to talk about how I feel. I’ve found people
                    Hillsborough, Sheffield.
                                                  who do care about the pain, the hurt,
                                                  frustration and helplessness inside.                ‘HILLSBOROUGH INTERLINK’ is a
                                                                                                      free magazine, put together by the
                                                  As a survivor I can speak for many by saying        bereaved and survivors of the
                                                  we appreciate what these caring people are          tragedy. If you wish to receive more
                                                  doing. For those survivors who are thinking         copies on a regular basis, for
 Many thanks to the people of Sheffield.          of coming to the Centre and who may not             yourself, friends and family, please
                                                  want to see social workers, there are               write to us at:
 Many Liverpool fans who left Hillsborough        survivors’ groups every Tuesday afternoon                   Hillsborough Interlink
 following last April’s tragedy will never        and every other Wednesday evening. The                       Hillsborough Centre
 forget the warmth and compassion of local        Centre also has group meetings for the                          1, Anfield Road
 residents who opened their doors and their       bereaved, carers, the young people, and                            Liverpool 4
 hearts to offer when it was most needed.         acts as a drop-in facility for individual
                                                  counselling, or a cup of tea every weekday.         Remember your contribution is vital
 We will always be grateful for the offers of                                                         to the magazine, whether it be poetry,
 tea and telephones as we walked from the         Like the banner read at Goodison Park last          letters, articles, artwork, ideas etc.
 ground. To the people of Hillsborough we         year, W e Never Walk Alone. That latter             Send all work to us c/o Hillsborough
 offer in return sincere thanks and our           sentence rings so true since that day I             Centre. W e look forward to hearing
 friendship.                                      walked into the Hillsborough Centre - I've          from you, and send all our love and
                                                  never walked alone.                                 best wishes to you all.
                     Interlink Editorial Group                            Tommy McDonagh
                                                                                                       thought it was horrendous. But I knew I had
                                                                                                       a specific job to do and I could comfort
                                                                                                       people. It was just when I arrived at the
                                                                                                       ground that the enormity of the tragedy
                                                                                                       struck home and that’s when I was
                                                                                                       overcome.




                                                                                                       What impressions o i the club did you form
                                                                                                       when you arrived? Was it almost too hard to
                                                                                                       go in?
                                                                                                       It was too difficult. Everyone had their
                                                                                                       faces down. The lads registered surprise at
                                                                                                       seeing me but the sadness was in the air.
                                                                                                       You could actually reach out and grab a
                                                                                                       handful of sadness; you could see it, you
                                                                                                       could feel it, it was there.




                                                                                                       Do you feel closer to the people of Liverpool
                                                                                                       because of what happened at Hillsborough?
                                                                                                       Absolutely. I never felt like I wanted to
                                                                                                       come back and play soccer until one day at
                                                                                                       Hillsborough around the front gate. I went
                                                                                                       to the Leppings Lane and walked right
                                                                                                       around.     It was just near twilight and
                                                                                                       everyone was crying. I didn’t have a dry eye
                                                                                                       for two weeks. I just cried as a matter of
                                                                                                       course, but there was no shame. If you
                                                                                                       didn’t cry there was something wrong with
                                                                                                       you. A Manchester City fan was crying and
                                                                                                       he came up to me and put his scarf round
                                                                                                       my neck and said, “You Scousers are the
                                                                                                       greatest fans in the world, it’s just so sad.”
                                                                                                       Just then I thought I would so love to come
                                                                                                       back and play, not for the money or the
                                                    cabinet. It raised about $50,000. There was        glory, but to know why I was playing for
                                                    just a helplessness, but at least we were          these people. I could never understand why
                                                    able to raise some money, about $100,000           they could place this game so high in their
                                                    from different things.                             priorities. But at the time when they needed
                                                                                                       football it was so natural, and I felt that I
Craig Johnston talks to                                                                                would like to dedicate the next two years of
‘ In te r lin k ’ abo u t his                                                                          my life to that. My one regret about my
                                                                                                       career is that I didn’t realise the huge stakes
return to the city and the                          What was in your heart as you flew over on         for which I was playing. When I watch a
                                                    to the city because it was such a long way         Liverpool game on the television and see
people who came to                                  to come and people were surprised to see           anyone not giving 100% I wince and say,
                                                    you?
mean so much after the                              My heart was pretty mixed up, but my brain
                                                                                                       ‘Let me at 'em.’ Not that it happens very
                                                                                                       often!
Hillsborough tragedy.                               was pretty focussed that I could do
                                                    something positive to help. I knew the lads
                                                    would have to train, and the burden on them
                                                    would be great. As I wasn’t a footballer I
                                                    could do some of the things that the lads          Have you changed as a person since
                                                    couldn’t do. My sister had been in a coma          Hillsborough?
What was the initial reaction to the disaster       and for the last 2 years or so I’d been            Yes, but I also changed when my own
in Australia?                                       helping her with brain injury, and I knew by       tragedy happened. That was one of the
Even more helpless than people here felt            the nature of suffocation that there would         reasons I walked out on football, not just
who could at least go to Hillsborough. Over         be people there with brain damage that’s           Liverpool.
there, within hours I had 15 different              what happened to my sister, lack of oxygen.
Scousers and Londoners saying, “What can              I’d already been through that and I knew
we do? Have you anything we can donate?”            there would be Mums and Dads, brothers
I tried to forget about it and I went up north      and sisters, who I could talk to about the         What do you appreciate in life?
to have a surf because I was consumed               way to treat the injuries and about not            I appreciate other people more, and I
with grief, and I didn’t want to talk about it. I    losing sight of the fact that there is a person   appreciate fans more, especially Liverpool
just had to get away. It was only when I            there. You think they’re not registering but       fans.
 looked down and saw the waves washing on           they are, and they need love and support in
 my Liverpool FC liver bird crest that I said,      their darkest hour. So I was pretty focussed
 “ I’ve got to go back there.”          All the     and not too overcome on the journey. What
Scousers were so pleased because it was              upset me was picking up the Bangkok Post
 like I was their representative as well. I gave    on the way and reading about Scousers              What is it that makes Liverpool supporters
 them every bit of Liverpool stuff I had,            urinating on policemen and picking the            so special?
 including my surfboard which I now believe         pockets of the dead.         Obviously they’d      Well Liverpool people are different. They
 is at the club waiting to be put in a glass        taken it from the British papers and I             will never sit on the fence, and you find that




     Hillsborough
               9
                  Helpline: 051-225   3413/3414
                                 24 Hours A Day          ■
a lot of com ics, musicians, actors,              stories: kids, who the last time I saw them     What is your view on the FA decision not to
playwights, footballers, and other people         had tubes stuck up their noses and who          allow the FA Cup to stay at A nfield because
who are artistic and creative, come from          were in comas, who couldn’t speak or            It would be ‘inappropriate?’
Liverpool. Other cities can sit on the fence      couldn’t move, were sitting there saying,       Inappropriate? Well insensitivity is about
and watch the world go past, but Liverpool        “ G’day Craig how are you?” It was just very    the best word that can sum it up. What I’d
people live with a passion.        They are       rewarding experience. I can’t put it into       like to know is where does all the money go
perceived in a funny light by outside people      words - just sheer happiness. For instance,     that all these supporters spend? When you
who either love them or hate them! Like           young Gillian Edwards had just come out of      talk about going to watch a sporting event,
Aussies, they have a basic mistrust of            a coma when I saw her last, and she was         this place is in the dark ages. I live in a
authority and have been given a bad deal at       blind. The doctors said she might never see     place that is very civilised and we wouldn’t
times.   I feel an affinity with Scousers         again. Anyway, she came up to me with big       treat our people the way the FA and the
because I'm not a fence-sitter. When you          bright eyes and said, “ Remember me?” and       Football League treat your people here.
talk about Liverpool fans you’re talking          I said, “Of course, how are you?” She said,
about a people’s way of life and Scousers         “ Do you remember you promised me if I got
are invariably over-passionate and they take      better you’d shave all your hair off?”
that football with them. That’s why they’re       “You’re not going to hold me to that are
so special.                                       you?” and the whole family just burst out       0o you think it will ever change?
                                                  laughing. “ No” she said, “ If you got your     Just tell us where the money goes,
                                                  hair cut you wouldn’t be the same old           someone, please, and then then it might
                                                  Skippy that we knew .”            Actually I    change.
                                                  recognised many parents because I spent
But we still have to battle to constantly         most of the time with them in he hospital
defend ourselves, as we did when the              wards and it all started coming back. It’s a
dreadful sto ries were printed in the papers      year down the track now so it was much          A n d the FA Cup?
soon after.                                       easier to talk to these people than it was      I think it’s very wrong. Liverpool were so
I know. After being privvy to the inside as a      before. Now they had plenty to say and it      brave to carry on in the first place and it was
player coming back I saw the real truth. I        was very interesting. They would say, “ If      through a mixture of God and Shanks that
saw the pictures from BBC and ITV and              we’re upsetting you we’ll stop” but I said,    we won it. It was meant to be ours....
there wasn’t one single sign of people             “ No, I want to hear about your son and how
peeing on the police and robbing the dead.         good he might have been as a soccer                Craig was talking to Tricia Longhorn
People were screaming at the police for            player.”
help, and screaming at the photographers
to get out of there. Scousers were running
everywhere to do the best they could to get
makeshift stretchers.    I saw all that for
                                                  Did you feel as though people were               W e would like to pass on our thanks to
myself, but for the papers it was just a
                                                  releasing som ething when they spoke to          Craig, for this interview which he gave
smokescreen that was thrown up. Liverpool
                                                  you, as, though you were some kind of            during a busy week, and for the time spent
fans were dragged through the mud as a
                                                  counsellor?                                      at the “ Evening of Thanks,” and for
smokescreen for the guilty people.
                                                  Well I was really interested and people kept     everything he has done to help since last
                                                  saying ‘thanks so much,’ but I was doing it      April. W e send all our best wishes to his
                                                  because I was genuinely concerned. I didn't      family, and hope that his sister Faye will
                                                  feel like a counsellor although I could sense    continue to recover from her injuries.
What do you fee l about that as a journalist?     the gratitude of people that I was spending
After being there for 2 or 3 days I’d spoken      time there. The thing is, I love people and
to the lads, the people who were at the           everybody had a different tale.
front, the Hillsborough bobbies, and the
landlords in the pubs around Sheffield, and
they were just as disgusted with the stories.
I wanted to piece together what had
happened and it was painfully obvious who
was at fault, painfully obvious.       On my
station it was broadcast that football
hooliganism had killed 95.        I saw the
pictures and I phoned every newsdesk in
the country and said, “ Get that story off. It
isn’t hooliganism, just mismanagement.”
I’ve said it in the book. At 3 o’clock on a                                                       Hm l
Saturday afternoon it’s a player’s job to
make sure he’s physically and mentally
right to perform at the highest level. It’s the
fans jobs to make sure they can afford the
fare and the ticket down there. The police’s
job is to police, and the ticket people’s job
is to ticket, and they screwed up. They
always harp on about drunken fans arriving
late without tickets. Their brothers and
sisters from the same family went to Villa
Park and there were probably a few drunk
and ticketless fans there - so what? They
were correctly marshalled and correctly
ticketed and that’s why no-one died at that                                                              fiKft
ground.



You went to a special evening a t Liverpool
FC on Saturday night (March 17) to m e e t the                      111111
bereaved, the survivors and the nursing
staff from Sheffield. H o w did you feel about
seeing everyone again?
Well it was a real shock. I thought it was
basically the hospital staff and I just
popped in to say ‘thank you’ to them, and
ended up having one of the best nights I’ve
ever had. There were so many success
                                                                                                                               “Our thoughts are always with you '
                                                                                                                               No-one your place can fill
                                                                                                                               in life we loved you dearly
                                                                                                                               In death we love you still
                                                                                                                               Even though you walk beside us
                                                                                                                               but when our lives are through
                                                                A day of families, a day of fun            .
                                                                                                                               and lead us straight to you.’
                                                                Just like any ordinary one                          ^ -
                                                                                                                                                                          'A lfc ig :
                                                                But fun turned into horror and pain
                                                                As news of happening to us came
                                                                :XtTese.'young.meftwentHo support their              :

                                                                Now everyone knows the horrors they’ve v
                                                                           '■    :       ..hi.   ■     :       th        '&
                                                                The cries for help ring in their ears                %
                                                                The looks of hope, the looks of fear
                                                                The prayers we say for those who died                         ,Rivers: in life, they ebb and flo w ;-
                                                                And for the anguish of these left behind                        Family, friends, come and go.
           Did you enjoy your last Jourse'y on earth as         For in our hearts if?e sorrow lies                              When watching old movies on TV,
           you drove across the Pennines on a                   On the worst day of cup ties                                    It makes you wonder where all thftstars and
           beautiful April Day?                                 In our city the pain is shared '                                   extras could be,                   ■" /?.;   ■
                                                                                                                              '’tt.fe seems to stall, then goes so4ast.
           Did you glance out of the window and       ,                                                                         Stay at the helm and try 1
                                                        Be it stronger, friend o f family
           notice the blue sky, the birds flying almost We feel the pain as deep as can be "            v                       T her& M II be tears and pain,
           alongside, the sheep in the fields, the lovely
                                                        W
                                                        Wer loarnt
                                                            learnt ftf iniiiries nasiiaities tOO                               tiv in g y o u r life'Is never a n ^a sy. g lu e
          scenery around you?                                                                                                   So; let’s stick together, it may be alright.
                                                        They s                       ing they ceulffctto
                                                        No way to help the ones                                                 We all fe e d sorheone to shine the light.
      vr Or were you to busy laughing and;jokinfjg To get them out ho way indeed                 /                              Strong love and:arms’f 9 'teSp:you\warm,
          with your dad and his friends? Especially     TOSee them suffer on the terrain :                                      To help keep you sheltered from life's -          '
          when Tony got out of the car to               To know they’ll never be home again                                     storm.                     ■
          cigarettes "th d each time he tried to \g § t The loss is shared like a family              v-                      Standing up straight :pn life ’s st
    ?:   back in Derek would drive o ff - I betj.you    Not on our own but as a city
    k i were helpless with laughter.           '(
                                                        The anger in our hearts will stay,
                                                                All those rrlstakes, m id e ttfere, that d a f '|             At what Mother Nature might deal.
           Did you think to yourself “ Isn’t this ajgreat       For the ones who’ll never return home ■ r
           day, aren’t I lucky to have a ticket fo r the        We know “ THEY’ U- NEVEffW AlK,Al»pN:g ’                                            John Kendal, Birkenhead.
           match?                                    #          So this therefore 1$ a fe ^t keen thdugfft
                                                                To see t | g le & o n l that it’s taught    - '
          Were you filled with excitement as you                To show ttiey :ptdnit die in vain
     ■    parted the car and walked towards the                 BleaSeQod, dan’t je t this happen again:w
                                                                fVith passing time the hurt will mend £
                                                                '* " % help from families and from friends
;t ^ .V; DM you wonaer at t                                           g o o d n ig h tto all Is what we say
       :'the/turrfsiyles?'                                      As SHANKLY welcomes you today
                                      antf^our dad; y                                           A. Percy si 989:
           WlfiBQ                         frtend                                          A FITTING TRIBUTE                   The great day.-has irrived          .-v...:... v
           an open gate?                                                                               Ag.0.1.3               Off they went my son and his friend
                                                                                                                              To watch Liverpool w ith pride
                                                                                     Wa!tan Community O&ro-p.
           And could you believe it when no-one                                                                               As 1 said ta.ra son, I said my prayer.
           stopped you and asked you for your t ickets?                                                                       Watch o v e rth im St. Anthony
                                                                                                                              And keep them in your care.
           Did you think “This is too good to be true”                                                                        As the day went by
           as you both made your way down to the                                                                              Little did 1 know, that I would cry.
           front of the terraces?                                                                                             Then ask, “ Lord why.”
                                                                                                                              At 3.35 I answered the phone,
           Did your heart soar as your team ran out                                                                           My daughter said, mum turn on the T.V.
'          onto the pitch?                      .- :;r      ■                                                                 There’s something wrong as you will see
                                                                 I, Sit alone thinking                                        There was fear in my heart
           But then were you frightened as you felt the          Of the love I have for you.                                  For the son who is always with me
           crush or did you’think “ This will ease off in        The baby you’ve left me,                                     The phone rings again, mum its me,
         • a minute?”      ~                     .               W ill always see me through.                                 I’ m a lrl§ h tf:f 11 be home around tea
                                                                /S lje ’s..so special,                                        Thank yoiJ: St. Anthony fo r answering my
           Did you feel safe in your dad’s arms;and              She’s so kind,                                                 - prayer
           think ‘xl;’lt be okay?” /             V,              In fact she’s just like you.                                 For t h i son that I love
                                                                 As the days go on,                                           Was kept in your care                  : .
           Did you think of me for one brief moment              The pain gets lighter,                                       The Liverpool flag in the heavens above
           before you lost conclbusness?                         But David, why you?           r : ''£                        Will fly with pride
                                                                 Our life was just right,                                     For the 95 fans who died
                                                                 it was like a star shining so bright.                         In our hearts they will always stay
                                                                 It had to end,                                                Remembered, in every w a f'
           Do you know how much you-gieant to us                'Put T a sk myself, David,   :                                 Watch over them lord
           and how dearly we all love and miss you?              W ill this pain ever mend?                                    And give them, in heaven above
                                                                 I love you.                                                   All our love,
                    Your Mum. xxxxxx (I love you)                Lesley.                                                       David’s nrium.::




               Hillsborough Helpline:                                                                051 '2£ ^ s 413/ 341 4
            Pullout




 YOUNG                Unscramble the letters below and find the
                      names of groups of fruits and vegetables.




INTERLINK
 PRIZE                The winner receives a prize. CHILDREN
                      ONLY!
                      Send to: Young Interlink, Hillsborough
                      Centre, 1 Anfield Road, Liverpool 4.
  QUIZ                Entries close - 21st May.
                                                                                                                                          »         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9



                                                                                                                                                                                                    W lV \6 t£ 0 0 N


                                                                                                                 London
                                                                                                                                                iTTitfCrHAM R )te $

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       i           6


                       s
                           C A tfM > £
                                                 £                                                     CrM 5 2 £ 5
                                                                                                                                                                                             6 AY£RN M UW 'CH




                      , m          S u K b e E ^ l:                                                        &
                      \ r T    \                      T H t 6 5 *^       *   /   A W i^ T T T ^ ^ V S ^ l.
                                                                                   WEM6LEV
                                       <:                                          M m t Y S iD E ir ^ ;^ ^                                                                                    ^ T z i^
                              O A A fA P \0^
                                                                                                                                                                               I V«J*0




                                                                                                                                                                                  F.C.
                          Kfl
I   \                                                                                                                                                                                                                      vtltLWAU.               a
                                                                                                                                                                              rr*’^ /-XL w**-*+>'»“»-U
                                                                                                                                                                               C>7V      7               ■»*T^


                                                                                            ~ ill-
                                                        s4
                                                                                           @ u

                                                                                               .*     ®                                                                                       LNEZP ool

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           **C A

                    M fc A N

                                               V                                                                                                                                                        6.
                                               ©
                                                                             ¥
                                                                                                                         T/vJdl§6F00
                      3

                                                 v /i^ g jg g ^
                                                                                             v ;s r
                                                                                                                               0                                      BS
                                                                                                 W    'W       o o lfc


                                                  fd                 'TMAn K

                                                                                                                                                    6

    Z o N S to fZ

          OGABSC
                                                                                  ....W    e 'l l      W EA£               YOUfc        SCAfcPS WITH             f=RiDE
                                                 m outh                                  ,N*        m e m o r y               of       -T h o s e   w ho      d ie o   ....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SC O TU ^
                        Find the names of 20 films in the word square:
u   N   T   0   U   C   H   A   B    L   E   S   P   L   H   S   T   U   N   G
L   J   S   K   E   X   I   F   G    N   I   C   N   A   D   Y   T   R   I   D
A   W   I   I   L   D   G   I   B    L   X   E   H   D   N   C   E   U   X   K
S   P   M   C   I   P   H   S   E    J   N   A   K   N   B   N   V   V   E   C       A Fish Called Wanda       Last Emperor
T   P   E   K   A   B   S   H   E    D   A   A   M   A   B   K   S   I   L   R       Beetlejuice               Nuts
                                                                                     Crocodile Dundee          Rain Man
E   E   H   B   M   0   P   C   W    K   D   N   M   C   E   I   A   C   G   0                                 Scandal
                                                                                     Dirty Dancing
M   X   T   0   K   E   I   A   E    I   T   L   U   S   N   R   N   E   A   C       Empire In The Sun         Twins
P   T   N   X   C   R   R   L   B    A   L   L   E   A   0   I   B   V   E   0       Fatal Attraction          Untouchables
                                                                                     Gorillas In The Mist      Vice Versa
E   0   I   E   A   F   I   L   E    L   0   L   S   R   R   C   P   E   N   D                                 Willow
                                                                                     High Spirits
R   R   S   R   L   F   T   E   L    T   B   R   0   I   Q   Y   K   R   0   I       January Man               Monster Squad
0   0   A   B   B   G   S   D   0.   U   S   N   I   W   T   K   M   S   R   L       Kick Box                  Predator
R   T   L   R   M   V   B   W   C    0   Y   C   M   F   H   V   0   A   I   E
U   A   L   E   F   A   T   A   L    A   T   T   R   A   C   T   I   0   N   D
R   D   I   A   0   W   E   N   E    G   L   E   E   R   0   T   I   A   R   U
G   E   R   N   R   F   M   D   A    U   Q   S   R   E   T   S   N   0   M   N
L   R   0   E   M   E   I   A   T    R   W   L       F   D   U   A   R   F   D      Clues can be found up, down, acress and
                                                 Q
                                                                                    diagonally and letters can overlap.
A   P   G   R   S   A   N   0   B    B   E   E   T   L   E   J   U   I   C   E
R   G   Z   E   G   Y   N   U   S    E   H   T   F   0   E   R   I   P   M   E      Word square devised by Tommy McDonagh




                                                                                      The first correct entry pulled out of the bag
                                                                                      receives a personal stereo, donated by a
                                                                                      raffle winner at the “ Evening Of Thanks.”

                                                                                      Closing Date: Monday 21st. May 1990.

                                                                                      Send entries to: Prize Quiz, Hillsborough
                                                                                      Interlink, Hillsborough Centre, 1 Anfield
                    *«■                                                               Road, Liverpool 4.




Mrs Liz Forsdick was the first woman             4. Name John Barnes’ former club and        7. Who was the leading scorer in the
to officiate in an FA Cup tie. Did she              the Division they are now in.               1986 World Cup?
achieve this distinction in
 a) 1981 b) 1985     c) 1986                     5. Who scored Liverpool’s two goals in      8. Who won the 1986 World Cup and
                                                    the 1983 Milk Cup Final and against         what was the score?
Name the two brothers playing for                   whom?
Liverpool and Everton.                                                                       9. Who scored Liverpool’s goals in the
                                                 6. In June 1986 England were beaten 2-1        1986 and 1989 FA Cup Finals?
In 1965 Liverpool won the FA Cup for                by Argentina in the 1A finals of the
the first time.    Who scored the                   World Cup. Why was the match so         10. Before Candy, who were Liverpool’s
winning goal, and what was the final                controversial?                              two other shirt sponsors?
score?
                                                                                                                       W e lost our loved one last year,
                                                                                                                       A football match cost us so dear.

                                                                                                                       But much in front will be very hard.

                                                                                                                       The Taylor Report was very fair,
                                                            There were bus loads and train loads          But those who caused us such distress
                                                            Some went by their own steam.                 I’ m sure will never be brought to trial.
                                                            But tl^y-had. onet|ilng in common      0 a    Police, A Football Club and then The Press,
                                                            To cheer their football tears.,            ' Among them many who just, Do Not Care,
                                                            th e re was goodwill and laughter,
                                                            With spirits running high,                           en, Hooligans, we hear them say, ;
                                                            Tjien there was disaster,                   cC5ame to cause trouble on that day.
                                                           >#thy oh Why?                                  Yet because we present a united front,      :
                                                            The crowds surged on the terraces             We will be strong, no matter what they say.
                                                           iv ith o u t a single care,                    Because we know it didn’t happen that way.
                                                            But what they didn’t realise,
                                                            There was no room to spare,                   The evidence is there for all to see,
                                                            in their excitement, forward they rushed.        everything’s filmed at matches these days.
  He died at springtime
  When I could see the cherry and apple                     Not knowing how the fans at the front were :;;S;0 we can see, they didn’t act the correct
                                                             crushed.                                                   ■: way,
   blossom                                                                                                             Now they can't handle the truth, like men
  From my window                                                     lams of panic filled the air,
                                                                  , a ghastly scene,                                   So they blame those who cannot speak f o r :
  When the season showed such promise                                                                                    themselves.
  And life lay all before him                              There were so many people dead.
                                                           Where so much life had been.
                                                           Now families are morning,                                   Those guilty ones will never pay,
                                                           The ones they loved so dear.                         ;;     Though the sights they saw that day,
: And though i want to wake him                                                                                 :      Must affect even them, in some way.
  He lies there silent                       ':            Grim faces filled with sorrow,
                                                           Too shocked to shed a tear.                                 And surely if they’re found as guilty as it’s
  Unable to respond                                                                                             ;■       been proved,
  A sword has pierced my soul                              We take life so for granted.
                                                           Don’t stop to count the cost.                               Then they'll have to live with that too.                    '.I■'
  And alone among the mothers                                                                                                                                                 )■     -
  1 grieve while others                     ,,             Then there comes tragedy,
                                                           And we find out what we’ve lost.                       ; ; April this year will be with us soon,
  Make plans fo r j^ a s u re s and holidays ;                                                                  '     Twelve months have gone, we know not
  I mafetny p;H§rirrage                                    If only we could turn the clock
                                                           And wipe out our mistakes.                                     where.      ;.                         iS lt
  To visit his grave                                                                                                   \Next to :the Shankly Gates a Memorial will
  The pain w on’t leave my heart                           But life is not that easy,
  Who can e l$ e myisorrow?                       /        F o ritg iv e s aftd alaS;|&Rfe, ;
                                                                                                                        It will be built, it will be theirs.
  How will I face tomorrow                                                                                             ;For ustbISee d ty fa s te r Day.-:
  Without my lovely'son?                          :                                                                              Memorial to those far away...            ?

                                                                                                                                                     ...E.C.M....17.3,90...
J%#r Last .Respects
 ■ The Heartache
: The Anguish ...
  The Suffering, the Pain,                                         The/Tragedy of
 ■'A tragedy like ttjis.
  Should never I

  Innocent people, -                                       The tragedy of-Hillsborough.
  Alt died in despair,
  All getting crushed,    s       ,    v .        .;
                                                           Is quiteibeyond belief.
                                                           A day that start                                                         % Pfem p i
  And gasping for air.    *             x -'-‘             Became a day of

  Its hard, so hard to fight back the tears,                                                  y went th a tla y .                                                 mams
  To get over this will take years a ft# y e f© ,          In tfi©lr;tftfe!us3 nds'th'eyVleft the city,
  Those peoples faces, are stuck Ifl 'my mind,             “ Here we go, here we go” they sang,                         Phil he was a i
  Like a terrible nightmare of theSvorst ;klf»tfc          Chanting their favourite ditty.                              Sharing laughs all the time
                                                                                                                     ■" Giving advice, showing me through
  Grief and sorrow,           :                            Six minutes’ play was all they saw,                       ; Always telling me the right
  We all will share,                                                                                                   Thing to do
  Trying to help and showing we c a f e , v                Not enough room fo r all the fans,
  For football that day,                  a-               Creating a frightening crush.                              W e’d took back on memories
  It was a terrible shock,              -/f            J                                                              And:remember old times
  If only now we could turn back the clogfe-               Perimeter fences held them back                            All of the m ischief  "
                                                           And stopped them getting but.                               All of the crfmes     v    .     ,    .        .
  The children, their families, all died in vein,          And agonising-eall's were heard,                            Innocent faces not taking the blame
  Oh God! Oh Goaf It must never happen ■                   “ God help us, get us out.”                                 All the excuses, it was only .a;,gatae •:
    again.
                                                           They tried to help each other.                              Playing in the road with all the gang
  We’re all now in mourning and asking                     And quite a. tot survived,  ;                               Hide and seek, every day every week
    ourselves Why?                                         But this was a major tragedy,                               We all had our arguements
  Our hearts all broken,                                   And 95 fans died.                                           W e’d all take our sides
  All we can do is cry,                                                                                                Calling the names, you little snides
  Who is to blame,                                         th e famous Reds of Liverpool,                       ,;f
  For this horror, this rage,                              Have an anthem all their own,                       |g Soon back together
  For those poor poor people who died in a                 And through the tragedy, they know,                         Not f “ -~
    cage.                                  i               T h e y’ll Never Walk Alone.’                               All having a Is

  Let us now pray to God,                         ‘        Why does it take a tragedy
  For their fam ilies at home,                             To bring fans close together?                               Phil showed me a lot, he was so kind ;
  For in his care,                                         Let’s hope the bond that’s now been forged,                 Between me and him was a special bind
                                                           W ill never, ever, sever.                                   Sharing our secrets, and our dreams too
                                                                                                                       ‘Phil’ alwa|S remembered that,
                                      Sue Rowlands                          '                      Joan Savill         I’ll neve
                   HILLSBOROUGH
                      HELPLINE                                                                           Surviving
                            A 24 hour telephone helpline

                                                                                                         Together

         0512 2 5            3 4 1 3          o     r 0512 2 5            3 4 1 4
Help is just a phone call away                      come through their good offices and some
                                                    release staff as volunteers during work-time
                                                                                                               THE
Hillsborough H elp lin e is a 24 hour
telephone helpline set up to offer advice
and support to anyone affected by the
                                                    as well.’ Volunteers come from all walks of
                                                    life and age groups; some live just around
                                                    the corner, others - like the lady who comes
                                                                                                             HARDEST
Hillsborough tragedy. How does it work?
Who runs it? What kind of people are on the
other end of the telephone? Deirdre M or ley
                                                    from Runcorn to cover Saturday mornings
                                                    -are from further afield. What they all share
                                                    in common is a commitment to the Helpline
                                                                                                              STEP
explains.                                           and its callers. ‘You find yourself reading
                                                                                                      After Hillsborough people told me I should
                                                    all the bits in the newspapers, watching all
                                                                                                      talk to a counsellor. What good will that do
In a bright, comfortable room to the north of       the television programmes - anything to do
                                                                                                      I thought, it wasn’t going to bring back 95
Liverpool city centre, Stella sits at a desk by     with Hillsborough,’ says Stella. ‘I’ll carry on
                                                                                                      lives and I didn’t see how anything could
a ‘phone, ready and waiting in case anyone          doing it till whenever.        I hope to do
                                                                                                      take away that pain.      Hillsborough was
rings and wants to talk. She is one of a            something on Easter Sunday,’ she added.
                                                                                                      public knowledge but the feelings I had
team of volunteers, all trained and
                                                                                                      were very personal, I’d always tried to solve
experienced, who run the Hillsborough               But caring isn’t enough. Volunteers must
                                                                                                      my own problems, I wasn’t sure I could
Helpline, round the clock, seven days ■ and         have had training and experience of
                                                                                                      share those feelings with a total stranger
nights - a week. Her philosophy is simple:          counselling.     And the Helpline likes to
                                                                                                      -least of all with some arty farty busy body
‘Whenever the’ phone goes you’ve got to be          encourage volunteers to take further              social worker.
there - you never know when something like          tra in in g asw ell.     Eleano r explain s:
this could just hit somebody and they need          ‘Telephone counselling is not the same as         Months after the disaster a relative drove
to have someone to talk to.’                        talking face to face with someone, and you        me to the Hillsborough centre, I wouldn’t
                                                    have to know the difference. I used to work       get out of the car I was too frightened, the
No problem is too small, or too big for Stella      with the Walton Hospital Relative Support         thought of talking about Hillsborough made
and her colleagues to listen and help with.         Group, where you meet people in person.           me fee! sick; What was I supposed to say?
Some callers ring up for information - the          Making the transition to the telephone was        Where was I going to start? I felt confused,
address of the Hillsborough Centre, for             difficult - but now I prefer it.’                 Hillsborough was like a hundred different
example, or where to send money. Some
                                                                                                      nightmares at the same time.
people have material problems or need               Volunteers are sure of a good welcome at
specific support and advice. Others are             the Helpline. ‘It’s very friendly here,’ says     One of the suspected arty farty busy body
upset and want to talk about the way they           Stella, and you can’t help feeling a lot of       social workers came out to the car to my
feel.                                               that is due to Eleanor’s warm personality.        surprise he was a normal human being (Well
                                                    Her organisational skills play an important       almost, he was an Evertonian.) He asked me
Sometimes it’s easier on the ‘phone,’ says          part too. There is a regular rota, based on a     if I was at Hillsborough, I said “Yes, I was in
Stella. ‘You don’t have to give your name or        standard four hour shift, that has to be filled   Leppings Lane but I don’t really know what
even meet. You can pour your heart out to a         without fail and switched at short notice if      to say. “The guy made me feel at ease, we
stranger and still keep your anonymity if           someone is suddenly unable to cover.              talked for a while and then I continued to go
you want to.’                                       Eleanor manages it all with an infectious         to the Hillsborough centre. I’m not clever
                                                    smile and consistant good humour.                 enough to describe how or why counselling
The Hillsborough Helpline was set up                                                                  helped me to come to term s with
immediately after the disaster last April and       But there are darker moments and she is the       Hillsborough, I just know that it did. It
run by L iv e rp o o l S o c ia l S e r v ic e s    first to admit there are times when you feel      didn’t make me forget how 95 supporters
department, close to their city centre              you are failing callers.      She told me:        died I wouldn’t want to forget them, but it
headquarters in Hatton Garden.            They      ‘Recently, on a couple of night calls people      helped me cope with strong feelings that
always intended that the local voluntary            have been very distressed. Nothing I said         otherwise would have continued to intrude
sector should eventually take over the              seemed to help - they’d already tried my          and wreck my life.          Talking to other
Helpline, given financial and other support         suggestions and they didn’t work. Then,           survivors also helped, I realised I wasn’t on
■and last October they did. At the same time        suddenly I hear them saying “Thank you            my own and I wasn’t going mad. The
the Helpline moved to more suitable                 very much - you don’t know how much you           Hillsborough centre helped me turn
premises in the grounds of Walton Hospital.         have helped me.”                                  disaster into opportunity.
Hillsborough Helpline is now managed by             One person said to me, “ If I could reach         Every week new people come into the
Liverpool Council for Voluntary Service,            down the ’phone now I’d give you a big            Hillsborough centre, survivors or not, when
Eleanor Grundy is the Co-ordinator.            A    hug.” That’s lovely - though you don’t know       they’re asked can we help you nearly
volunteer on Helpline from the start, she           what you could have possibly done to              everyone replies “ I don’t really know.” They
had her own reasons for wanting very much           deserve it!                                       soon find that other people can help and
to run it: ‘Through my own personal loss of
                                                                                                      that they’re not alone.       If you are still
my brother some time ago, I knew the need           The Helpline is on 051-225 3413 or 051-225        suffering because of Hillsborough please
for someone you can ring up and say - “ I           3414. Out of office hours your call will be       do yourself a favour and talk to someone at
feel like hell” ■ and they’ll just listen. And it   diverted to the duty volunteer. After 2-3 ring    the centre, people there are sound and
won’t be “official” in any way.’                    tones you will hear 8-9 seconds silence           down to earth. One thing I’ve heard every
                                                    w h e n you th in k you h ave b een               other survivor admit is that asking for help
Eleanor’s first task was to put together a          disconnected, but your call is simply being       was the hardest but best step they’ve made
team of volunteers.     A difficult task?           transferred and will be answered.                 since April 15, 1989.
‘People thought it would be but it wasn’t!’
Eleanor told me. ‘Other voluntary agencies           Helpline will be operational until at least
wanted to be involved. Volunteers have               April of next year.
                               THE SURVIVORS GROUP
      FEAR
      Now that death has intruded into our lives. W e no longer             crying or shouting. You don’t have to hide your grief or hold
      take our life for granted. What if it happens to me next              back from expressing how you really feel.
      time? Is my life safe? Am I safe in this society? Also, a fear
      that the psychological damage I have suffered may never               GUILT
      fully repair itself. Am I in someway mentally scarred? Do I           When the going got tough why did I look after No. 1 and
      need to see a psychiatrist? Are people looking at me and              save my own skin? Couldn’t I have panicked less and used
      thinking “ He’s cracked up?”                                          my head to save others? Maybe I’m a coward. Why didn’t I
                                                                            rally around raising all kinds of money after Hillsborough?
      Fear when alone in bed, I’m on my own like I was in the               If I had got into the ground a little earlier, maybe I wouldn’t
      Leppings Lane. Who will hear me if I cry for help? What will          have added to the fatal crush that killed 95. Why should I
      tonights nightmares have in store for me?                             live when a 10 year old kid died?

      By attending the Survivors Group I was able to share my               The group helped me to realise that everybody was guilty
      fears and gain relief as I realised others had the same fears         and it is pointless persecuting yourself with it. What I need
      and I was not alone in this mess. Everybody in the group              to do is make events of Hillsborough make me a better
      was afraid no matter how old, wise or tough. Nobody                   person.
      thought I was cracking up but shared my worries and fear. I
      was able to drop my brave face and reveal my fears and                ANGER
      hopes.                                                                I can’t scream at the South Yorkshire Police in the middle of
                                                                            the street but I can in the group. I can get some of this
      HELPLESSNESS                                                          anger out of me in the group rather than let it build and build
      W hy did I stand and gaze as people died? Why was I so                at home and then explode at the slightest thing. Anger also
      helpless then and why am I so helpless now? When will I               at the press who dragged us through the mud, who kicked
      regain control of my mind and why can’t I fight it?                   us when we were down, and anger at myself for not being
                                                                            able to prevent the Police, Government, Press etc., from
      The group again showed me that I was not alone in feeling             making these disgraceful distasteful remarks.
      helpless and can take positive steps to help myself now by
      coming to terms with the tragedy and looking to the future            HOPE
      with some hope.                                                       The group in itself instills hope as week by week you can
                                                                            see people progress from virtual zombies who cannot grasp
      GRIEF                                                                 what is happening about them to self-confident, aware,
      The group gives you the chance to express your grief,                 expressional people who can finally see the light, the way
      nobody will be at all surprised if you suddenly break-down            out of this mess.
                                                                                                                                      PAUL



THE CARNIVAL IS OVER
“Gorreny spares?”                                tickets as a sympathetic gesture. Result?           treatment; and we provide a handsome
                                                 Some desparate touts, some bigwigs, but             wage for many of our football heroes in the
That will be the cry from both sets of fans      plenty of genuine support from those who            top bracket. The match itself of course is
when the FA Cup draws near, and yet more         had shared mutual friendships through the           the life-blood and the reason for hours of
loyal supporters will fall by the wayside in     aftermath of the Hillsborough tragedy. It           discomfort and weeks of saving up.
the hunt for the most elusive and exclusive      was the people’s Final.                             Frankly, outside of the action itself, and all
bits of paper in football.                                                                           the experiences that make football so
                                                 But why should this policy be confined to
                                                                                                     important to us, there is no reward.
                                                 1989? The Tradings Standard Authority
Lucky fans by grace or design, or sheer
                                                 proved in 1988 in a special survey at the
good fortune, will lay their hands on tickets,                                                       It took a major tragedy for the distribution
                                                 Liverpool v Wimbledon Final, that floating
wouldn’t dream of parting with them, but                                                             of FA Cup Final tickets to be handled in a
                                                 tickets will travel to all corners of the globe
there are those who are looking for                                                                  more legitimate way. Now the 1990 Final
                                                 and elude the pockets of genuine suppor­
something in return. Not for them the proud                                                          beckons and for the two clubs involved,
                                                 ters. The big day is reserved for the chosen
walk down Wembley Way in club colours:                                                               things seem to be getting back to ‘normal’.
                                                 few: some regular fans who hold season
the ticket touts who hang like an albatross                                                          Voices raised in anger on behalf of the
                                                 tickets; a small minority of those who pay in
around the necks of soccer officialdom are                                                           humble supporters (who only keep the
                                                 each week and find success through an
looking for a financial killing on the game’s                                                        game alive) are falling on the legendary deaf
                                                 inadequate voucher system; the so-called
greatest showpiece.       Through channels                                                           ears.
                                                 deserving servants of every club from
best known to themselves they defy the
                                                 Land’s End to John o Groats who, in most
paltry laws on ticket distribution laid down                                                         A lot of hot air and banging of fists
                                                 cases, care not who wins or who takes part;
by the FA, and set out to buy the dreams of                                                          accompanied the Taylor Report in which
                                                 and the various business big-wigs who
the desperate supporter who they know will                                                           certain bodies were criticised for their
                                                 surface from their anonymous grey suits
pay over the odds.                                                                                   treatment of football fans. This applies not
                                                 once a year to see if football is still alive and
                                                                                                     only to those who physically patrol grounds
                                                 well, and claim their right to be there when
For those left out of the cake-cutting                                                               but those responsible for the allocation of
                                                 they find it is. Others have to use their
ceremony the excuses that filter through                                                             tickets and the safety of venues which we
                                                 initiative or find a tout prepared to sell for
are as hackneyed as the day is long. The         less than a king’s ransom. For them, collec­        attend.
allocation to each Finalist is an indication     ting tickets is an annual source of income.
of the ‘high regard’ the game holds for the                                                          For God’s sake, give us a fair deal on all
average supporter.        The policies of        Fans can scream and rant and rave as much           counts, and turn a sympathetic gesture into
distribution around the country are enough       as their tired throats will allow. We have to       a permanent pojicy. Put your money where
to make the regulars give up the search          accept that we are the 2nd class citizens of        your mouth is arid admit that the supporters
altogether. The truth is, as long as feet are    this football business - at the moment. Most        just may be an important part of football.
on terraces and backsides on seats               of us show up every week in all weathers;           W e can be trusted, with enough tickets,
throughout the season, it matters not that       we pay travel firms thousands of pounds a           with fair treatment, with guaranteed safety,
those same fans are treated like exiles          season to visit grounds around the country;         and without steel cages. It’s a game that
when the carnival arrives.                       we get wet, cold, tired and taken for granted       people have died for, and many of us live
                                                 when we do put our valuable frames                  for, so don’t treat us as though you can live
Last season, Liverpool and Everton were          through the turnstiles; we put up with sub­         without us       because you can’t!
given the major allocation of FA Cup Final       standard co n d ition s and sub-human                                       TRIGIA LONGHORN.
                                                  (para 189) Taylor actually states:-                depends on the circumstances. It would
                                                                                                     seem then that the police insurers have
              A Mothers                               “ In making this recommendation I
                                                      am merely indicating a maximum
                                                                                                     done their calculations and realised that
                                                                                                     their generous offer of 100% payout before
               Message                                height should perimeter fencing                Christmas wouldn’t cost them much, as so
                                                      be used. I do not suggest there                many of our loved ones who died were
                                                      must be such fencing or indeed                 children and young people w ith o ut
As a member of the Hillsborough Family                any fencing. Those who presently               dependants.
Support Group I have been attending their             have no perimeter fencing may
meetings as often as possible. Apart from             well think it is safe to continue              No amount of compensation will bring back
finding out any information it gives us an            that way.      Others may emulate              those we loved so dearly but if the insurers
opportunity to meet up with some of the               them.     Still more may consider              were made to pay out large sums of money,
other bereaved families and a chance to               that they can dispense with                    then they in turn would bring pressure on
talk, and talk is something we all need to do,        fencing or bring it down to a lower            those concerned to tighten up their safety
we talk about those we loved and lost, we             level....etc.”                                 requirements.
talk about the day it happened, we talk
about those we believe were to blame for          It goes without saying that the family group      I'm sure the other families would want me
the tragedy and we talk about what we can         feel THE FENCES MUST COME DOWN                    to take this opportunity to thank the many
do to change things for the future.               NOW.                                              thousands of people from all over the world
                                                                                                    who helped in the aftermath of the disaster
A group of family members including               Some time before Christmas a lot of               in so many ways. Not only in their generous
myself travelled to London in November to         publicity was given to the fact that the          contributions to the fund but in their many
talk to M.P.’s regarding safety at football       police were paying out 100% (non-liability)       letters of kindnes?, their offers of help and
stadiums. Members of the committee had a          compensation. Figures were bandied about          support, their sympathy cards and Mass
further meeting with M.P.’s in March and          in some newspapers along the lines of             cards, their prayers and so many beautiful
discussed a number of issues such as the          ‘£50,000 would be paid out for each of those      poems.      A lot of love, kindness and
implementation of the Taylor Report, in           who died,’ one newspaper ran the story            friendship was shown at that time - let’s
particular (a) When will the proposed             along with photographs of Mr. & Mrs. Hicks’       hope it will always remain.
Football Licensing Authority begin? (b) The       two daughters implying therefore that they
Safety of Sports Ground Act (c) A review of       would receive £100,000 when in reality Mr. &      But most importantly of all let us never
the ‘Green Guide’ to start immediately and        M rs.    H ic k s w ill  re c e iv e £ 3 ,5 0 0   forget the 95 men, women and children who
(d) The requirement still for the perimeter       compensation for the death of their two           died that dreadful day at Hillsborough - just
fencing to come down, I quote from the            lovely girls. The law is that anyone under        there to watch a game of football - and
committee’s agenda ‘ It is a common               the age of 18, their family receives £3,500,      those who remain in hospital are always in
misconception that Taylor recommends the          anyone over 18 without dependants, their          our thoughts.
retention of the perimeter fencing of             families receive nothing and those over 18
2.2mtrs height. In the body of the report         w ith dependants their compensation                                                Janet Spearritt



                              SAFETY — The state of play
On the first pages of the match programme        ordinary football supporters have been             seen disaster being courted on several
from last year’s semi-final at Hillsborough,     herded like animals from buses and trains          occasions.    On the opening day of the
Sheffield Wednesday Chairman Mr H.E.             into cramped, squalid cages with little            current season, poor organisation over
McGee commented, “As you look around             regard for their comfort and safety. Even to       ticket sales to Everton supporters and
Hillsborough you will appreciate why it has      perform the most human function is a               inadequate turnstiles to visitors’ sections at
been regarded for so long as the perfect         degrading experience: there’s the paddle           Coventry led to severe problems outside the
venue for all kinds of important matches.”       into a filthy inadequate toilet and the added      ground. More recently at Middleborough,
His comments were printed over the               problem for women of finding a toilet at all.      several Leeds United supporters received
background of a photograph of the                Cleaning o n e’s hands afterw ards is              hospital treatment after they were crushed
Leppings Lane terrace.                           generally a case of spit and rub. Catering, if     against perimeter fences on an over­
                                                 any can be found or afforded, offers, in           crowded terrace.
Our thoughts are now with the families of        addition to sock water tea and house brick
the 95 whose precious lives were lost, and       pies, varities of food poisoning which would       Television coverage of matches has also
with those still seriously injured when this     shock Edwina Curry!                                revealed that gates in perimeter fences have
“ perfect venue” proved to be nothing more                                                          been closed during play, against Justice
than a death trap.                               In contrast, those facilities experienced by       Taylor’s recommendations. The report is
                                                 the likes of Mr McGee and the officialdom          the ninth covering football crowd safety and
Yet the omens of Hillsborough were there         of the game may well lead to talk of “ perfect     control since 1923. Others have been in
for all to see; in fact it’s a miracle that it   venues” .    For these people, executive           response to deaths at Bolton in 1946, Ibrox
hasn’t happened before and on many               boxes, private bars, restaurants and               (1971) and Bradford (1985). In the light of
occasions. When the venue of last April’s        separate entrances remove them to a                the recommendations made following these
repeat semi-final against Notts Forest was       different planet from those whose first love       tragedies it is perhaps surprising that Hills­
chosen by the FA despite objections from         is to watch their team, and do so in great         borough happened at all.
Liverpool FC, many fans who had                  discomfort.
experienced discomfort at the previous                                                               The fact is, past recommendations on
year’s corresponding fixture were amazed.        Looking back to the week following                  crowd safety have been largely ignored in
Similar problems had been experienced in         Hillsborough many newspaper headlines               view of the authorities’ preoccupation with
the past, notably 1981 and 1987 when             echoed, “This must never happen again.”             hooliganism and crowd control.            Indeed
Wolves and Leeds supporters respectively,        Indeed if it did, then the lessons of that          many of the measures implemented to
were allocated the Leppings Lane section.        awful day have not been learned and those           combat hooliganism, the erection of
                                                 who died will have done so in vain.                 perimeter and radial fences, were major
It would seem however that those in                                                                  factors contributing to the deaths of so
authority who labelled the 1988 event a          However despite an extensive inquiry into           many at Hillsborough, when these fences
success, consider only a heavy loss of life      the tragedy by Lord Justice Taylor and his          prevented th eir escaping the crush.
to be any reason to question their own           catalogue of recommendations to improve             F o o tb a ll s u p p o rte rs are s e e m in g ly
lamentable complacency.       For years,         safety at sports grounds, we have already           considered to be a fringe nuisance tolerated




    Hillsborough Helpline: 051-225 3413/3414
                                                                                                    24 Hours A Day
only for the money        they pay at the        overcrowding when ample space exists on               stands and terraces. In any emergency,
turnstiles, with their    safety given low       boths sides.                                          overcrowding, fire, terrorist action or hoax,
priority.                                                                                              it would need only one person to stumble to
                                                 P ro b a b ly th e m ost p u b lic is e d and         cause a major accident.
                                                 controversial of Lord Justice Taylor’s
                                                 recommendations is the introduction of all-           If future crowd safety is to be ensured, this
The organisation surrounding this year’s FA      seater stadiums and the consequent                    problem needs to be tackled urgently. Is it
Cup semi-finals is yet another example of        demise of cheap, standing accommodation.              not reasonable to suggest a vision where
the ignorance which pervaded football’s          The theory behind this move is that whilst            the entire, or at least the majority of the
ruling bodies, and their distance from the       seated, fans are less likely to misbehave.            back of terraces and stands form wide,
paying customer. In this instance, kick-off
                                                                                                       easily accessible entrances and exits on
were manipulated to fit in with the              Many supporters throughout the country                which over-crowding is avoided.
schedules of television companies whose          are a la rm e d h o w e v e r th a t if th is
money is apparently considered paramount         recommendation is fully implemented, the
to crowd safety.                                 resulting increase in admission prices,               To make structural alteration to grounds of
                                                 probably double the terrace charge, will bar          course would involve a great deal of
                                                 them from continuing to watch football.               planning. In his report, Taylor suggests that
While fans of Oldham and Man United have                                                               an Advisory Design Council should be set
                                                 Certainly they will not be able to afford to
a short trip to Maine Road, Manchester, the      take along the family which is the sort of            up by the FA and Football league to offer
Liverpool and Crystal Palace faithful face       participation the game needs in its fight             ‘expert’ advice for the conversion of
frustration and inevitable delays on the         against less desirable elements.         The          grounds, particulary regarding seating. One
congested motorways and Sunday train             inevitable reductions in general capacity             has to question whether those bodies, so
services in their race to reach Villa Park,      will also exclude large numbers of genuine            totally removed from the needs of ordinary
Birmingham by 12 o’clock. Common sense           supporters if seating becomes the norm but            fans, can offer any expertise in this area.
would suggest that it was the Villa Park         without the extensions and ground building
which should have kicked off at 3.30 in          programmes.                                           To promote ground safety in the future, it is
order to allow ample time from Liverpool                                                               vital that the game’s ruling bodies and the
and London.                                                                                            police, radically change their attitude
                                                 Certainly the hooligan is not deterred by
                                                 cost as is displayed by England’s unruly              towards football supporters, and to involve
                                                 element. Further, experiments with seated             us in the decision making process.
Many of us at time of press have great
concern regarding these arrangements and         accommodation have shown that the seats
                                                 themselves have provided weaponry to                  The ball is firmly in their court.      If the
their potential consequences. In making                                                                lessons of Hillsborough are ignored as were
such arrangements the authorities tended         thugs in the past: witness Coventry’s
                                                 experience in the early 80’s and the Millwall         the inquiries into the cases of Ibrox, Bolton
to rely upon luck rather than sound                                                                    and Bradford before, then the next major
judgement to avert tragedy, but if safety is     invasion at Luton a few short years ago.
                                                                                                       tragedy is only a matter of time in the
to be the key issue, lives cannot be trusted                                                           future; the only question will be where, who
to luck alone.                                   M ost im p ortan tly, seating does not
                                                                                                       and how many?
                                                 necessarily provide safe accommodation to
                                                 spectators, especially if an emergency
In his final report on last April’s disaster,    demands their rapid evacuation.          At           Safety is not an issue which can be fully
Lord Justice Taylor recognised the poor          Bradford in May 1985, rows of seats                   covered in an article such as this. There
leadership within football, and encouraged       constituted a barrier to fans panicking to            needs to be extensive debate in which every
consultation with ordinary spectators.           escape the pursuing flames, many of whom              sports fan should be involved, and pressure
Perhaps predictably the FA idea of                                                                     put on those who run our game from oak
                                                 tripped and fell whilst climbing over fixed
consultation is to inform fans by press          seating. Certainly it should be possible to           panelled boardrooms to listen to our needs.
statements of decisions already made             provide safe standing areas at grounds if             Our money is vital to the running of the
which radically affect their enjoyment of the    limits on capacity and careful monitoring             game and it’s now time for he who pays the
game.                                            and policing are observed.                            piper to call the tune.

In not urging the closer involvement of          Looking abroad, many past tragedies have              We aim to address safety again in future
ordinary football supporters in the running      occurred either in seated areas or in all-            issues of ‘interlink’ and would value readers
of the game, Taylor has missed a golden          seater stadiums when emergencies of all               comments on this and other issues.
opportunity to return the game to those who      types have led to the death of fans
matter, those who pay with their money at                                                              KEITH MARTIN
                                                 attempting to escape through inadequate
the turnstiles and those who paid with their     exit staircases after a panic. In 1988, 71
lives. After all it is we who experience the     died in Katmandu when fans stampeded
worst aspects of our antiquated stadiums                                                               LIVERPOOL TEARS
                                                 through an exit because of a hail storm and
and therefore can give the necessary             69 died when fans leaving a UEFA Cup                  Old men, young men,
guidance to ensure future safety.                match in Moscow fell in exits.                        Deep ruts their footsteps made,
                                                                                                       The victor and the loser came by here,
It was also most surprising that Taylor did
                                                 The full catalogue of previous sporting               Red scarves, blue scarves,
not advocate the total removal of both
                                                 disasters reveals that the vast majority of           Flags flying in the breeze,
perimeter and radial fences at our sports
                                                 fatalities and injuries have occurred as              See the people mourning,
grounds. There is no doubt that had those
                                                 spectators were either entering or leaving            In their thousands standing here,
fans trapped in the centre pens at
                                                 the stadium. Whether they were sitting or             They died, was it justified,
Hillsborough been able to escape to the
                                                 standing whilst inside has generally been             To see our Liverpool tears.
pitch and to the sides, many lives would
have been saved. Instead Taylor’s report         quite irrelevant.                                     Sad eyes, child cries,
advocates only the lowering of perimeter                                                               Sleep evades through the night,
fences to 2.2 metres (7ft 2.2ins) which still    When we reflect on Hillsborough we will               Many broken hearts pass by here,
represents a considerable barrier to anyone      also remember that the only exit from the             Who said, they can,
trying to escape any type of emergency.          central pens was through the narrow tunnel            When they saw the young man,
One can only shudder at the idea of what         which was also the only entrance, and                 Torture on a face of pain and fear,
would have happened at Bradford for              through which thousands of Liverpool fans             And the crowd at the back,
instance, when fire raged through the            surged before kick-off. Rapid escape was              Didn’t see our Liverpool tears.
stand, if there had been perimeter fences to     th e re fo r e im p o s s ib le . T ra g e d y w as
prevent escape.                                  therefore compounded by the surrounding               Fathers and brothers,
                                                 fences with their ridiculously low gates.             Sisters all so innocent,
                                                                                                       Couldn’t draw breath, and so full of fear,
No mention was given in the report to the
                                                 Yet Taylor does not consider the question             The policemen, the groundsmen,
radial fencing, which at Hillsborough, only
                                                 of main entrances and exits to both stands            Everyone who gave a hand,
served to trap in the fatal crush and divide
them from safety and life. Apart from giving     and terraces where the major bottlenecks              Don’t raise the dust, when you pass here,
                                                 occur at nearly every ground, every week.             For now they’re sleeping,
business to steel contractors, there is little
                                                 Winding stairs, tunnels, narrow passages              And in our keeping,
practical use in these fences which divide
                                                 and tight gates in the corners of stadiums            Will be our Liverpool tears.
stadiums into pens, particularly in visitors’
sections, and often lead to localised            seem to be the typical routes to and from                                       Marilynne Harrison.
                                                                                                              HILLSBOROUGH
       CHESHIRE &
    MIDLANDS REGION                                  LINKLINES                                               YOUNG PEOPLE’S
Notice to the bereaved, survivors, their
                                                                                                                 ACTIVITY DAY
families and friends. By popular request a                                                             Thursday April 19th 1990 at Runcorn
further meeting has been arranged for                                                                  (C a s tle fie ld s ) Co u nty Y o u th C e ntre,
Thursday 3rd May 7.30 - 10pm.                                                                          Kingshead Close, Castlefields, Runcorn.

As before we will get together informally, at                                                          Starts with a service at 11am for all ages
K ilrie C h ild re n ’ s H o m e, K n u ts fo rd ,                                                     followed by arts & crafts, drama, face
Cheshire. Refreshments are provided.                                                                   painting, writing, making a banner, a
                                                                                                       Hillsborough garden, football, netball.
Mutual support is always available, all are
welcome.                                                                                               Meet and share experiences with others.

For directions       &   further    information
contact:

Paul Barnard - 051-263 5366
Edna Murray - 0782 336776



    EVENING OF THANKS
  On Saturday March 17th, there was a social
  ‘Evening of Thanks’ at the trophy room
  Liverpool FC, for the staff at both the Royal
  H a lla m s h ire and N o rth e rn G e n e ra l
  Hospitals.       Over 170 people attended,
  including 50 guests from Sheffield and
  former Liverpool player Craig Johnston who
  spoke to many of the bereaved, the                                          wwMi
  survivors, and their families, some of whom
  he had last seen immediately after the
  tragedy.

  During the evening, two plaques were
  presented to representatives of the
  hospitals whose staff did so much for so
  many of us last April.
                                                                                                      ill
  Our heartfelt thanks go to all those involved
  and we hope that everyone who attended
  enjoyed their evening. Special thanks also
  to J. Banks and Son, General Engravers &
  Trophy Specialists, of Aintree, Liverpool for
  donating the plaques.                                     Two nurses from Royal Hallamshire accept our Thanks as did the sta ff of
                                                                                    the Northern General



       HILLSBOROUGH                                  Good home wanted for a very friendly black
                                                     cat, approximately 3 years old. Would make
       HEART APPEAL                                  an ideal pet for a caring family.

Walton Hospital League of Friends and The            Please contact the Hillsborough Centre
Liverpool Weekly Star are trying to raise            -051-263 5366.
£90,000 for a new coronary heart unit,
named The Hillsborough Heart Unit, in
memory of those who died in the disaster.
                                                                                                       A group of survivors and their friends play
Please give generously so the target can be
reached quickly. Donations can be made at
                                                     CAN YOU HELP?                                     5-a-side indoor football every week.
any National Westminster Bank, Account               I am trying to trace, on behalf of “Terry” , 3
                                                                                                       Anyone else who would like to join us would
Number 98089811, Sort Code 60-22-24.                 young men to whom he gave a lift to
                                                                                                       be most welcome. No cost involved. No
                                                     Hillsborough on the 15th April. The lads,
Alternatively, send a cheque or postal order         aged approximately 18 or 19 years, were           regular commitment required.        Only a
                                                                                                       friendly competition.   We meet at the
made payable to the Hillsborough Heart               thumbing a lift at the junction of the M62
A p p eal to, The M a n a g e r, N a tio n a l       motorway when Terry and his son gave              Hillsborough Centre, Anfield Road, before
                                                                                                       10am Thursday mornings.
Westminster Bank pic, 205 County Road,               them a lift in his new Red Bedford Midi van.
Walton, Liverpool, L4 5PF. Any queries can           Terry would like very much to contact any of
                                                                                                       For more information contact Peter Carney
be a d d re s s e d to T in a F a irc lo u g h ,     thes young men.
Chairwoman, Walton Hospital League of                                                                  at the centre most Tuesday lunch times or
Friends, W alton Hospital, Rice Lane,                                                                  Adrian Anwyl social worker, tel: 051-263
                                                     If you think you can help please contact Jan
Walton, Liverpool 4, or you can ring the             Crawley at The Hillsborough Centre on             5366.
Weekly Star on 051 -236 4422.                        051-263 5366.




    Hillsborough Helpline: 051-225 3413/3414
         EASTER DAY 1990


                     f
         THE FIRST
   ANNIVERSARY
                    OP
 HILLSBOROUGH



Sunday, April 15th 1990 at 2.45 p.m. at Anfield
W e all sta n d as the M erseyside Church Leaders m ake their w a y to the dais.


WELCOME

The M o s t R eve ren d D erek Worlock, A rch bish op o f L iverpool, w elcom es
everyone to the service an d announces the hymn, which everyone is in vited
to sing:


HYMN

Abide with me; fast falls the eventide:
The darkness deepens; Lord with me abide:
When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
Help of the helpless, O abide with me.

I fear no foe with thee a t hand to bless;
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness.
Where is death’s sting? Where, grave thy victory?
I trium ph still, if thou abide with me.

Hold thou thy Cross before my closing eyes;
Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies:
Heaven’s morning breaks, and earth ’s vain shadows flee;
In life, in death, O Lord, abide with me.


We s it for:

THE READING

Read by Mr. Rogan Taylor

2 Corinthians Chapter 1 verses 3-7

The G od o f C om fort

Praise be to the God and Father'of our Lord Jesus Christ, the all merciful
Father, the God whoee consolation never fails us! He comforts us in all
our troubles, so th at we in turn may be able to comfort others in any trouble
of theirs and to share with them the consolation we ourselves receive from
God. As C hrist’s cup of suffering overflows, and we suffer w ith him, so
also through Christ our consolation overflows... If our lot be consolation,
it is to help us to bring you comfort and strength to face with fortitude
the sam e sufferings we now endure. And our hope for you is firmly
grounded; for we know th a t if you have part in the suffering, you have
p art also in the divine consolation.
* A s w e sta n d an d Sing th is hym n, n in ety-five roses, one for each life lo st
 ' a t H illsborough, are brS ugh t to the d a is by Jen n y Cunningham, T im oth y
   K nowles, Ian Price an d H elen Thomas, four o f those injuredin the tragedy.


  HYMN

  The Lord’s my shepherd, I ’ll not want;
  he makes me down to lie
  In pastures green; he leadeth me
  th e quiet w aters by.

  My soul he doth restore again,
  and me to walk doth make
  W ithin the paths of righteousness,
  e’en for his own name’s sake.

  Yea, though I walk through death’s dark vale,
  yet will I fear no ill;
  For thou art with me, and thy rod
  and staff me comfort still.

  Goodness and mercy all my life
  shall surely follow me;
  And in God’s house for evermore
  my dwelling place shall be.


  N o w we s i t for

  T H E ADDRESS

  The Right Reverend David Sheppard, Bishop of Liverpool

  In corporated in the A d d ress, a t 15.06 we all sta n d for

  THE SPENCE
A f te r the B ish op's closin g rem arks the Church L eaders bless

 THE NINETY-FIVE ROSES

 to be p laced by the fam ilies on the A n field H illsborou gh M em orial during
 the p r iv a te dedication o f th a t M em orial later th is afternoon.

Heavenly Father, as we commemorate on this E aster Day the life and love
of your son, Jesus Christ, which death itself could not conquer, bless all
those whose love is stronger than death and sanctify these roses as tokens
of the undying love and devotion of the families and friends of those who
died at Hillsborough.

Lord in your mercy

A ll: Hear our prayer

THE PRAYERS

Dr John Newton, M oderator of the Free Church Federal Council

O Lord God, from whom neither life nor death can separate those who
tru st in your love, and whose love holds in its embrace your children in
this world and the next; so unite us to yourself th a t we may always be
united to our loved ones whether here or there: give us courage, constancy
and hope, through him who died and was buried and rose again for us,
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Heavenly Father, look in your mercy on those who still suffer as a result
of the Hillsborough tragedy, whether from physical disability or mental
distress. Bless all who give of their time and energy in the continuing
process of caring and making whole, through him who brings healing to
all creation, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Grant, O Lord, th a t we m ay journey through the years with your love in
our hearts, your tru th in our minds and your strength in our wills; of your
mercy, take from us all bitterness, anger and strife; th a t when we finally
stand before you, it may be with the assurance of your welcome and the
joy of seeing our loved ones again; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
N ow the M e rseysid e Church L eaders jo in in pronouncing

THE BLESSING

God bless Liverpool
and make her people
strong in faith,
steadfast in hope,
and generous in charity,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


N ow we all sing:

When you walk through a storm
Hold your head up high
And don’t be afraid of the dark.
A t the end of the storm there’s a golden sky
And the sweet silver song of a lark.
Walk on through the wind,
Walk on through the rain,
Though your dreams be tossed and blown;
Walk on, walk on with hope in your heart
And you’ll never walk alone,
You’ll never walk alone.




W E W O U LD B E V E R Y G R A T E F U L IF M E M B E R S OF T H E P U B L IC
W OULD VACATE TH E A R E A A R O U N D TH E GROUND A S
Q U I C K L Y A S P O S S IB L E , SO T H A T T H E D E D IC A T IO N O F T H E
H IL L S B O R O U G H M E M O R IA L , W H IC H I S S T R IC T L Y P R IV A T E
TO T H E B E R E A V E D F A M IL IE S , C A N T A K E PL A C E .
               THE DEDICATION
                OF THE ANFIELD
HILLSBOROUGH MEMORIAL




B ish op D a v id S h eppard s a y s th ese w ords o f S ciptu re


God is our refuge and strength: a very present help in trouble.


Jesus said, “ Let not your heart be troubled, believe in God, believe also
in me; in my F ather’s house are many mansions.”


St. Paul said, “ I am sure th a t . n o th in g . . . in ail creationw ill be able
to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jeeus our Lord.”



                         M R S N E S S IE S H A N K L Y
            U N V E IL S T H E H IL L S B O R O U G H M E M O R IA L
D r John N ewton reads the names of those who died a t Hillsborough


John Alfred Anderson              Thomas Anthony Howard
Colin Mark Ashcroft               Eric George Hughes
Jam es Gary Aspinall              Alan Johnston
Kester Roger Marcus Ball          Christine Anne Jones
Gerard Bernard Patrick Baron      G ary Philip Jones
Simon Bell                        Richard Jones
Barry Sidney Bennett              Nicholas Peter Joynes
David John Benson                 Anthony Peter Kelly
David William Birtle              Michael David Kelly
Paul David Brady                  Carl David Lewis
Andrew M ark Brookes              David William M ather
Carl Brown                        Brian Christopher M atthews
David Steven Brown                Francis Joseph McAllister
Henry Thomas Burke                John McBrien
Peter Andrew B urkett             M arian Hazel McCabe
Paul William Carlile              Joseph Daniel McCarthy
Raymond Thomas Chapman            Peter McDonnell
Gary Christopher Church           Alan McGlone
Joseph Clark                      Keith M cGrath
 Paul Clark                       Paul Brian Murray
 Gary Collins                     Lee Nicol
 Stephen Paul Copoc               Stephen Francis O’Neill
 Tracey Elizabeth Cox             Jonathan Owens
 Jam es Philip Delaney            William Roy Pemberton
 Christopher Barry Devonside      Carl William Rimmer
 Christopher Edwards              David George Rimmer
 Vincent Michael Fitzsimmons      Graham John Roberts
 Thomas Steven Fox                Steven Joseph Robinson
 Jon-Paul Gilhooley               Henry Charles Rogers
 Barry Glover                     Colin Andrew Hugh William Sefton
 Ian Thomas Glover                Inger Shah
 Derrick George Godwin            Paula Ann Smith
 Roy H arry Hamilton              Adam Edward Spearritt
 Philip Hauimond                  Philip John Steele            ,
 Eric Hankin                      David Leonard Thomas
 Gary Harrison                    Patrick John Thompson
 Stephen Francis Harrison         Peter Reuben Thompson
 Peter Andrew Harrison            S tuart Paul William Thompson
 David Hawley                     Peter Francis Tootle
 Jam es Robert Hennessey          Christopher Jam es Traynor
 Paul Anthony Hewitson            M artin Kevin Traynor
 Carl Darren Hewitt                Kevin Tyrrell
 Nicholas Michael Hewitt          Colin Wafer        ■
 Sarah Louise Hicks                Ian David Whelan
 Victoria Jane Hicks              M artin Kenneth Wild
 Gordon Rodney Horn                Kevin Daniel Williams
 A rthur Horrocks                  Graham John W right
 Thomas Howard
A rch bish op D erek W orlock sa y s th is p ra y er

Lord Jesus Christ, risen from the dead yet bearing the scars of suffering;
bind up our broken hearts, heal our deep wounds and assuage our common
grief; th at as we are bound together in the loss we share, so we may be
bound together in the strength we find, in the days ahead.

     Lord, we your servants make this prayer:

A ll: Be it your care. Amen.

N o w the M e rsey sid e Church L eaders d ed ica te the M em orial

                  IN THE FAITH OF JESU S CHRIST,
                    WHO DIED AND ROSE AGAIN,
                  WE DEDICATE TH IS MEMORIAL
                    TO THE SACRED MEMORY OF
                THOSE WHO DIED AT HILLSBOROUGH:

D r N ew ton:

May the stone on which their names are engraved, be a sign of the
indestructability of God’s care for those we love.

A rch bish op Worlock:

May the living flame be a sign th a t death is not the end of life for them,
nor of our love for them.

B ish o p Sheppard:

May this spot, on ground so loved by those who died at Hillsborough, ever
be a hallowed place in memory of them.

E v eryo n e says: Amen.

N O W N IN E T Y -F IV E R O S E S A R E L A I D A T T H E M E M O R IA L B Y
              T H E F A M IL IE S O F T H O S E W H O D IE D .
                                                                                                                                                                      FORSHEFFIELD
P u b lis h e d b y P u b lic ity D e p a r t m e n t a n d p r o d u c e d b y D e s i g n & P rin t fo r A L L C o u n c il e m p l o y e e s . T e l: 7 3 4 0 6 0 o r w r ite t o P r e ss O f f ic e , T o w n H a ll, S I 2 H H                                                          I S S U E 28




Words of grief                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       liis s




and tribute
For Heather Rooney, a YTS trainee in the City Council’s Occup­
ational Health unit, poetry proved a way of helping her come to terms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sheffield is gearing up its
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          c a m p a ig n to w in th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          h e a d q u a r te r s o f th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          proposed fifth national tele­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          vision ch an n el, and has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          appointed local film expert
with the nightmare of the Hillsborough disaster.                                                                                                                                                                          Colin Pons to head up the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          cam paign.
   A year a g o H e a th e r w as              H e a t h e r ’s p o e m is o n e o f   th o se w h o d ie d , c o n ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C o lin , a fu ll-tim e w o rk er
a pupil at H erries S c h o o l in         a c o lle c tio n o f p o e m s by          tr ib u to r s an d S h e ff ie ld
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          fo r S h effield I n d e p e n d e n t
S h ir e c liffe and had a                 th e p e o p le o f S h e ffie ld ,         W e d n e sd a y p layers.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          F ilm fo r th e last six yea rs,
regu lar S atu rd a y j o b at             L iv e r p o o l and N o ttin g h a m          C h ris to ld t h e gu ests:                                                                                                    brings a w ealth                     of
H illsb o r o u g h , w o rk in g in       - as w e ll as furth er a field -           “ P o e tr y has a lw a y s b e e n                                                                                                e x p e r ie n c e to h is n e w ro le.
an o f f ic e a g a in st th e             w h ich h a v e b e e n g a th ered         th e w a y in w h ich ord in ary                                                                                                   B a s e d at th e C ity C o u n c il’s
b ack g ro u n d o f th e ch eers          to g e th e r by C hris S ea rle,           p e o p le h a v e ex p ressed                                                                                                     D e p a r tm e n t o f E m p lo y ­
an d roars o f th e crow d .               o n e o f th e city ’s ed u ca tio n        th e m s e lv e s w h en faced                                                                                                     m e n t an d E c o n o m ic D e v e l ­               C olin Pons.
    S h e w a s d o in g ju s t that       a d v iser s as a trib ute to               w ith a traged y o f this sort.                                                                                                    o p m e n t , h is t a s k s w ill
w h e n t h e d is a s t e r h a p ­       t h o s e w h o d ied .                                                                                                                                                        in v o lv e p ro m o tin g th e city       alread y b e e n th e su b ject o f
                                                                                           “ T he poem s about
p e n e d a n d th e p o e m sh e              A n d sh e rea d h e r p o e m                                                                                                                                             as th e id ea l sp o t for a               m u ch d iscu ssio n , an d that
                                                                                       H illsb o ro u g h are n o t the
w r o te afterw ards d escrib es           at a sp ecia l lau n ch o f the                                                                                                                                                n atio n al t e le v isio n sta tio n ,    will c o n tin u e this m on th
                                                                                       k in d y o u will find in liter­
grap h ically h o w th e ch eers           c o lle c tio n in th e M a n d ela                                                                                                                                            m e e tin g p o te n tia l b id ders       w h e n S h e ffie ld h o sts a
                                                                                       ary s e le c tio n s bu t th e y are
turn ed to so m e th in g e ls e as        R o o m n e a r ly o n e y e a r                                                                                                                                                                                          n a tio n a l c o n fe r e n c e o n th e
                                                                                       th e a u th en tic v o ic e o f a                                                                                                  to e n c o u r a g e th e m to
the scale of the disaster                  a fter th e trag ed y . G u ests                                                                                                                                               lo c a t e in S h e ff ie ld , an d        fifth         channel.              C o­
                                                                                       c o m m u n ity c o m in g to
became clear.                              in c lu d e d th e fa m ilies o f                                                                                                                                              raising th e C ity ’s p rofile in          s p o n s o r e d by S h e ffie ld
                                                                                       terms w ith a m o m e n t o f
                                                                                       grief.                                                                                                                             th e m e d ia and b road cast              C ity C o u n cil, th e B ritish
                                                                                           “ A n d it is t o th e y o u n g                                                                                               w orld .                                   F ilm In stitu te , T h e L is ­
                                                                                       p e o p l e , in particu lar, that                                                                                                     T h e fifth te le v isio n ch a n ­    te n e r and B r o a d c a st m a g a ­

        Thoughts of Hillsborough                                                       we must listen as so m an y
                                                                                       o f th o s e w h o d ie d w ere
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n el p ro p o sa l is c o n ta in e d in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          th e B r o a d c a stin g B ill, cur­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     z in e , th e c o n fe r e n c e will b e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     h eld o n 18th an d 19th M a y
                                                                                       y o u n g p e o p le w ith s o m u ch                                                                                              ren tly o n its w a y through              at th e U n iv e r s ity ’s O cta g o n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          p a rliam en t. T h e fran ch ise          C e n t r e . Part of the
                Sitting in th e office,                                                b e a u ty in sid e t h e m .”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          will b e a w ard ed s o m e tim e          c o n fe r e n c e will b e o p e n to
       You could h e a r th e cro w d 's great roar,                                     Copies o f ‘Remember                                                                                                             n ex t yea r, and th e n ew                th e g en era l p u b lic, so that
         The su n w as shining happ in ess,                                            H ills b o r o u g h ’ can be                                                                                                      sta tio n is e x p e c te d o n air        th e v ie w e r s can g iv e their
                                                                                       obtained from the Water-                                                                                                           by th e m id d le o f th e                 o p in io n s o f w h at th e fifth
            So w h o could ask for m ore?                                              thorpe and Central Library                                                                                                         decade.                                    ch a n n el sh o u ld b e . (S e e
                                                                                       shops and local bookshops.                                       H eather R o o n e y reads h er p o e m .                             T h e n ew ch annel has                p a n e l).

             The gam e w as ju st beginning,
            W hen th e roaring cam e to a stop,                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EVER WANTED
               N o yelling from th e stand,
             A n d no singing from th e Kop.                                                   The price is right for                                                                                                                                                    TO CHANGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WHAT'S O N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TELEVISION?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NOW'S YOUR

                                                                                             healthy eating promotion
           It w as w h e n I h ea rd the sirens,
           That m y h eart beg an to p o u n d ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C H A N C E ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Plans are currently
        W ithout a clue w h a t w as h ap p en in g,                                                                                                                                                                                                                     being drawn up for
         To this safe a n d friendly ground.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Britain's fifth national
                                                                                       Staff in Health and Consum er Services are delighted at the success o f the recent ‘H ealthy E ating’ week at the Tow n Hall                                                      television channel, and
                                                                                       canteen.                                                                                                                                                                          a major conference to
    I th en saw w ith m y eyes this ho rrid scene,                                        M o n ito r in g o f sa l e s           p e o p le b u yin g b eefb u r g ers        c h o ic e s o n o ffer - d r o p p e d    d a y t o ju st 13. O n th e o th e r          discuss the issue is
               To see w h a t I could do,                                              sh o w e d that th e n u m b er o f        - o n e o f th e ‘less h e a lth y ’         fro m an avera g e o f 29 p er             h a n d , sa le s o f b a k e d p o ta ­       being held in Sheffield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to e s and fruit rose b y 50                   this month. As part of
             Body to b o d y lay th ere cold,                                                                                                                                                                             p er c e n t and th e h ea lth y               the conference, a
               Face to face, each blue.                                                                                                                                                                                   dish o f th e d ay so ld ou t o n              public session has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          W e d n e s d a y , T h u rsd a y and          been organised where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          F riday.                                       the most important
                 I gave th e in jured w ater,                                                                                                                                                                                                                            people - the viewers -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              “I ’m v ery p le a se d w ith
            A n d shared w ith th em th eir fear,                                                                                                                                                                         th e resu lts a lth o u g h I ’m               can have their say on
              A n d for every d ro p of w ater,                                                                                                                                                                           su re that th e price in c e n t­              the new channel.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          iv e s will h a v e p la y e d a part              The session w ill be
                There also d ro p p e d a tear.                                                                                                                                                                           in co n v in cin g s o m e p e o p le          chaired by Newsnight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to try th e h ea lth y d is h e s ,”           presenter Jeremy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          explained             C aroline                Paxman, and the
            The crying from th e families,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          B u rr o w s from th e H e a lth               panel w ill include
        As th ey w atch ed their loved ones go,                                                                                                                                                                           P r o m o tio n U n it in H e a lth            Robin Corbett, Labour's
         The tangled scarves a n d souvenirs,                                                                                                                                                                             an d C o n su m e r S ervices.                 spokesperson on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         broadcasting, and
         The fence w as crushed d o w n low.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Granada Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Long-term                              Deputy Chair, Sir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               “ E s se n tia lly th e p r o m o ­       Dennis Forman.
        The bells are chim ing in th e church,                                                                                                                                                                            tio n w a s an a w a ren ess rais­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             So i f y o u 'v e
              N o less th an ninety-five,                                                                                                                                                                                 in g e x e r c ise an d h o p e fu lly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         g o t s o m e th in g t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          it w ill h a v e s o m e lon g-term
      N inety-five candles b u rn in g constantly,                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s a y , c o m e a lo n g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e f f e c t ,” sh e said.
            R epresenting every lost life.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t o t h e O c ta g o n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D u r in g th e w e e k o v e r            C e n tre a t 6 .3 0 p m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          100 p e o p le e n te r e d a sp e-            o n F rid a y , 1 8 th
            It breaks m y heart to thin k of it                                                                                                                                                                           cial h ealthy             eating               M a y . Entrance is by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          c o m p e tit io n an d t h e six              ticket only, but these
           A nd rem em ber the fateful sound,                                                                                                                                                                             p r i z e w i n n e r s a r e as               can be obtained, free
           I see h er stan d th ere m ournfully,                                                                                                                                                                          fo llo w s: 1st A . D o llin g ;               o f charge, from Kath
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2 n d S h a ro n A s h to n ; 3rd
            This h u rt, b u t friendly ground.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Harding. Tel: (0742)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G e o f f A itk e n ; 4 th A . G .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         766755, ext 263.
                                                                                        H e a d C h e f M a rk C u m m in s p ic tu re d w ith the L o r d M a y o r at the launch o f the ‘H ealthy E a tin g ’ w eek.   G ra h a m ; 5th L in d a C h a m ­
                                                                                        (P h oto: D a v id B ocking).                                                                                                     bers; an d 6th K a te W a tso n .
      iM a n n w g                                            fo r                       s h e f f ie l d




  All change at the top
A recent spate of early retirements and job moves at senior
management level has resulted in new heads of department for
Fam ily and Community Services and Em ploym ent and
Economic Planning, and a new head of Education will now be
needed (see separate story).
    M a r tin M a n b y t a k e s                  F o r th e p a st s e v e n years      restriction s at G r e e n w ic h -
o v e r as D ir e c to r o f S ocia l          h e h a s b e e n D ir e c to r o f        d u e to ra tecap p in g - his
S e r v i c e s in m id M a y                  S o c i a l S e r v i c e s in t h e       department has been
r e p la cin g N e il K a y w h o              L on d on B orough of                      r esp o n sib le fo r a n u m b er
retired last m o n th .                        G reenw ich                having          o f m a jo r im p r o v e m e n ts in
    T h is w ill n o t b e th e first          p rev io u sly w o r k e d a s an          so c ia l se rv ice p ractice and
tim e that M r. M a n b y has                  A s sista n t D i r e c t o r of           services. These have                       M artin M an by, new D irec to r a t        N eil K a y, retired.                     John D arw in , n ew D irec to r a t     D an S eq u erra ,   m oved   to
w o r k e d in S h effield as h e              F ie ld w o r k at th e L o n d o n        in clu d ed th e e sta b lish m en t       F&CS.                                                                                 DEED.                                    K irklees.
b e g a n his career as a S o cia l            B o r o u g h o f Islin gton and           o f a so c ia l serv ices R a c e
W elfa re O fficer in th e th e n              t h e L o t h i a n r e g i o n in         U n i t an d an E l d e r l y




                                                                                                                                          Bill to retire
S o cia l C are D e p a r tm e n t in          S co tla n d .                             R e s o u r c e C en tre. H e has
1967.                                              D e s p it e se v e r e financial      a lso p la y e d a k e y role in
                                                                                          th e        e x p a n s i o n       of
                                                                                          C o m m u n ity M e n ta l H a n d i­

       New group to aid staff                                                             cap T e a m s and m en ta l
                                                                                          h e a lth train in g p ro g ra m ­
                                                                                          m e s a n d in itia t iv e s to
         suffering from ME                                                                im p r o v e c h ild c a r e , ch ild          B ill W alton, Sheffield’s Chief Education O fficer since
                                                                                          p r o t e c t io n a n d f o ste r in g        1985, i s to take early retirem ent from the end o f M ay.
H elp and support for em ployees suffering from M E - Post                                serv ices.
                                                                                                                                             B ill ca m e t o S h e ffie ld fro m N e w c a s tle in 1979 as
V iral Fatigue Syndrom e - could soon be available if an                                                                                 S e n io r A s sista n t E d u c a tio n O fficer resp o n sib le for
                                                                                             John Darwin h as b e e n
initiative by two staff in the Fam ily and Com m unity                                                                                   s c h o o ls - an d t o o k o n th e task o f p rev en tin g th e drop
                                                                                          a p p o in te d as th e n e w
Services Departm ent is a success.                                                                                                       in th e n u m b er o f p u p ils in sc h o o ls from d a m a g in g th e
                                                                                          D ir e c t o r o f th e D e p a r t ­
    F o s t e r in g O ffic e r E v e          riously d ifficu lt t o id en tify.        m en t o f E m p lo y m e n t and              q u a lity o f y o u n g p e o p l e ’s ed u c a tio n .
Evans and Principal                            Y e t u n lik e flu , w ith w h ich        E c o n o m ic D e v e lo p m e n t               T h a t ro le led h im o n to th e j o b o f fin d in g a w a y o f
C o m m u n ity W o rk er L e e n a            it sh ares a n u m b er o f ch a­          ( D E E D ) , filling th e v a c ­            p ro tectin g th e city ’s p o st-1 6 ed u c a tio n p r o v isio n
J o n e s - b o th M E su fferers              racteristics, M E can afflict              an cy c a u se d b y th e resig­              w h e n fallin g n u m b ers w e r e p u ttin g a h u g e strain o n
- a r e h o p in g t o m a k e                 p e o p le fo r se v era l m o n th s      n a tio n o f D a n S eq u erra               th e ability o f sc h o o ls to o ffe r a d e c e n t sixth form
co n ta ct w ith o th e r C o u n cil          or years at a tim e - w ith                w h o left t o ta k e up a se n io r          c h o ic e an d c o lle g e s w e r e fin d in g it d ifficu lt to recruit
e m p lo y e e s a ffec ted b y th e           sy m p to n s r ece d in g a n d re-       m a n a g e m e n t p o s t w it h            e n o u g h stu d en ts.
illn e s s w ith a v ie w to                   e m erg in g th rou gh ou t.               K irk lees C ou n cil.
setting-up a self-help                             “ I t’s an illn ess that can                                                             It w a s v ery m u c h th e resu lt o f h is w o rk w h ich le d to
                                                                                             N o stra n g er t o th e field
gro u p .                                      affect all k in d s o f p e o p le in                                                     th e crea tio n o f th e c ity ’s n e w tertiary c o lle g e sy stem .
                                                                                          o f e c o n o m ic d e v e lo p m e n t,
    A d e b ilita tin g c o m b i­             a ll k i n d s o f j o b s , ”
                                                                                          J o h n D a r w in h a s b e e n                   W h e n h e b e c a m e C h ie f E d u c a tio n O fficer in 1985,
n a tio n o f fa tig u e, m u scle             ex p la in ed E v e E v a n s. “ W e
                                                                                          w o r k in g fo r D E E D fo r                 h e p u t h is e n e r g y in to trying t o m a k e th e c ity ’s
an d h e a d a c h e s, sle e p le ss­         k n o w that th e re are a lo t o f
                                                                                          eigh t yea rs - th e last five as              e d u c a tio n a l a p p ro a ch es m o r e r elev a n t t o m o re y o u n g
n e s s and c o n cen tra tio n d if­          e m p l o y e e s stru g g lin g on
                                                                                          A ssista n t D irecto r.                       p e o p le b y en co u ra g in g tea ch ers to re-th in k t h e w a y
ficu lties are ju st s o m e o f               w ith this illn ess a lth o u g h
                                                                                             D u r in g h is time w ith th e             subjects and the tim etable were organised.
th e sy m p to m s a sso cia ted               s u f f e r e r s c a n f i n d it
                                                                                          C o u n cil, h e h as p la y e d a               H e h a s b e e n a k e e n su p p orter o f id ea s lik e th e
w ith M E - an illn ess n o to -               ex tr e m e ly difficult t o h o ld
                                               dow n a jo b .”                            k e y ro le in a va riety o f                 R e c o r d s o f A c h ie v e m e n t and th e C o m p a ct w h ich h e
                                                   “ O n e thin g o f particular          su ccessfu l lo ca l in itia tives,           b e lie v e s m a k e e d u c a tio n m o r e im m e d ia te to y o u n g
                                                                                          in clu d in g th e S h effield S ci­

    Making!                                    c o n c e r n is th e a p p aren t
                                               lack o f co n siste n c y in th e
                                               ty p e o f trea tm en t and
                                                                                          e n c e P ark , th e S h effield
                                                                                          P e o p l e ’s R e s o u r c e f o r
                                                                                          In fo r m a tio n T e c h n o lo g y
                                                                                                                                        p e o p le and h e lp s m o tiv a te th em t o su cc eed .
                                                                                                                                             B ill’s d e c is io n to ta k e early retirem en t fo llo w s a
                                                                                                                                         p e r io d o f in d ifferen t h ea lth at a tim e w h e n th e                    B ill W alton takes early retirem ent.

     links ;
                                               a d v ic e th a t p e o p le w ith                                                        e d u c a t i o n s e r v i c e is f a c i n g p r o f o u n d a n d
                                               M E g et in d ifferen t d ep a rt­         (S P R I T E ) , S h effield P art­
                                                                                          n ership s a n d th e S h effield              u n p r e c e d e n te d ch a n g e.                                             # Senior Assistant Education O fficer, R oy Pilk-
                                               m e n ts a n d w e ’d lik e t o try
                                               and ad d ress this p r o b le m .”         E c o n o m ic R e g e n e r a tio n              “ N o w , m o re th a n e v e r , ed u c a tio n n e e d s e ffe c tiv e      ington, h as a lso ta k e n early retirem en t fro m th e
  Is a n y o n e o u t th e r e            .
                                                   A n y o n e se e k in g further        C o m m itte e .                               lea d ersh ip and c o n tin u ity an d I h a v e h a d to c o m e to             E d u c a tio n D e p a r tm e n t. R o y started w ork in g in
  interested in strengthen-                |
                                               in fo r m a tio n a b o u t se ttin g ­       M o s t rece n tly , h e h as               term s w ith th e fact th at it d o e s n o t n e e d s o m e o n e              e d u c a tio n ten years a g o as h e a d o f th e staffing branch
  ing their international                  ■
                                               up an M E su fferers grou p                b e e n h e a d in g up a te a m o f           w h o s e in d ifferen t h ea lth m a k e s h im less e ffe c tiv e              but t o o k o v e r resp on sib ility fo r b u d g et an d reso u rce
  ties? I f so, then L iz                  I
                                               sh o u ld co n ta ct E v e E v a n s       officers w o rk in g o n S h e f­              th a n h e sh o u ld b e o r w ish e s to b e . ”                                m a n a g e m e n t 5 years later.
  H ow arth in the Pub-                    I
  licity Departm ent would                 ■   o n 7 3 4 8 7 7 o r L e e n a J o n es     field 2 ,0 0 0 research and
  like to hear from them .                 |   o n 73 48 82.                              co n su lta tio n p rogram m e.
      A s P r in c ip a l In te r - ■
  n a tio n a l O fficer L iz fre- I
  q u e n t l y is a s k e d t o i
  arrange              private I
  e x c h a n g e s or a c c o m m o - I
  d a tio n fo r foreign visit- •
  o r s , m ain ly from W e s t I
  G e r m a n y                b u t *
  so m e tim e s fro m o th e r I              The distinctive Sheffield logo displayed on Council publi­
  pa rts o f E u r o p e a n d .               cations has finally gone multi-lingual thanks to the efforts                              If y o u r i d e a o f t h e
  occa sio n a lly from fur- |                 o f the Community Language Unit and design staff in the                                    p e r fe c t h o lid a y is tran-
  th e r a field .                     ■       Publicity Department.                                                                  I I q u ility m o u n ta in s c e n ­
      “ T h e m ain c a teg o ries ■                                                                                                 ery , g o o d f o o d an d w in e
                                                  “Until recently all Council publications in the four major                         and a c o m fo r ta b le p la c e to
  are fo r e x ch a n g es o f a I
                                               community languages besides English - Bengali, Arabic,                                sta y , I T A L I A N C O U N ­
  couple             of w eeks
                                               Urdu and Chinese - went out with an English language                                  T R Y H O L I D A Y S sh o u ld
  b e tw e e n individual |
                                               logo, ” said Community Language Unit head Navid Babar.                                fit th e bill.
  teen a g ers; p ay in g g u e st .
                                               “I f people are getting information in their own language its                             Italian C ou n tr y H o lid a y s M uriel A tk in s (fourth right) with colleagues fr o m the P ro p e rty Services D iv isio n o f L a n d and
  a c c o m m o d a t io n or |
                                               important that they are able to identify the source. ”                                is a s m a ll, in d e p e n d e n t Planning.
  e x c h a n g e s o f up to ■
  th r ee m o n th s fo r lan - I                                                                                                    op e r a tio n recen tly se t up
  g u a g e stu d en ts o r y o u n g |                                                                                              b y tw o S h e ffie ld C o u n cil
  ad u lts           on     w o rk '                                                                                                 w ork ers w h o lo v e Ita ly, its
  e x p e r ie n c e p la cem en ts; I                                                                                               p e o p le an d es p e c ia lly th e
  a n d f r e e o r p a id -fo r 1                                                                                                   fo o th ills o f th e A p p e n in e s ,
  hospitality from a |                                                                                                               n ot far from B o lo g n a . L ik e
  c o u p le o f n igh ts t o a .                                                                                                    T u sca n y , th e area has
  w eek for visiting |                                                                                                               beautiful scener y and
  a c a d e m ic s , b u sin e s s •                                                                                                 p la c e s to v isit, u n lik e
  p e o p le and c o u n c il I                                                                                                      T u sca n y y o u will hard ly se e
  officer s.                          i                                                                                              an o th er E n g lish car.
       “ F l u e n c y in o t h e r    *                                                                 J!                              T h e Italian en d is m a n ­
                                                                                                                                     ag ed b y a w e ll-esta b lish ed
                                                                                                                                                                              After 37 years with the Council Property Services’ Typing Pool Supervisor, M uriel
  la n g u a g e s w o u ld b e        I                                                                                                                                      Atkins, has decided to take a well earned rest from work.
  u se fu l, bu t is n o t alw a ys    J                                                                                             farm in g c o o p e r a tiv e - w h o
                                                                                                                                     run th r e e farm s and a r e s­            M u riel started h e r career  sh orth an d typist in t h e then back in 1952 and h as b e e n
  n ecessa ry . F rien d lin ess       |
                                                                                                                                     taurant. T h e h o u se s and             in t h e T o w n H a ll as a     T o w n C lerk ’s D e p a r tm e n t a ty p in g su p erv isor in Lan d
  and flexibility are m o r e          .
                                                                                                                                     flats are p erso na lly                                                                                         and P la n n in g sin ce 1968.
  im p o r ta n t!”                    |
                                                                                                                                     se le c te d and are c o m ­                                                                                        A t a sp ec ia l retirem en t
       A n y o n e in te r e ste d ,   I
                                                                                                                                     fo r ta b ly fu r n ish e d an d                                                                                party organised                   by
  w h o w o u ld lik e furth er        *
                                                                                                                                     e q u ip p e d .                          Unless otherwise stated all photographs appearing in c o l l e a g u e s , P l a n n i n g
  d eta ils, can co n ta ct L iz       I
                                                                                                                                         F o r m o r e in fo r m a tio n       Working For Sheffield are taken by the Council’s C h a ir , C o u n c i l l o r M ik e
  at th e P ub licity D e p a r t ­
                                                                                                                                     se n d fo r o u r b roch u re.           Photographic Unit based in the Town Hall. I f you would B u c k le y , p r e s e n te d M u riel
  m e n t, t h e O ld T o w n          |
                                                                                                                                     T e le p h o n e 58 50 08 or write like copies please contact Chris Calow on 734437 who will w i t h a s e a l e d C o u n c i l
  H a ll, P in s to n e S tr eet,      .
                                                                                                                                     to Italian Country Holi­ be able to give you information about the cost of reprints.                            R e s o lu tio n in reco g n itio n
  t e le p h o n e 73 47 95 .          |       i                A3                /I                                                 days, 14 Charnley Close,                                                                                        o f h e r o u tsta n d in g se rv ice
                                                                                                                                     Sheffield S ll 9FP.                                                                                             t o th e A u th o r ity .
                                                                                                                                                                  M IO n O n U                                       FOR                       SHEFFIELD



                                                                                                                                                                           Clean sweep for
                                                                                                                                                                               in-house
                                                                                                                                                                            contracts bid
                                                                                                                                                                        The benefits of Joint Working in the face o f compulsory
                                                                                                                                                                        competitive tendering have been demonstrated once again with
                                                                                                                                                                        the successful attempt by the Council’s Cleaning of Buildings
                                                                                                                                                                        Direct Service Organisation (DSO) to retain four new cleaning
                                                                                                                                                                        contracts in-house.
                                                                                                                                                                           T h e 3-4 yea r co n tra cts,            o p e r a te fro m July 3 0 ,1 9 9 0 .             It w a s w id e ly e x p e c t e d
                                                                                                                                                                        w orth £ 6 .9 m illio n , w ere             W ork c o v e r e d will in clu d e           that clea n in g o f b u ild in g s,
                                                                                                                                                                        officially a w a rd ed at th e              c lea n in g o f c o u n cil offices,         o n e o f th e d e sig n a te d
                                                                                                                                                                        en d o f A p r il a fter b e in g           s c h o o ls , c o lle g e s , libraries      serv ices su b ject to c o m p u l­
J oin t W orkin g extends to jo in t celebration a s cleaning o f bu ildin g stew ards are jo in e d b y C leansing D e p a rtm e n t M anagem en t a nd                c h e c k e d b y th e C o u n c il’s       and social s e r v i c e s ’                  sory c o m p e titiv e ten d e rin g
C ouncillors sh ortly after the M arch 2 b id deadline. (P h oto M artin Jenkinson).
                                                                                                                                                                        ev a lu a tio n te a m an d will            b u ildin gs.                                 u n d er th e 19 88 L o c a l G o v ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e r n m e n t A c t , w o u ld attract
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a se rio u s b id fro m th e p ri­


       Cleaners look                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              v a te se ctor.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N in e c o m p a n ie s initially
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s h o w e d an in te r e s t an d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  three - Cleanbright


       to the future                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Services,                 Contract
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C le a n in g N o r th e r n and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H a ll C le a n in g S er v ic e s -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  w e r e e v e n tu a lly in v ite d to
Changes in the way that services are                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ten d e r for the work
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a lo n g sid e t h e C lea n in g o f
d elivered have becom e increasin gly                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B u ild in g s D S O . B u t b y th e
common in recent years.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t i m e o f t h e 12 n o o n
                                           h a v e c o m p le te d sp ecia list                                                                                                                                                                                   d e a d lin e o n M a rch 2 o n ly
    C o m p u lso ry c o m p e titiv e     training in c o lle g e .                                                                                                                                                                                              th e D S O h a d p la ced a bid
te n d e r in g h as u n d o u b ted ly        “ O u r aim is to h a v e th e                                                                                                                                                                                     w h ic h m a d e it a lm o s t
h e lp e d to a ccele ra te this           m ost highly trained                                                                                                                                                                                                   certa in that th e con tra cts
p r o c e s s an d n o w h e r e has       c lea n in g w o rk fo rce in th e                                                                                                                                                                                     w o u l d b e r e t a i n e d in -
this b e c o m e m o r e ap p aren t       country,” explained                                                                                                                                                                                                    h o u se .
th a n w ith the clea n in g o f           c le a n in g stew a rd M argaret                                                                                                                                                                                           S p e a k in g o n b e h a lf o f
c o u n cil buildin gs.                    B e a u m o n t. “ E v e n tu a lly all            French constru ction appren tices gettin g han ds-on experience a t P a r k w o o d C ollege (b e lo w ) a n d takin g a lo o k a t P o n ds                        th e trad e u n io n s , C le a n in g
   T o w a r d s th e e n d o f last       o f o u r sta ff will b e train ed                 F orge (ab ove).                                                                                                                                                    o f B u ild in g s lea d stew ard
                                                                                                                                                                           ■ ■ I              ■                                 ■          ■ ■

                                                                                                                                                                           Trainee visit
y ea r th e settin g-u p o f a             u p t o B ritish S ta n d a rd .”                                                                                                                                                                                      L yn n S m ith said th at th e y
                                                                                                                        ■                                                                                                                                         w e r e d e lig h te d w ith th e
sin g le C lea n in g o f B u ild ­            A n o t h e r im p o rtan t part
in g s D S O b rou gh t w ith it           o f th e stra tegy lie s in the                                                                                                                                                                                        resu lts.
an entirely n ew m a n a g e ­             r e p la c e m e n t o f o u td a t e d                                                                                       A r o u n d 4 0 co n stru ctio n a p p ren tic es fro m C le r m o n t                        “T h is is a tr e m e n d o u s
m e n t structure an d e v e n             an d in e ffic ie n t c le a n in g                                                                                           F erran d in F ra n ce s p e n t th r e e d a y s in S h effield                         victo ry for J oin t W o r k in g ,”
g reater c h a n g e s are in e v it­      e q u ip m e n t - so m e th in g                                                                                             rece n tly g ain in g first-hand e x p e r ie n c e o f training                         s h e s a id “ I t ’s e x tr e m e ly
a b le n o w that th e n e w c o n ­       w h ich m a n y clea n ers h a v e                                                                                            m e th o d s a n d fa cilities in th e city.                                             d o u b t f u l w h e t h e r w e ’d
tracts h a v e b e e n aw a rd ed .        re c o g n ise d as b e in g lo n g                                                                                               T h e v isit, w h ich w a s org a n ise d b y P a rk w o o d                         h a v e b e e n a b le t o retain
                                          overdue.                                                                                                                       C o lle g e a n d W o rk s D e p a r t m e n t ’s train in g se ctio n -                 th e co n tra cts w ith o u t i t .”
   “ C lea n ers will h a v e t o b e
                                               “ It w o u ld b e tru e to say                                                                                            in c o n ju n c tio n w ith th eir F ren ch co u n terp arts -                           A sentiment echoed
m o r e fl ex ibl e in the
                                          that s o m e of o u r e q u ip ­                                                                                               f o llo w s o n fro m co n tra cts e s ta b lish e d th r ee years                       w h o l e h e a r t e d l y b y b o th
future , ’’ exp lain ed
                                           m en t w o u ld n ’t b e o u t o f                                                                                            a g o w h e n th r e e a p p ren tic es w e n t to F ra n ce as part                     M a n a g e m e n t                 and
C lea n sin g S tew a rd L in d a
                                          p la c e in a m u s e u m ,” said                                                                                              o f a tra d e u n io n bursary.                                                          C o u n cillors.
G a r g e t t . “ B u t w e ’v e
alw ays stressed the                      C lea n sin g S erv ices A s s is ­                                                                                                A p a r t f r o m p r a c t i c a l c r a ft w o r k s h o p s a t                        C o m m e n tin g o n t h e o u t­
im p o r ta n c e o f m a in tain in g    tant D ir e c to r Judith                                                                                                      P a r k w o o d C o lle g e , t h e tra in ees w h o w e r e a c c o m ­                 c o m e C lea n sin g D ir e c to r
term s an d c o n d itio n s .”           T u rn er. “ W e a ren ’t a b le to                                                                                            p a n ie d b y se v era l F ren ch tea ch ers, a lso had an                              K e i t h S i m m o n i t e s a id :
                                          ch a n g e ev ery th in g at o n c e                                                                                           o p p o rtu n ity t o v isit lo c a l firms an d m a jo r d e v e lo p ­                 “T h is w ill m e a n th at this
   B o t h M a n a g e m e n t and
                                          - for o b v io u s financial r e a ­                                                                                           m e n ts su ch as M e a d o w h a ll and P o n d s F o rg e.                             im p o r ta n t se rv ice w ill b e
U n io n s a g ree th a t all su ch
                                          so n s - bu t it w o u ld b e                                                                                                      “I th in k that it’s v e r y u sefu l for b o th tra in ees and                      carried o u t b y a w o rk fo rce
ch a n g es sh o u ld c o n tin u e to
                                          illo g ica l to train clea n ers                                                                                               te a c h e r s to b r o a d e n th eir e x p e r ie n c e in th is w a y ,”              w h ich is d irectly a c c o u n t­
b e n e g o tia te d th rou gh th e
                                          w ith o u t m a k in g t h e n e c e s s ­                                                                                     e x p la in e d W o rk s D e p a r t m e n t ’s M ick S m a llw o o d .                  a b le t o b o th th e e le c t e d
Jo in t W o rk in g structures.
                                          ary ch a n g es to th e e q u ip ­                                                                                             “ A n d w e ’re h o p in g th at a return v isit to F ran ce can                         r e p r e s e n t a tiv e o f the
    A n u m b e r o f c h a n g es                                                                                                                                       b e a rran ged in t h e n o t t o o d istan t f u t u r e .”
                                          m e n t th at th e y u s e .”                                                                                                                                                                                           C o u n cil an d th e P o ll T a x
s p e c i f i c a l l y a i m e d at
                                               T he e m p h a sis on                                                                                                                                                                                              p a y ers o f S h e ffie ld .”
im p r o v in g th e q u a lity o f
                                          im p r o v in g se rv ice d elivery                                                                                                                                                                                          D e s p it e the su ccess
se rv ice d eliv e r e d are a lso
                                          w ill d e p e n d t o a g r e a t                                                                                                                                                                                       e v e r y b o d y r e c o g n is e s that
in t h e p ip e lin e an d c lea n in g                                                                                                                                                                                                                           c h a n g e s in t h e w a y in
                                          e x te n t o n th e su c c e ss o f




                                                                                        Books go east
s ta ff are alread y gea rin g
                                          th is d u al stra tegy a n d b o th                                                                                                                                                                                     w h i c h t h e s e r v i c e is
t h e m s e lv e s up to m e e t th e
                                          j o b s a n d t h e q u ality o f                                                                                                                                                                                       d e l i v e r e d a r e i n e v it a b le
d em and s o f a m odern
                                          s e r v ic e w ill u ltim a te ly                                                                                                                                                                                       (see separate story) - p ar­
cle a n in g service.
                                          d e p e n d o n th e su cc ess o f                                                                                                                                                                                      t i c u la r l y in r e l a t i o n t o
    “ W e n e e d to s w e e p th e       t h e s e d e v e lo p m e n ts .                                                                                                                                                                                       in c r e a se d m o b ility and
p o p u la r im a g e o f clea n ers           C h a n g e o n such a scale is                                                                                                                                                                                    flexibility.
as th e ‘m o p an d b u ck et             a lm o st b o u n d to run in to             Design and B uilding Services very own intrepid civil engineer, B ill Ixer, probably took on m ore than he bargained for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      “ W e ’v e h a d t o a ccep t
b rig a d e’ in to th e d u stb in o f    s o m e d ifficu lties a lo n g th e         recently after offering to co-ordinate an appeal for technical books for Rom anian civil engineers.                                                                        that th e r e w ill b e s o m e
h istory w h e r e it b e l o n g s ,”    w a y , a lth o u g h th e r e are              T h e a p p e a l, w h ich w as       ruary after th e o v erth ro w          th r ee q u arters o f a ton! A ll          o f Ci vi l E n g in e e r s           in     important ch an ges,”
s a i d L i n d a . “ T o d a y ’s        u n lik e ly to be m any                     la u n ch ed b y th e civil e n g i­     o f th e C e a u s e sc u reg im e      B ill h a d to d o th e n w as g et         B u ch a re st.                               e x p la in e d L y n n S m ith .
clea n ers n e e d to b e train ed        c le a n e r s w h o will lo o k b ack       n e e r in g jo u r n a l ‘N e w Civil   b r o u g h t in 4 6 b o x e s o f      th e m t o th e h ead q u a rters                                                         “ B u t ou r o b je c tiv e has
in t h e u s e o f h ig h -te c h                                                                                                                                                                                      U s in g h is o w n car an d a
                                          w ith n o sta lg ia at th e o ld             E n g i n e e r ’ in e a r ly F e b ­    m a ter ia l w eig h in g arou n d      o f t h e R o m a n ia n In stitu te                                                      alw ays b e e n t o m a k e sure
eq u ip m e n t and h a v e a                                                                                                                                                                                       ca m p in g trailer t o tra n s­
                                          s te r e o ty p e d im a g e.                                                                                                                                                                                           th a t, at th e e n d o f th e d ay,
so u n d k n o w le d g e o f h ea lth                                                                                                                                                                              p ort th e b o o k s an d jo u r ­
                                               “T h e clea n ers o f y e ste r ­                                                                                                                                                                                  th e c o n tr a c ts c o n ta in e d
an d sa fety an d h y g ie n e .”                                                                                                                                                                                   n als, h e se t o u t o n th e
                                          y ea r h a v e g o n e fo r e v e r an d                                                                                                                                                                                w o r th w h ile jo b s for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1 ,2 5 0 k m jo u r n e y a c c o m ­
    A n d it’s in r e s p o n s e to      in th e fu tu re it’ll o n ly b e                                                                                                                                                                                       c le a n e r s .”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    p a n ie d b y M a rcela E llio tt,
t h e s e req u irem en ts that th e      th e o n e s w h o are h igh ly                                                                                                                                                                                             “ F r o m th e v ery b e g in ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    th e R o m a n ia n b orn w ife o f
C le a n in g o f B u ild in g s D S O    tra in ed w h o w ill su r v iv e ,”                                                                                                                                                                                    n in g w e ’v e in sisted that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    civil e n g in e e r in g c o lle a g u e ,
r ece n tly la u n ch ed a n ew           stressed L in d a G a rg ett.                                                                                                                                                                                           c le a n e r s’ term s an d c o n d i­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P eter E llio tt.
train in g p ro g ra m m e run by             C learly n o ro o m for M rs                                                                                                                                                                                        tio n s o f e m p lo y m e n t m u st
c lea n in g staff, all o f w h o m       M o p here!                                                                                                                                                                   F iv e d a ys an d se v era l             b e a c c e p ta b le an d w e ’re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    burst ty res later h e finally                c o n v i n c e d th a t th is h a s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    arrived in B u ch a re st and                 b e e n a c h ie v e d .”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    m e t up w ith M a rcela w h o
       FOR QUICK, HIG H-Q UALITY                                                                                                                                                                                    h ad b e e n fo rced to travel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N o w that th e co n tra cts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h a v e b e e n w o n all effo r ts
          W ORD PROCESSING                                                                                                                                                                                          th e final le g from Y u g o ­                are b e in g d irected tow a rd s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sla via t o B u ch a re st b y train          g e ttin g th e D S O p rep a red

    H             m tords
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    - w ith m o s t o f th e b o o k s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a cc o m p a n y in g h er as h an d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lu g g a g e ! - a fte r it h a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to carry o u t th e sp ec ifi­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c a tio n s . O n c e a g a in it’s


               UNLIMITED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h op ed that the joint
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    b e c o m e o b v io u s that th e            w o r k in g stru ctu res w ill b e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tr a ile r w a s u n lik e ly to              a b le t o p la y an im p o r ta n t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    c o m p le te th e jo u r n e y .             part in an y d ifficu lties that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  m a y arise.
     Libraries and Information Services                                                                                                                                                                                  “ D e s p it e all th e p ro b ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    le m s it w a s all w o rth it”                   “ T h e r e are b o u n d t o b e
      Typing/Word Processing Bureau                                                                                                                                                                                 said B ill. “ H o p e f u lly this            a f e w p r o b le m s b u t w e are
                        C O M PETITIV E PRICES                                                                                                                                                                      w ill b e ju s t t h e b e g in n in g o f    co n fid e n t that th e se ca n b e
      O p e n i n g H ou rs: M on d a y -F rid a y , 9 .3 0 a m -4 .3 0 p m                                                                                                                                         a tte m p ts to str e n g th e n              s u c c e s s f u lly d e a lt w ith
                                                                                       T echnical training officer in the D ep a rtm en t o f D esign a n d B u ildin g Services, B ill Ixer, a n d R om an ian     r e la tio n sh ip b e t w e e n e n g i­     th rou gh J o in t W o r k in g ,”
         For fu rth e r d etails - te l. S h effield 734710                                                                                                                                                                                                       e x p l a i n e d          K e i t h
                                                                                       born M arcela E llio tt p rese n t M ihai M ihaita, the P residen t o f the R om an ian Institute o f C ivil                 n e e r s in o u r t w o c o u n ­
                                                                             g #       Engineers, with copies o f the jo u rn a l ‘N e w C ivil Engineer'.                                                          t r ie s.”                                    S im m o n ite .
      w onting                                            «=or                    she«=i=.eld




HP
       Snookered by male                                                                                                                                                      Blooming
        image
      The decision by the governing body o f snooker not to                                                                                                                   well done!
      accept w om en as com petitors on the professional
      circuit cam e as no surprise to m ost wom en who play.                                                                                                                Sheffield’s top gardener, Don W illiam s            (pictured below) is t o r e c e iv e a sp ecial aw ard
         M ic h e le S a w le - w h o w o rk s in t h e training s e c tio n                                                                                                fro m th e N o rth ern H orticu ltu ral S o c ie ty fo r his “ co n sid e r a b le co n tr ib u tio n ” to a m en ity
      o f th e E d u c a tio n D e p a r tm e n t is an en th u sia stic                                                                                                    h o rticu ltu re in t h e reg io n .           t0 p horticu ltu rists fro m th e       S ig sto n T h o m p s o n - w ith
      sn o o k e r p la y er h erself. S h e b e lie v e s m a n y w o m e n                                                                                                    T h e S o c ie ty ’s P resid en t,         n o rth o f E n g la n d - in clu d -   H a r lo w Carr M e d a ls at a
      are m issin g o u t o n an e n jo y a b le sp ort b e c a u s e o f its                                                                                               R o b i n C o m p t o n , will                 in g T V g a rd en er G e o f fr e y    sp e c ia l c e r e m o n y at th e
      m a le d o m in a te d im ag e.                                                                                                                                       p r esen t D o n and fo u r o t h e r          Smith       and columnist               S o c i e t y ’s H a r r o g a t e
          “ I th in k it’s a sh a m e th at th e y h a v e m a d e this                                                                                                                                                                                             h ea d q u a rter s in ea rly M a y .
      d ecisio n . W o m e n p la yin g p ro fessio n a l s n o o k e r m a y                                                                                                                                                                                          D o n W illia m s h as b e e n
      h a v e p ro v id ed ju st th e e n c o u r a g e m e n t o th e r w o m e n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   th e C u rator at th e c ity ’s
Ill   n e e d t o g e t in v o lv e d t h e m s e lv e s .”                                                                                                                                                                                                        e v e r -p o p u la r B o t a n i c a l
         “ I can s e e n o rea son w h y w o m e n sh o u ld n o t p la y                                                                                                                                                                                          G a rd en s for th e p ast 22
      sn o o k e r eith er p ro fessio n a lly o r fo r f u n ,” s h e said .                                                                                                                                                                                      y e a r s a n d is k n o w n to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   th o u sa n d s o f S h effield ers
          M ic h e le is p artnerin g G arry W arw ick , th e E d u c a ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   through              his      radio
      tio n D e p a r t m e n t ’s P rincipal A d m in istra tiv e A s s is ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b ro a d ca sts and g a rd en in g
      t a n t , in t h e D e p a r t m e n t ’s s n o o k e r d o u b l e s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   g u id e b o o k s . H e h as also
      c o m p e titio n a n d th e y are a m o n g th e fa v ou rites.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b e e n r e s p o n s ib le fo r a
         S h e plays regu larly at a lo ca l clu b , an d b e lie v e s                                                                                                                                                                                            n u m b e r o f p io n e e r in g e d u ­
      m a le attitu d es are actively g e ttin g in th e w a y o f                                                                                                                                                                                                 ca tio n a l in itia tives.
      w o m e n g ettin g e q u a l access t o th e sp o rt’s fa cilities or                  iMMi
      th e e n c o u r a g e m e n t a n d su p p o rt t o ta k e u p t h e g a m e.                                                                                                                                                                                   B u t w h e n W o rk in g F o r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S h e f f i e l d c o n t a c t e d h im
          “ S n o o k e r can b e a lo t o f fu n and I ’d lik e to                                                                                                                                                                                                a b o u t th e aw ard h e se e m e d
      e n c o u r a g e m o re w o m e n to g iv e it a try. It d o e s n ’t                                                                                                                                                                                       a little b e m u s e d as to w h y
      m a tter h o w g o o d y o u are as lo n g a s y o u e n j o y i t .”            M ichele S aw le cues up                                                                                                                                                    he should have been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s e l e c t e d f o r s u c h an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   h o n o u r . “ I h o n e stly d o n ’t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k n o w w h y m y n a m e w as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   p u t forw a rd or e v e n w h o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n o m in a t e d m e , ” he


     Green advice from                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             cla im ed m o d e stly .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        F ortu n ately Colin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H u b b a r d from t h e N o r th ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ern H orticu ltu ra l S o ciety


        council unit                                                                                                                       For         Sale
                                                                                                                                      80w Orange combo, twin eles
                                                                                                                                      tion speakers - £60; Marlin
                                                                                                                                      Strat, copy guitar, silver - £73.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   w a s ab le to sh e d a little
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   m o r e ligh t o n th e situ atio n .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   “ I t’s sim p ly a reco g n itio n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o f all th e hard w o rk that
                                                                                                                                      Contact Andy Seiman on 134160                                                                                                h e ’s d o n e ov er th e years -
Green concerns m ay b e fashionable, but they’re nothing new for City E c o lo g ists Ian                                             (work)                                                                                                                       particularly in S h e ff ie ld ,”
R otherham and John R ose. The City M useum ’s N atural H istory Section, o f which their                                                                                   D o n W illiam s, C u rator a t B otan ical G ardens.                                  h e e x p la in e d .
unit is part, has been active in environm ental issues for over 100 years.
    A lth o u g h o n e o f th e                “ W e w a n t t o id en tify th e                                                                                                                                                                   mMm                                              ggJt
sm a lle s t C o u n c il u n its,         b est sites s o that a s S h e f­
th e y can cou n t o n the                 f i e l d d e v e l o p s a r e a s , it
support of the other                       d o e s s o t o th e b e n e fit o f
m e m b e r s o f t h e se c tio n ,       b o th w ild life and p e o p l e ,”
an d o f a d e d ic a te d b a n d o f     said Ian .
v o lu n te e r s and en th u sia sts           “ W h e n a n e w road is
th r o u g h o u t th e city.              b e in g pu t in w e a d v ise o n                                                      Vicky Rigsby      (pictured right) is ju s t o n e o f a h a n d fu l o f a p p ren tic es w h o are g ettin g v a lu a b le e x p e r ie n c e o f sp ecia list
    T h e y w o rk c lo s e ly w ith       rep la n tin g and w h ich s p e ­                                                      p a in tw o rk as part o f a 12 stron g te a m w ork in g o n t h e in tricate in te rio r o f th e L y c e u m T h ea tre - cu rren tly u n d erg o in g
and p ro v id e a se rv ice fo r           c ie s to u s e . I n s te a d o f                                                      resto ratio n .
s o m e o f th e largest d ep a rt­        e x o t ic trees an d p lan ts w e                                                      T h e £ 1 0 0 ,0 0 0 c o n tr a c t,  p r iv a t e firm s, fo r m s an
m e n ts , in clu d in g P la n n in g ,   su g g e st loca l ty p e s , s o th e                                                  w o n b y th e W o rk s D e p a r t ­ im p o r ta n t part in th e task
Hea lth and C on su m er                   ro a d b e c o m e s a u sefu l                                                         m e n t in c o m p e titio n w ith    o f r e s to r in g t h e fa m o u s
S erv ices, R e c r e a tio n an d         co rrid or fo r w ild life as w ell                                                                                           S h e f f i e l d t h e a t r e t o its
W ork s.                                   as p e o p l e .”                                                                                                             fo rm e r glory.
    T o g e th e r w ith p la n n in g          T h e y a lso a d v ise on
officer s, for e x a m p le , th e y       m a n a gin g S h e ffie ld ’s m any                                                                                                 A large part o f th e j o b
are d e v e lo p in g a strategy           la n d sca p ed areas, s o that
                                                                                                                                         Social Club                        in clu d es resto r a tio n o f th e
                                                                                                                                                                            b u ild in g ’s o n c e sp len d id ly
fo r p ro tectin g and d e v e lo p ­
in g co n se rv a tio n sites city-
                                           s o m e can b e p la n te d with
                                           s p e c i e s w h ich n e e d less
                                                                                       la n R otherham .                                  tees off                          c o l o u r e d f ib r o u s p la s t e r
w i d e , b r in g in g w ild life         m a in te n a n c e in th e b u sy                                                            for appeal                         w o rk - u sin g g ilts and g o ld
                                                                                                                                                                            l e a f - an d th e crea tio n o f a
back in to th e city ce n tr e ,           s u m m e r m o n t h s , fr e e in g
lin k in g sites o f in te rest and        s ta ff to p ay a tten tio n to                                                                                                  c lo u d sc e n e o n t h e a u d ito ­
im p r o v in g sites u n d er pres-       la w n s a r o u n d b u ild in g s ,                                                      Staff from the Depart­                rium c eilin g .
sure from p o llu tio n ,                  w h ile e n c o u r a g in g b ird s                                                       ment o f Design and                       H a lf o f th e tea m w o rk in g
o v e r u s e , and so o n . T h is is     an d b u tterflies b a ck to th e                                                          B uilding S erv ices’                 o n t h e con tract is m a d e up
e x p e c t e d to g o fo r p u b lic      less d istu rb ed sites.                                                                   social club recently set              o f a p p ren tic es w h o ’ll b e
c o n su lta tio n this su m m er,             A s p a r t o f t h e C it y                                                           out to raise money for                w o r k in g a lo n g sid e s o m e o f
an d th e p o lic ie s d e v e lo p e d    M u s e u m th e y a lso h a v e                                                           a local hospital appeal               th e C o u n c i l ’s m o s t
w ill g o in to th e unitary plan          access to th e h istorical p e r ­                                                         by staging a two-day                  e x p e r ie n c e d tr a d e sp e o p le .
fo r t h e city.                           sp e c tiv e , and can a d v ise on                                                        invitation golf
                                                                                                                                      tournament.                                “T h is really is an e x c e p -
                                           th e b e st w a ys t o p ro tect
                                                                                                                                         The event, at the                  t i o n a l          t r a i n i n g
                                           and maintain ancient
                                                                                                                                      H illsborough G o lf                  o p p o r tu n ity ,” e x p la in e d
                                           w o o d la n d or brin g b a ck the
     Hartley Brook                         w ild flo w e r m e a d o w s o f                                                          Club on 30th April                    P a in t in g M a n a g e r , J o h n
                                                                                                                                      and 1st May, looked                   A s h t o n . “ T h e r e ’s a lim ited
                                           o ld .
       reunion                                 A n d th e y try t o in flu en ce
                                                                                       John R ose.
                                                                                                                                      set to raise at least                 a m o u n t o f sp ecialist w ork
                                                                                                                                      £20,000for the Weston                 a v a ila b le t o us an d m o s t o f
   Attention all teachers                  t h e u s e o f t h e u n u su a l          c a s e g o e s to a p u b lic
                                                                                                                                      Park R oof-G arden                    o u r w o rk is o n co u n cil
   who worked at the                       a m o u n t o f C o u n cil lan d in        en q u iry . T h e y a lso draw up
                                                                                                                                      Appeal and give a                     h o u s e s , s c h o o ls , c o lle g e s ,
   then Hartley Brook                      th e S h effield a rea farm ed              rep o rts o n th e im p lica tio n s
                                                                                                                                      valuable promotional                  c h ild ren ’s and o ld p e o p l e ’s
   High School - now                       by te n a n ts through the                  o f n e w leg isla tio n o r g o v ­
                                                                                                                                      boost to the World                    h o m e s a n d recr ea tio n fa cil­
   Hartley Brook First                     P ro p erty S erv ices d ivision .          er n m e n t a ctio n - su ch as
                                                                                                                                      Student Games.                        i t ie s .”
   and Middle - between                    T h is m a y b e e it h e r b y             th e re c e n t w a ter p rivatis­
   1967 and 1970. A                        g iv in g d ir e c t a d v ic e o n         atio n - for th e C o u n cil and
                                                                                                                                         More than 50 local
   group o f ex-teachers                   issu es lik e th e lega l im p li­          p e o p le o f S h effield .
                                                                                                                                      companies entered the
   are o r g a n is in g a
   reunion in the bar o f
                                           c a t i o n s o f a f a r m e r ’s
                                           a ct i o n s for p r o t e c t e d
                                                                                           Their advice, while
                                                                                       m uch so u g h t, is n o t alw ays
                                                                                                                                      competition alongside
                                                                                                                                      top professionals from                  Double limelight at the Albert Hall
   the Crucible Theatre at                 an im a ls such as b a ts or                w e lc o m e d as th e y are n o t             the region and celeb­
                                                                                                                                                                            T w o C o u n cil e m p lo y e e s will sh a re cen tre-sta g e at t h e R o y a l A lb e r t H a ll, n e x t m o n th ,
   8.00p.m ., on Wednes­                   b ad gers o n th eir la n d , or            afraid to expl ai n why                        rities such as Emlyn
                                                                                                                                                                            in a c e r e m o n y to in a u g u r a te t h e n e w P resid en t o f t h e M e th o d ist A s s o c ia tio n o f Y o u th
   day, 16th May.                          by su g g estin g con strain ts to          a n o th e r C o u n c il d e p a r t ­
                                                                                                                                      Hughes, Bobby Knutt
                                                                                                                                      and Lennie Bennett.                   C lu b s. ( M A Y C ) .
                                           b e in clu d ed in th e le a s e            m e n t’s p e t s c h e m e sh o u ld                                                   L ib rarian , B r e n d a A d a m s , w ill b e p assin g h er ch ain o f o ffice to C areers A d v ise r ,
     A n y o n e wanting                   w h e n a ten a n c y ch a n g es.          n o t g o ah ea d fo r lega l or                   “ This is a very
                                                                                                                                                                            B o b H o d g e s as h e b eg in s his y ea r as P resid en t o f th e larg est, n o n -u n ifo r m e d y o u th
  further details should                      T h e un it is o fte n called            c o n se rv a tio n a l rea so n s.
                                                                                                                                      worthy appeal and we
                                                                                                                                      hope to make this an                  org a n isa tio n in E u r o p e .
  telephone Kathleen                       in to rep ort o n h o w a p la n ­              B u t if S h e ffie ld is to                                                        M o r e th a n 1 2 ,0 0 0 te e n a g e r s are e x p e c te d to c o n v e r g e o n th e ca p ital, o n S atu rd ay,
   Welbourn on 863624                      n e d d e v e l o p m e n t w o u ld        m a in ta in its rep u ta tio n as a           annual event in aid o f
                                                                                                                                                                            18th M a y fo r a “ L o n d o n W e e k e n d ” j a m b o r e e o f clu b activ ities and m usic.
   (evenings) or Janet on                  affect t h e e c o lo g y o f a par­        “ g r e e n -m in d e d ” city , th e r e      local charities, ” said
                                                                                                                                      tournament organiser,                    A S u n d ay w a lk from th e E m b a n k m e n t to Trafalgar S q u are will rou n d o f f th e
  423013.                                  ticular area - and can sa v e               will alw ay s b e a n e e d for                                                      w eekend.
                                           th e C o u n cil th o u sa n d s o f        th e in d e p e n d e n t e x p e r tise
                                                                                                                                      John Peckett.
                                           p o u n d s in ex p ert f e e s if a        o f t h e E c o lo g y U n it.
         i




              MIN U T ES O F TH Q I U . S B O R O P G H S T E E R I N G GROUP H E L D   ON   o   a p p tt   1 99 0




              PRESENT
                                     John Hatters le y (Chair), Sheffield H e al th A u t h o r i t y
                                     Dan Perks, Div i s io na l Officer, D i v i s i o n 2
                                     L — -----      — JSocial Worker, H i l l s b o r o u g h Task Te am
                                       r aham Mackrell, She ff iel d W e d n e s d a y Football Club
                                     Ch ie f Inspector R McRobbie, H a m m e rto n Road Police Stat io n
                                     M a xi ne Donovan, V i c t i m Support Sheffield
                                     Fathe r John Ryan, St M a r i e ’s Cathedral
                                                          (Minutes)


             APOLOGIES               John Pilling, A s s i s t a n t Dire cto r - F+CS
                                     Step he n Lowe, A r c h d e a c o n of She ffield



             "*■'       C l a r i f ication of Minutes     of 9 April      1990

                        The G roup agreed the minu te s         of the last m e e t i n g wi th no amendments.


             2.         H i l l s b o r o u g h R e s earch from Edge Hill College

                     M i c k Bond        Research Officer,      F+CS attended for this item.                         The

                     H c T ln l       alrH ad^ b ! e" PUt t0 the D e P a r t m e n t a l Ma na ge m e n t Te am at
                     F+Cs and it was decided it n e e d e d to be brought to the a tte nt ion of the
                     S t e er ing Group.    Mick b r i ef ly explained w h a t areas the                       J
                     oneixa Coleman, n e ed ed infor mat io n about, w h i c h included the impact on
                         . e f f e c t s on r e l a t i v e s / p a r t i c i p a n t s , and talking w i t h peopl e wh o

                     The",,'""0 , ^               ^  d i S a S t 6 r ’ SUCh aS Social w - k e r s I n v ol ve d at
                     the hospitals and senior m a n a g e m e n t involved in decisi on -ma ki ng
                      n c l u d i n g the police.   It was felt that until the enquiry had been
                     sorted out, it m ay be d if fi cul t to get this information.                D a n Perks

                     o f ft r     tet e .g T P that the D epartment w i U take into account the views
                                 St eering Group on this matter, and indicated the d if fi cu lty a nd

                    D o n o v a n ^ s k e ^ i f ° t h e ° C o l l ting ^ decisions taken oth^ s . M a xin e
                    u o n o v a n asked if the Coll ege w e r e aware of the p e nd ing Inquests next-
                    Wednesday.           Mi ck Bond told the group the researchers may 2e R e s e n t at
                    :    *   r   r    S t S : a n d .have a l r e a d 7 been involved in some meetings.                    There
                    of  he D i i r       n reP° rt m a i l a b l e soon after the first a n niv er sar y
                       the Disaster.     It was a g ree d that this w o u l d be ci rc ula te d to the
                    group w h e n it was available.


                    The Group felt that they would not want to support this research
                    proposal .t the present time.  John Hattersley will send this iS
                    w r i t i n g to F+CS.                                                                            in


                    - ask Tea m R e P o r t (items not otherwise covered^

                    A l a n G e r ra rd explained that there was n o t hin g really outstandine

                    affpr t h g ^        TaSk T e a m ' The Tea m WaS due to finish °n 4 M a y 1990
                    after the inquests are completed.              D an Perks p o in ted out in reply to a
                    q u e s t i o n that the Departm en t w e r e pre pa re d to resource the te am if
                    requ ir e" after that date, but indications we re this wou^d not be
                    necessary, unless inquests w e r e not co mpleted on 4 M a y 1990.




.EPAAQ
         A.   A n n i v e r s a r y - 15 April   1990

              Gr a h a m M a c k r e l l p o inted out t h a t people m a y leave tributes outside the
              ground.        He asked A                          lif the Task Te am w o u l d be w i l l i n g to
              help collect these.               G r a h a m M a c k r e l l to liaise w i t h Clive Betts re this
              matter, given the task teams involvement in the inquests from 18 April
              1990.

              John R y a n exp lained that the issue of the churches open in g h ad been
              taken    care of.    Local radio and "The Star" w o u l d ma ke an announcement
              regarding this to members of the public.



         5.   Inquests     - commen ci ng 18 A p r i l 1990

              Dan Perks told the group that someone h ad be en able to m a k e contact
              w i t h every family w h o wer e a t t e nd ing the Inquests. There w i l l be
              social work er s present at the inquests on standby if they are n e e d e d by
              relatives.

              There was the que st ion of people turning up at H i l l s b o r ou gh to v isit
              the g round af ter the inquests.  G r a h a m M a c kr el l and           Ito sort
              this out.

              It was m e n t i o n e d that there m a y be enquiries from the m e d i a once the
              inquests started.          It was thought that We st Midlands Police w o u l d be
              best h a n d l i n g all queries in regard to the Enquiry and Inquests.

         6.   Civic Rec ept io n

                          | informed the Group that there was a c om pi lat io n of p e o p l e s ’
              experiences w h i c h had been mad e into poems. It has been put together
              by the Ed uc ati on Department, and there was a p r ese nt ati on on W e d n e s d a y
              11 A p r i l 1990.

         7.   A n y Oth er Business

              D a n Perks introduced a report w h i c h h a d been pro du ced by S h e f fi el d Area
              B e re ave me nt F o r u m entitled M a j o r A c c i d e n t Plan. The report was the
              basis of a one day c onference w h i c h took place on 31 O c t o b e r 1989.
              Copies h a d already bee n sent to V i c t i m Support Scheme, and John
              Hattersley, w h o was replying on behal f of the M ental Illness Service
              Unit.         It was agreed, if p ossible that a copy of the report be
              c i r c u l a t e d to members of the Steering Group at the next meeting.

         8.    Date and Time of Next M e e t i n g

               It was agreed that the next m e e t i n g w o u l d be on M on da y 4 June 1990 at
               4.15 p m in a Town Hall Committee Room, the par ti c u l a r purpose is to
               review the ne ed for the Steer in g Group.




         FKL/18.4.90




.EPAAQ
COPING AFTER
HILLSBOROUGH
Information to help anyone affected by the
          Hillsborough tragedy
  issued by Family & Community Services Sheffield
Someone you know may have been personally involved in helping those who died                       PHYSICAL AND MENTAL FEELINGS                                                               SUPPORT            — You'll need other people's physical and em otional help. D on't
or those w ho w ere injured in the Hillsborough Disaster on 15 April. Alternatively                                                                                                                                 reject it. It can help to talk to others w h o have had similar
you may know someone w ho died or w ho has been injured.                                           Even if you haven't felt these em otions, your body m ight react to the crisis. This can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   experiences.
                                                                                                   even happen m onths later.
For a 11those involved i n those situations the experience w i 11 be a very persona I one                                                                                                     PRIVACY            — Sometimes you w ill just need to be alone, or w ith your fam ily
                                                                                                   Some com m on problem s are tiredness, sleeplessness, bad dreams, loss o f m em ory
that w ill remain w ith them for life.                                                                                                                                                                             and friends.
                                                                                                   or concentration, dizziness, palpitations, shaking, difficu lty in breathing, choking in
O ther people have been through similarexperiences and come through them. Your                     throat and chest, nausea, diarrhoea, musculartension, w hich may lead to headaches,        But rem em ber, overactivity, or letting your feelings remain num b, w ill delay your
experience was a very personal one but w e hope that this leaflet w ill help you to                backaches, or neckaches, dragging in the womb, menstrual disorders, change in sexual       recovery. The pain of the wound w ill lead to healing. You may even com e out of this
understand how other people have reacted in similar situations. It w ill also show                 interest.                                                                                  w iser and stronger.
you how you can help yourself to begin to recover.
EVERYONE FEELS THESE T H IN G S                                                                    FAMILY AND FRIENDS                                                                         THINGS TO D O . . . AND NOT TO DO
Fear                  - of damage to ourselves and those we love                                   You m ight make new friends as a result of th e tragedy. But it can also put a strain on   D O N 'T bottle up your feelings. M ake sure you express your emotions.
                      - of being left alone
                                                                                                   existing relationships. You m ight feel you're not getting enough support, o r that you
                      - of breaking down                                                                                                                                                      D O N 'T avoid talking about w hat happened. Think about what happened and talk
                      - of something similar happening again                                       can't give as m uch help as o th er people need. You m ight drink more, or use drugs.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       it over w ith others.
Helplessness          - what can you do in the face of such a tragedy?
                                                                                                   MAKING YOUR FEELINGS EASIER TO BEAR                                                        D O N 'T expect the m em ories to vanish — they w ill stay w ith you for a long time.
G rie f               - for death, injury and loss
                                                                                                                                                                                              These are things you should try to do:
G u ilt               - for being alive, for not being hurt                                        NUMBNESS            — Your m ind m ight not be able to take everything in at once. At
Shame                 - for seeming helpless or emotional                                                                first you m ight feel numb, and the tragic events may even seem      • Let your children share your feelings and express th eir own. They may be feeling
                                                                                                                         u n real. People sometimes wrongly see this n u mbness as either       m uch the same as you.
Anger                 - at what has happened and at who allowed it to happen                                             "being strong" or even "n o t caring".
                      - W HY ME?                                                                                                                                                              • Take tim e to rest, and be w ith friends.
Memories              - of people you saw or knew and loved                                        A C TIVITY          — It's best to keep active. H elpingothersm ighthelpyou.B utdon't
                                                                                                                                                                                              • Tell friends, family, o r counsellors how you feel.
                                                                                                                         overdo it — it could detract from the help you need for yourself.
Hope                  - for the future
                                                                                                                                                                                              • As you begin to recover, keep your life as normal as possible.
Everyone has these feelings. They are especially powerful when people have died in                 REALITY             — W e have to com e to terms w ith the reality of a tragedy such as
circumstances like those at Hillsborough. And even stronger when you depended on the                                     Hillsborough. G oingto the funeral, going to w here it happened,     • Send the children back to school. Let them carry on as norm ally as possible.
person who has died, if your relationship was going through a bad patch. These feelings may                              w ill help you to do this.
intensify if you were already coping with other problems.
                                                                                                   TALKING IT OVER — G radually you w ill need to talk and th in k about your
                                                                                                                                                                                              And a special warning. Accidents are m ore com m on w hen people are u nder stress. Be
Letting these fellings come out is part of the natural healing process. It doesn't mean you will                     experiences. You'll probably dream about them too. Children
                                                                                                                                                                                              especially careful w hen driving; be m ore careful around the home. This m ight sound
lose your self control, but if you try to stop them coming out you could end up feeling even                         may w ant to draw about this event, o r even playgames about it.
                                                                                                                                                                                              unlikely, but it is im portant.
worse. Crying will help you to cope, too.
WHEN TO SEEK HELP
Family and friends may helpyou all th ey can. But you may feel the need for extra help.
W e can offer this, but only if you ask.

You should ask fo r help if:
• You feel you can't handle your deep feelings.
• You feel you aren't getting back together over a period of tim e.

• You con tin u e to feel tense, confused, em pty or exhausted.

• You have nightm ares and can't sleep.
• You've no-one to share your feelings w ith .
• Your relationships suffer, or you develop sexual problems.

• You have accidents.
• You drink, sm oke, or take drugs to excess.

• Your w ork suffers.
• O thers close to you are not recovering.
Even if you're helping others, you could become em otionally and physically exhausted.

D on't hesitateto seek help. N o problem is too big or small for usto helpyou deal w ith.
Everyone needs help — it is nothing to be ashamed of. Anything you say w ill be totally
confidential.
FINALLY, REMEMBER — You're th e same person you w ere before this tragedy. There
is a light at th e en d of th e tu nn el. HELP IS AVAILABLE.
        Liverpool also have a number (24 hrs) that can be
                            contacted




               (051) 2 2 5 3413
                 or 225 3414
     Both numbers are staffed by trained and experienced social workers. They
     w ill help w ith material problems or if you are upset and just w ant to talk.
     Anything you say or any help you are given w ill be com pletely private and
     confidential. No problem is too big or too small for us to help w ith.

     Sheffield FCs D e p t acknowledge the help o f Kent Social Services
     Department and other Authorities in preparing this lea fle t




Printing donated by Kall-Kwik Printing, Sheffield (0742) 701582
Paper 'Spatial' donated by Guppy Paper, Leeds, (0532) 823111
Plates donated by Offset Plates 89, Sheffield, (0742) 430444
              FOR ANY HELP, SUPPORT OR ADVICE

         PLEASE CONTACT OWE OF THE FOLLOWING CENTRES



WIRRAL                          KNOWSLEY

Hillsborough Advice Centre      Hillsborough Support Team
Birkenhead Town Hall            The Connaughtons
Brandon Street Entrance         House No. 1
Birkenhead     L41 5EU *        Tarbock Road
                                Huyton
051 647 2306                    Merseyside       L36 5XW

                                051 443 3549
                                               »
LIVERPOOL

The Hillsborough Centre
1 Anfield Road                  SEFTON
Liverpool 4
                                Sefton Helpline
051 263 5366                    Marbenthe
                                14 Marine Terrace
                                Waterloo
                                Liverpool   L22 5PR
SHEFFIELD
                                051 928 1571
Hillsborough Task Team
Hillsborough Library
Middlewood Road
Sheffield      S6 4HD

0742 734666



               ANY OTHER AREA, PLEASE RING

                   HELPLINE - 051 225 3413
                              051 225 3414
                                       SHEFFIELD CASUALTIES


Ref   Name and address                    Injuries           Hospitalisation                  Helper             Spcaai Worker

437                                       None               No
                                                                                                                 - Deaf Team
      Sheffield 7            I
      (D7 )

443                                       None                                                                    None / '
                                                                                                   M ftJ o o o
      Sheffield.
                                                                                              ®a   c.p w c S
      (D 3)

       Other Address



      Liverpool

523                                       None               No                               None                None

      Sheffield 8
      (D3 )                  '*<fy

524                                       None                                                                    None
                                                      H - v O c -■T _                                                            POLtci
      Sheffield                                                                                                                  c<w
                                 |C(

546                                       None               N-q                              None                None
                                                     'T a if* H D   -K ) o T (\Q n X tT 6 0
      Sh e ffi eld ,
                         U                           UMO       U
              Os
     $& £$,   .W.ho                                  q     f l s s i 'a ^ f t r c c l             o r    p g -r e R     u » - u s a o e o o y -.




                                         b a lL J ^ lc L
                      ri                                                      ”     b o l f vOO'^od o u ^ b t cOjaakaA<i- o r \d                     \£®Roo><i§.

                                         f c a M i^ jU d l.
                                                                                    cX      \ta, ^ c u fv d .                                    9
f

*                                        £ )a > f\c L ^ a .                         Kort'fi. te \j2 .L^h
                                                                                                      p h ooto
                                                                                                             N i. U
                                                                                                                  u sSaac d
                                                                                                                          L   Jbg
                                                                                                                                ^ ^ o o lfib a ll

                                                                                    S u p p o rts          Of\     4te. d a ^ j •

                                        Lm d ooia                             -         mvdvUzjci or\ fe . d a^*-1 cu \cf cx^te r- ^boiibait ^a*>cl

                                         i f l ^ H i l l Bdi         - in/olvteda\ Ik. d a un. ^ ivjj-tNja^A ^ a a c -rc x Q .
                                          D i V 0<vq, on p l a c a r d - m v o l v t o d oX B o | s C l u b or> f e da^j

                                         L fr jo \sONa.                                 IA vo\v£od or\ S cJ I o k Ao ^        o JL   te :   gK JO A d

                                                  W a N i-

                                         UtmbUoAa-                        /             irv/ol'kzd              daad                                 0<vcmi1 s X c

     Limo Woni   \oaNjdM nwv.kos t'oite ■M'b.HoiKvshiMi H'osp end nvx-ttr^essa-^ ■.■■•?^ Yp ^--

#r                                                                                                                            OA S oJ^O
                                  "     (?icK(t»Oftd                      -             kaQp&d

                                        Rtc)o crvorvdi



                                        Q a Q v a Q lou)                            ^aQ|>ael. o X f e . C^KXiacL                            ScJ^Uf-dCX^j.

                                             0 0
 ‘r rfo fP      W HO        H (W 6         b£SX




                                                           H gaJLa                                                  'OOS                 O u sh         Oul^stda tts. ^-Kx/'^d .

                                                                                                            -     WQ£ iiv/oitfacl bold. u<\cdbb to JbJdka'- A.c^aba-
                                                                                                                   <^<v*\ oJk            sl6a^e, .



                                                                                                           -«     VyosbcAd a ^ c h c a rftc A © * d L * .^ > •

                                               *            Pc»«as l^ill •                                 -      Jb^ctfcar »'r> lo .^   cl   poUCQ.Cf^a/'*
                                                                                                                                                                          (J
                                                          Q v a u a iL ^ o d                                        ixat-jnau-o-c^ -

                                                          Chancet Wood                                              hosbctnd a pcAtc&ftNGA o<\ d o £ |; •



                                                                     >5                                rfNdfer-.                                  d a u ^ .K & s -s   J o o ^ ||h *a A c i
i-
                       i
                                                     »S    O- ^jooE baH Q.ppvcfil£ica_ o J t W»1l$boK>«cjjk c o d vjoas o J r tu l rocJfch




             WHO Q ^g R g P          U-giP         e>U< W gRe K o< C ftu -£ D uPoN: ;«



                                                                      Pd          •

                                                      b j'o o m h o .ll P   oqc^


                                                      Qt'chmc^d Qjci^tortOnit
                                                      4Vucic\o-J ^            ■

                                                      c ^ p -a jd      te l           o s f l- c ^ jt te        w ^ k J ja c d S
                                    \i



 Y o o \S      P lO P ufl      IK        R £ S lD e K < lftl     CP>R£                 WHO WEKH-Pri^rHg



                                                                     Q xxcL              - 'Tvqim uj. ^M 2orkds.Tvcf\                    aX     tlilts b o * o ^ ^ - .

                                                     O hcvr\ca£ Wood                      -       cxk- 4tg. rncJ^aP- -o .fe . h is -^ccft& r -J x s tfc
                                                                                                  p o ^ o u ." d l ^        c ^ U .c f e ii


                                                     O KavcaJr W ood                          -     H a s SjSo ScA , Ctfr'f'ffto r\»'oaj£fo f' cL^y) tc*J &fl-'i



^ G x< \t& t Wood is a                                          ^                                 peapb w .fc              c h s a b .l itS s ,

     U |j l    jL \p e c ito \c ^        »s V£>-^| sKoi-fc.         U rv c fl -fts,                                  p 'C ^ o o ^ d _ a ^ b c £     .
                                                                    r      e     q     u   e       s   t   s           0 R   T R A C I N G S




                                                                                                                T.T.    Member           Person                 Sought                             Commen ts
      Date           Name of Pers on                    Social             Worker
                     ma k i n g r e q u es t        DC       (\< a ^ T -

                                                                                                                                     £ T /\/6 -/A ft5 £ *< .    Co M O     ( r r t '/e
                                                                                                                                                          S>     A "* r                  To
                                                                                                                                    C urti.& s      f/e.oM 7 X e A b u *h «8H /K e                                                              uA.
y j n l n                                                                                                                           Vac/a/ 6 - C s jo /^ ^ r^       C-Jt/a                        & J& A ' M u t& tA d * /O f f e r >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          'W.   CKi&CStfffoM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /%*. f0                oySe*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  & A C S tffri& & *& *■ AM ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            »A4*i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4 *1 /wWJ
                                                                                                                                     /P f-S o c:/ r '*>TFO & y
                                                                                                                                             s * " * <4*>6e'i ‘* /vce:       te M A ffrS         d u x / <svt / £ / r / & ' 7 fc ° isqferM&iwR ujoo f a * * * * ' ^/v

                                                                                                                                       G .v 'e J ^ ^ -v -w      (S u v *M rv C X o _ *-*O L
                                                                                                                                            kouOacV —c x o io < 3 « a x J         n j .C U -H

                                                                                                                                                                                                Po^   muv      k'-fc*4 c '-<>cV:v V ^ r       To. c v *« 7
o V 11                                                                                                                                                                                                             MlSiT <,M^rO

                                                                                                                                                                                                '-rv»*c60   (d .M W ,         s-r                        ito fo
                                                                                                                                     ?<U «S 7                  V itu f^ o KT noAT vamvX
                                                 \)(K     V - <N\?><JVOOS                  VJ>^                                                                                                   Ofj     P,C.                  Uit l*- frv. AVNfj's P<An>s$(0f>i.
                     V\<U 7
 \°\\u ' \ v \        \J IG O V '   o f"
                                                 p ,c .                        S r*^   U tL C
                                                                                                                                    " '"Z. S-Vli VMo H6vP4 0 TaVv* -V 6<l.vKr*. A T              ' i S,VJs — (\u v ‘n €>(lAA^-0 + (oU N ^A-A^CG              ”
                                                                                                                                       C>oTs Co-\&                                               c .W v „        . <MU_ VJKTSorO ,
                                                                                     Lj KUWvV. ;                                      -4- Cl^'CV nArO vivvo     (\v^io KT                        r\6 T or* X p I k     ftffX /i              'h s iT
^ V l fe r\C> 4/\_
                                                                                                                                     tAue.^ ^        (U v *         .-clfciOl
                                                                                                                                     S .w . ~               f V \ U ^ , V>«7‘ ~ e‘^ vv
                                                                                                                                     Cat \ \ q u C 4?M<b$T — Slu-. Ow u ^ n I CuC'fiW
                      06\jvc*t> ^ N n y X _ l_                                                                                                    L_6N^^6       oV ^ 9 j W > i    WOAJU'U
                                                                                                                                       -w^
O GjCjfe)f\C^6 V .

                                                  Ol <L4>c7        C a/vff'.C T
                                                                                                   .VjidAf-L.
                  '”™5 V i 5 W




                      LIVERPOOL *SaB* M EM OR IA L




             devaaflm
                               eternal flame in
                               glass enclosure




brick pier




Itte LIYIKEPfMlj MlMdDMAB J                          steteln cfeifM
            REVIEW OF CASES                                    2 0 . 12.39

Ref, No.

678 & 789
797         Seen week beginning 11th December. Went to match with               Went
            reasonably well.        went too - had other benefits. Reassurance,
                 returned to matches - since visiting the ground.       witnessed
            fatal accident. '    Iand I     planning to watch the World Cup.
            Little more being asked of H.T.T. - copy of Interlink and tape of poems
            for         Contact agreed New Year - last contact (possible). Closure
            in January, 1990.

824 & 856   Death of workmate en route to Christmas work party,      tried to help
            him. 29th - a hurdle overcome for him. He is all right. No plans for
            further contact of either      or          Both cases closed.

833         Not expecting him to   return.   Will write to him and then close.

660         Went to Crystal Palace match, 25-11.89, surprise at how he was affected.
            Was shortly after interviewed by West Midlands Police who showed him the
            video. These two events brought everything back - crying, flash backs.
            Seen later by       6.12.89. This visit "well" timed. Wife supportive.
            Now feels he is coming through the experience. Started a college course.
            Beginning to feel more at ease with his feelings, recent re-experience
            shocked his confidence, his coping mechanisms didn't initially work.
            Required support from|       and|     [Visit to the ground. No particular
            worries or concerns. No plans to see him again. Will write and then close.

818         Young man who was at the match (15th) and wanted a pen pal. Returned to
            the ground - finds it eerie, atmosphere changed, but still goes. Did not find
            a pen pal, had a letter put in Interlink, but response not known. Another
            copy of Interlink will be obtained. [    could then request his own.
            Letter then close.

787         Traced patient that she helped -             [Sefton) knows of him - this
            patient has severe problems, but back at work, maintaining relationships.
                 would be willing to fill in the gaps - but patient not yet ready or
            able to accept this information. Would     I be willing to relate the
            information now or be prepared to give the information in perhaps two years'
            time. Some positives in what has happened.          Iwill see     again.

603         No address for her, cannot review.    Close.

456         Has a'job, plans to buy a house. Shortly goig to Japan for two weeks on
            holiday. Attitudes to life changed.    Now trying to get some structure
            back into her life. High expectations of the job, perhaps not all of the
            answers. Preparing to make an effort. Hopes eventually to go to University.
            Giving up the modelling career? Has had problems with Fran's parents in
            Liverpool. Still very difficult for her. Has not established her own
            position. Contact again after she returns from Japan. Arranged to see
            her after she returns from Japan. Still very vulnerable. Ongoing work
            required.




            20.12.39
                                                                                              1




               CASE REVIEW                                            19 .1 2 .8 9

REF.NO.

887 & 888       Few problems, other issues, work.          Roping better.        pother
                issues - a reversal of the earlier situation. Next visit in January,
*              probably the final one. Coped with match.

.902           Missed one appointment. No further contact initiated by client.
               Unannounced visit made - no reply.  Card left.

796    *       Trying to trace victim whom she helped into an ambulance. Efforts being
               made to trace.   May be seen in JaNUARY. Went to the match. Didn't
               react well. Could be a final check.

S.W.           No contact 2 - 3 weeks. Needs little more from this team - may have need
                to be in touch if difficulties with the Jones family, but next contact
                possibly final one. All relevant papers sent to Liverpool.

889        *   Seen week ago - feeling better - didn't think he needed to talk any
               further now that he has shared his experience and realised some of his
               feelings were "normal" ones. Will telephone in January.

               Review Cases

260            Cancelled at very short notice - wife saidhe is   o.k. now - would contact
               us if necessary. N.F.A.

615            Works at the ground as well as theHallamshire Hospital.      Found it
               difficult at first - seen G . P . - has been back to the ground - more times
               - easier - didn't need to talk about it again.      N.F.A.

783            School boy - will contact teacher.

               Nurse in Bradford - helping an ex-boyfriend of her daughters, who was a
               victim.    The youth lives in West Riding - advice given.




               * Agree to close, following next visit/contact if no new/substantial
                 work identified.




               2 0 .1 2 .8 9
 Date   Vi si tors   Social Worker             Me mb ers       Time & Place   Confirmed


Mon

Tues                                 su   *s


Wed



Mon

Tues



                                                           *


Mon

Tues

Wed



Mon

Tues

Wed



Mon

Tues

Wed
 Date              Visitors                                  Social Worker                                T.T. Members                   Time   & Place   C on firmed


Mon

Tues

Wed



Mon

Tues
                                                                        fs V C A .
Wed                                                                         1 ^ 7 7 1r<, Wv<~\ -




                        \ Aaa-J &,Vsi •
Mon      ^                        ^ Cxv'-'v ^QjCL<a-x                                                        1       ■■ "      •
                        t S lAc  +• % R u / i JvOOOs
Tues

Wed                                                           d^XA-C&UjiV    cU a *. to            <*
                    —
                                                                                                     j--------------------------------
                                                                                                    4


                                                                    •
Mon     ^ cj
                          *■
Tues    ^ e?
                        .T----
Wed
                                                        ■:     +
                                                                                                                                           o£*~ CX        i.   —
          1Sk~
Mon          ^                   n     a / c        h
Tues         - 5

Wed
                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                                               y
ThuA          8                                                                                                                                                v/
                                                G' R_0 _ U_ _ N_ D_ _ V_ I _ S_ I _ ; T _ _ mR_E_F_E_R_R_A_L__S



  Date                       V isito rs                 Social    Worker                 T.T.             Members   Time      & Place          C o n f i rrned


Mon,      tv i'- J

T u e s    S -tV j   k & e


                                                                                                                    3 p w v               ’©
W ed
                                                                                           ................   \
   o                                        o



Mon

Tues
                                                                                                                              Cv   — o\
Wed

                                   8                                                                                                 8


Mon

Tues

Wed



                                       a©
Mon         ^                                                                                                                             ©




T u e s     Jto



W e d       3 1




Mon

Tues

Wed
  Date                                  Vi s i t o r s                                     Social              Worker                                 T.T.   Members                                Time     & Place          C o n f i rir;?: ‘


Mon,                   0^7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
Tues                   ocT
                                                                                                                  (_Wi(UwO\                       n                                                     °^~ Q vCu_/--©4 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                   M sisJt                     .__'
rfe d         I    ! ^ 0 \ )
                                                         lx                                                                      £    ---- :------ _j                      i                       3-so Uhj^c ejh t-4. t- ,     — —          ...............


                                                                                               D -  <'
                                                                                               Qg^wgp    v K y u*v»iy- i.
                                                                                                                  t ( ^ -6 (^ w c y                                      cp o ^ _ c a jlA iija |                                 l ^ c c c n cjlX M cJ,
i^on          lo   s ^ O \J


T u e s
              1
W ed          ^        ^ g \)




                                   /    ■. •  ./ ■ . 3
                                                     -        3-
                                                               0° f*^       ^
                                                                            /
                                                                            V@
                                                                             ,/
Mon ^ c©\) (
Tues                    4
                        -^
                         VW
                          rJ
                           TS      (v.m^Q                                f
Wed          l         :      |
                              /
                              \         'OiKVv^lCL^^          «3^o  tUisuib
      niunoo »                   —______ — — -— _____ ^        )(9<afcV\
Mon                         (                         ■
                                                      ts \     |
                                                               >
                                                               w   O ^£^
                                                                       aV
                                                                        ,0
                                                                         i
             "
             7
             ^
             -  :
                - .-—
                    - -
TuesQjC^D\} - ^ / Z ^/ / -:/ / •7 ' / y\p^'r c f r / j y & 7< //     / ■/  / ;  /7 //
                                                               * 7
Wed QjxN                          /
                              /... .1 .  a °\\ vi\
Mon       ^        ^                                                                                                                                    K\o^I>_> 7   ' \J ICjvV
Tues'i4^o\J
W e d /l_p^ [AQ\7
                                                                  C- O A    (V -* fc    W [T \\

                  o^ii         o r e   f\£ 6    ^             o ^ t    o m fe s        -fo ^                                          wr>
                                                   c.c.




   CASE REVIEW                                    15.1.90


   REF.NO.

   205       Seeing client week beginning 22.1.90. Will be last contact,
             providing welfare rights advice.   Moving to steward at United*s
             ground, requested transfer at Hillsborough, but no positive
             reply. Still unsettled by Hillsborough, but related to the
             ground, did complete a season's stewarding at the ground.

    888
and 887       Cases closed.

    211       Case closed.    Still part of Stewards’ Group.

    230       Case closed.    Still a member of Stewards’ Group.

    900       Referred by         Seen once, plan to talk over the events of the
              day,
                v" 7
                     but
                      —
                         sDOke
                          »
                               about a lot of other issues. Still very vivid.
              Was perhaps avoiding some issues until interviewed b y ____ Was
              a spectator at the match, Kop end. Wanted to go over the events
              of the day, but considering the setting. Ongoing work required.
              Not supported in Sheffield - from Norwich. Tested out the
              situation during the first interview. Ongahg work needed.

    204       Steward at Wednesday and United. Friend of Ref. 205.
              Superficial issue of the Fund - will be an application to the
              Fund. Assessment required - possible short term work, though
              one interview may complete the work.

    235       Steward. Seeing the video - will do this week beginning 15.1.90.
              Will see the video with partner and possibly son.


    Conclusion
      /
    Ref. 900 the only case that work will,-with any degree of certainty,
    continue into February.




    16.1.90




                                                                                   (
    ;             *         vs v^Q r^5~vQ




                       Q     o .S S 'Q        JA           ,



     V \q     x k      >_n ^          V   W


        V 'w C X W                   " jE ^        S .^ X A _ )^


                  0 *> ^ v                                     s


           C S A M . M vAJLxx-Xs-' S



             C 3JV\            —       vxi                            V   n^   _& ,


        V o             C -^ A js A a -                                ° s'


           S S ^ c O k                       "n W > —                          ^       V

        ©a j\ ,                      ^j u > « - c ^ - -                            .


        cxV                    vo - ^

    < k x js >     c   X    x js   >U^           V W       .


    ^                       - c » ^JO ^V 0 v

    C X N <k                C U ^ ^ M            vsjc k t           V^VO L^of


  C c s J ^                                           v js tv CSlX        ^ -^




                                                                          >*


           _________
                       I                                       V




            O O sK             VJ&

  VKK^_               V ®          c^JD




                                    li U ^ ^ - 0 ^ - V -           v j 0 va - g3 vJ^~-



                  7 \   n          C-QJiJ v/ A   jn      \N N .G l X / X S L


\\^ _ x r ^                    " X l\u            ^
I '(j* .      \r<i- -Q M J^C V X A ^'^> *- ^ '( _______
                                                                  j0       Divisional Officers Group
Freta
            Hillsborough Task Team

Date        6th November, 198^
f-ef.
Tel. Ext.
            An *3*7                                               Ref.




            RE          PREPARATIONS AND SERVICES REQUIRED FOR THE 29th NOVEMBER
                        - THE EVENING FOOTBALL MATCH BETWEEN LIVERPOOL F.C. AND
                        SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. AT HILLSBOROUGH

            This football natch will be the first meeting of the teaas since the disaster
            and therefore the first occasion when Liverpool supporters as a large group
            will return to Sheffield and tne ground. This fixture, for all those
            involved, from South YorKshire as well as the North West will raise
            considerable anxieties and tensions which may or nay not be managed by
            individuals. Liverpool supporters will be entering the-ground via Lepoings _
            Lane and the Lepoings Lane turnstiles configuration ana using tne west ^t&nc
            area. Of course', for tne Police and grouna staff, the occasion will be
            'evocative ana stressful. Preliminary discussions with South Yorkshire Police
             nave revealed that they wish a third party group to handle the flowers anc
             tributes that are likely to be brought to tne ground by Liverpool supporters.
             These flowers can net be laid on the terraces, and an area is being set asice
             at the entrance to the West Stand. Given the uncertainties wnc.n surround
             fhe whole event and tne various publics who will be             the ground or invclvec
             i n ’some*way, it is proposed that a comprehensive service is available at key
             p o i n t s , both insioe anc outside of the ground,and to have tne H e l p l i n e ^ n u m c er
             o p e r a t i v e for tne evening. These services, wnicn need to be sensitiveiv
             orcviceo and available snould be provided by a combination of Sheffie,c
             F & CS staff, volunteer counsellors from Sheffieic anc social workers : rcm
             -,-e ’-jor*;'; W e s t . It is crcoosed to brief tr.ese stair anc e v a i u ^ ^ e
             nlace on t ne evening afterwards.
                                                        o '-                          .

            ~'•■s. ’'o^t7'; ".'jest are being asked to provide six sociai wc-r«<ers:
                                                                                ',Oj.u.»»=.. «
            sector three ttney wiIl~also be at two local churches wnicn will be ^ccer.ee! .
            As well as tne Task Team memoers, twelve further staff members snould oe_
            sought from within F i CS. These staff should be volunteers and appropriate
            time comtensations made.

            Conclusion

            *'’ u ° ~ : c r s w i l l s n o r t l v ce c o m o l e t e c wx~h ^ne .»or t n iics =nd S o u th Y o r k s h i r e
            P o l i c e and Sheffield 'Wednesday F.C. regarding t h e detail a r r a n g e m e n t s
            from t h e consultations with the North West, a lower l e v e l of need can ce
            c o n f i - e n - . ' - v crecieced, then appropriate staffing adjustments can?■•be nacs.
            However, t n e u s e of Sheffield social w or ke r s on t n i s o c c a s i o n w i l l give ar
            oooortuni tv to tai k informally to South Yorkshire P o l i c e members, a gr oup
            a b o u t whicn t h e r e a r e s e r i o u s worries follcwing their involvement i n t n e
            HilIsoorcuifh -cisa.-ter. Tr.e r e q u e s t i s ma::t m a t a o p r o v a l i s g i v e n ..o .no
            Vasic l e a n t o c a n v a s s f o r t w e l v e v o l u n t e e r s : s e r e ;
            "T o                      <
                      -— )



                                                                                                                           r-n
                             (r PL    C\
                                                               Ch>              <">       f1
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Appendix 1

                                                                                                                                                                W                                    Sheffield Wednesday Football C!ub
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hillsborough Ground.




                                                                                                                                                                           W




                                                                                                                     Gymnasium




                                                                                                                                                                                  Lighting
                                                                                Lighting                                                    Police                                Tower
                                                                                                                        First Aid           Room
                                                                                Tower                                   Room
                                      Sweet Shop
                                                                                                                 NORTH STAND
                                                        'Access
                                                         Gate
                                           Gate A
                                                                                                                                                                                             CCTV'

                   Perimeter     [umstiles
                    Gates
                                    9-16

                                           f       Porta-
                                           ,Gate /C abin

                                     A-G
                                                     ''Access
                                                      Gate        Tunnel
                                           .Gate C

                                                                                                                                                                    i3U
                                                                   LU


                                                                                                                                                                    '2i\
                                                                                    12                                          Players
                                                                                                                                Tunnel

                                                                CCTV       c.
                                                                                                                                                                               Lighting
                                                                                                                                                                               Tower


                                                                   Lighting              Police
                                                                   Tower                                   CCTV             CCTV
                                                                                         Control
                                                                                                                  SOUTH STAND
                                                                                                                                                     nn nn
                                                                                                   23-28                                             3 0 -3 2
                                                                                                            s.
                                                                                                                      'Directors Entrance
                                                                                                      Official

                                                                                                                    Lighting'
     SCALE                                                                                                          Tower
                                  5 0 metres

             50   100          150 feet




T-
