          MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
  (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                  held 13th October,   1989



PRESENT:   Councillors Moscrop (Deputy Chair), Mrs. Mulhearn and Mrs.
           E. Smith.




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
Owlerton Sports Stadium
           With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its
meeting held on 15th September, 1989, to issue a notice prohibiting
the entry of spectators to the Owlerton Sports Stadium, the Acting
Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a
proposal of the proprietors for restricted use of the Stadium.      He
also reported verbally on the recommendations made at a meeting of
the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group held on 11th October,
1989, regarding the proposals.      The Managing Director and Secretary
of Owlerton Sports Stadium L t d . , the Engineering Consultant to the
Company and a representative of the South Yorkshire County Fire
Service attended the meeting to speak on the proposal.
RESOLVED: That approval in principle be given to the proposal now
reported for the use, during daylight hours, of the area in front of
the Panorama Room at Owlerton Sports Stadium for spectators while
the Stadium is in use for greyhound racing events, subject to
           (a) the completion to the satisfaction of the Building
Surveyor of all outstanding necessary works;
           (b) the crowd capacity of the Stadium not exceeding the
figure to be determined by the Building Surveyor, in the region of
1500 persons;
           (c) no use being made of the Panorama Room while greyhound
racing is in progress; and
           (d) no admission of spectators to the Stadium outside
daylight h o u r s .

Bramall Lane Sports Ground
          The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
submitted a report enclosing a letter from the South Yorkshire
County Fire Service which drew the attention of the Council to the
fact that, while the maximum crowd capacity for the Spion Kop
terrace
at Bramall Lane Sports Ground was specified in the relevant Safety
Certificate as 14,550, according to calculations based on the
requirements of the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds,
the capacity of the exits serving the area was 11,040.  The meeting
was attended by the Engineering Consultant for Sheffield United
Football Club Ltd. and a representative of the South Yorkshire
County Fire Service and the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
Department reported verbally on the recommendations made in the
matter by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group at its meeting
held on 11th October, 1989.
          The Engineering Consultant stated that the Company wished
to ask that the permitted number of spectators on the Spion Kop
terrace at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground remain at 14,550 for at
least three months to enable the Company to improve the access to
Meeting of the General Purposes Panel (Municipal Enterprise and
General Purposes Programme) 13.10.89                         Page 2

accommodate that level, in view of the fact that walkways were
somewhat wider than the figures used in the calculation, gates onto
the pitch were permanently open and current Police practice was to
hold certain sections of the crowd until others had left the ground.
RESOLVED: That, in the circumstances now reported, the crowd
capacity on the Spion Kop terrace at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground
be restricted to 11,040.
