Clifton File
      s m r o c s s c i-f
                         16


                                    MR.   COLLINS


     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, what I will do as I go through
is to endeavour in going through to draw attention to the
matters which we consider to be important and which may
require some further inquiry when the witnesses who will
speak to it give their evidence.
     Sir, before I actually go to the documents themselves,
it might be sensible at this stage to remind ourselves
of the statutory provisions which appfy and which establish
the requirement for Safety Certificates and set out the
responsiblity for safety at football grounds.
     Sir, the principle Act is the Safety at Sportsgrounds
Act of 1975 which came into force on 1st Setpember, 1975
and which was an Act passed as a result of the Wheatley
Report into the Ibrox --or arising out of the Ibrox Disaster
in, I think, 1971.
     Sir, if one looks at s1 of the Act, and this has been
amended by the 1987 Act but I am looking at this because
obviously historically this is the Act under which the
original Safety Certificate was provided, by s1 of the
Act:
     "The Secretary of State may by order designate
     as a stadium requiring a certificate any sports
     stadium which in his opinion has accommodation for
     more than 10,000 spectators."
Clearly, Hillsborough qualifies under that provision.
     Originally it was not a designated stadium because
at the relevant time Sheffield Wednesday was in the Second
Division and the original designation only covered First
Division grounds, but it was still staging large games;
Semi-Finals were being held at Hillsborough, and clearly
it was in the interests of the ground that it should be
designated and so it was that it was decided that it would
be and the relevant designation order is Statutory Instrument
1978/1091, which designated Hillsborough as a ground which
required to have a Safety Certificate under the 1975 Act
with effect from 1st January,  1979.
     Sir, we will see that there was then an application
made under the Act and it is to be noted as a matter of
interest that the then capacity of the ground, that is
the capacity de facto before any questions were raised
as to the capacity to be set under the Safety Certificate
was 54,950, made up of 23,350 seated and 31,600 standing,
and indeed it was recorded that at Semi-Finals in 1976 and
1977, that capacity was reached.
     Sir, you will bear in mind that that figure of
54,950 was a figure in relation to the Kop as it then
was, without the additional roof -- it was not then roofed
and it did not have the additional spaces at the back
                                             MR.   COLLINS


so effectively the capacity of the Kop and indeed
the capacity of the Leppings Lane terraces was above
that which was designated when the Safety Certificate
eventually came into force.
     Sir, going back to the 1975 Act, by s2 it is provided
that     ‘    ■ - i- .
     "Safety Certificates shall contain such terms and
     conditions as the local authority consider necessary
     or expedient to secure reasonable safety."
Then ss(2) sets out certain matters which must and certain
matters which may be contained in a Safety Certificate.
I should say that ss(2) has been repealed by the 1987 Act
but, of course, in relation to the Safety Certificate
which we have it was ss (2) which prevailed and, sir,
you will notice that one of the mandatory matters was
a specification of the maximum number of spectators to be
admitted to the stadium and a discretionary specification
under (b) of the maximum number to be admitted to different
parts of the stadium.       (
     And then by 2 (c) (iii) there was a mandatory provision
for terms and conditions as to the numbers, strength and
situation of any crush barriers.     •
      And then by ss (3) a requirement for records to be
 kept of attendances, maintenance; plan by ss (4) and by
.ss (5) a recognition that different terms and conditions
 might relate to different activities to be held at the
 stadium.   In fact, as we will see at Hillsborough it
 was licensed for football matches and religious conventions
 and one suspects that there might be slightly different
 crowds at those two sorts of events.
     Section 3 deals with the application.         I would ask
you to note ss (3):
     "The local authority shall send a copy of an
     application for a Safety Certificate for a stadium
     to the Chief Officer of Police and the Building
     Authority for the area in which it is situated
     and shall consult them about the terms and conditions
     to be included in the certificate."
Now, sir, that has since been amended.    It w s amended
as a result of the local government reorganisation in 1985/86
and the reason for the amendment is this, that at the
relevant time the Fire Services were incorporated with
the local authority so there was no need to separate them
as a statutory consultee, but after the coming into force
of the local government reorganisa'tion and effectively
the abolition of the South Yorkshire Council the Fire
Authority became a statutory consultee, so since 1st April,
1986 the Fire Authority has been included in ss (3) as an
independent statutory consultee.     That is the effect
of the legislation, I do not need, I think, to take you
                          18


                                         MR. COLLINS

to the details of it} it will appear in the documents
as we go through them.
     Then s4, the local authority can amend or replace
and if it does by ss (3) of s4, s2 applies again, so you
have to go through the same procedures.
     By ss (8) of s4 one sees the same duty to consult
again extended as the result of the local government
reorganisation, as I have indicated.
     Then s5 deals with appeals.     That has been radically
amended by the 1987 Act,     the effect of the amendments
being that instead of an appeal to the Secretary of State
there is now an appeal to the court, but one thing that is
to be noted is that there is reference there to an
interested party in ss (3) of s5 and a definition of
"interested party11 in ss(5) which again now extends to the
Fire Authority but in any event would be extended probably
by virtue of (b) because a Fire Authority inevitably
was involved in ensuring compliance.
     Section 6, Regulations.    Section 6 ss (2):
      "The Secretary of State may by regulations make
provi'sion' for securing’ safety at ■sportsgrounds ."    -
Sir, we have checked;   there are no such regulations.




                        /I do not think it is necessary.
                            19
                                                     MR. COLLINS

 X do not think it is necessary for me to read you, I
 think, any other - perhaps Section 11, Powers of Entry
 and Inspection.

           "A person authorised by a local authority,
            Chief Officer of Police, building
            authority or Secretaryof State may
            enter and make inspection," etc.

        Then Section 12 is offences which include, as I
  think I have already pointed out earlier in the Inquiry,
  by 12(1)(d) it is a criminal offence to break any term
  or condition of a safety certificate, contravene any
  term or condition and, as we see by Subsection 3, it is
  not a minor offence because it carries on indictment
  imprisonment for two years and an unlimited fine. As
  1 say, sir, I think that is all I need refer to in
  relation to this Act.           That has, as I have indicated,
  been amended by the 1987 Act, that is the 1987 Fire
  Safety and Safety at Places of Sport Act 1987, an Act,
  of course which came into being as a result of Bradford,
  largely as a result of Bradford, and the Popplewell
  Inquiry.      It is Part 2 of that Act which matters which
  came into force on the 1st of January, 1988, and which
  amends the 1975 Act.           Effectively it extends the 1975
  Act to cover not only stadia but_other sportsgrounds
"‘arid"give's''’pbw'er'7'’nmcn'-‘wider- pbwer;',to''ceftify the
  requirement or the need for safety certificates of
  sports grounds other than those which were originally
  referred to in Section 1 of the 1975 Act. We need
"not bother with that aspect of it but that was one
  of the major purposes of it.

      Section 19 subsection 2 deals with an amendment
 of Section 2(2)  and, as I said, sir, subsection 2(2)
 had been repealed and you will see that in 19(2)(a)
 which substitutes for the original section subsection
 2 of the 1975 Act, the provision there set out:

      "Insofar as an order under Section 15(a) below
       so requires as respects any class of sports
       ground a safety certificate should include
       such terms and conditions as may be provided
       for in the order."

 Otherwise the provisions of subsection 2 of Section
 2 of the Act are gone so there are no specific
 requirements as a matter of law to be included in
 the safety certificate but, as we shall see. the_
 Home Office Guidance indicated that local authorities
 should effectively continue to include those same sort
 of provisions. Section 15(a) is inserted ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Sorry.  This really watered
 down the legal requirement, did it?
                        20
                                                 MR. COLLINS

      MR. COLLINS:   Well, it removed the need for there
to be the specific matters referred to in subsection 2 ,
of Section 2. It was not intended, I think, to be a
watering down.   It was intended simply to enable there
to be a wider discretion because it was a recognition
that the Act extended beyond stadia and therefore there
would have to be much greater flexibility in the prov­
isions that would be applicable to the various sorts of
sports grounds to which the Act was going to apply.    I
think it was, as I say, a recognition of flexibility or
the need for flexibility which led to the repeal.    But
of course if one looks at Section 15(a) which is a prov­
ision inserted in the 1975 Act by subsection (c) of
Section 19(2) you will see that there is power given
 to the Secretary of State to modify the provisions of
 the Act in their application to sports grounds and
 to make different modifications in relation to different
activities and include such supplementary and transitional
provision as he thinks expedient which gives him a power
 to make an order effectively providing for specific
matters in relation to any ground.    He has not actually
made any orders under Section 15(a), at least not as far_
 as we have been able to - I should say not as far as Lexis
 knows - but certainly there is that power given.

     Then by Section 21 there is added a subsection 2(a)
to Section. 2.:af'..the.‘1975 Act' that no .condition of a
safety certificate shall require the provisionof the
services at the ground of any members of a Police Force
unless the extent of the provision of their services is
reserved for the determination of the Chief Officer of
Police of the Force. What        that of course means is that
the local authority cannot in a safety certificate
require the Chief Constable t o d o anything in particular,
specify that he must do something, it must be left to
his discretion as to precisely how he decides to carry
out any responsibilities.

     Sir, the only other section I think I need refer to
is Section 25 which adds a new Section 10(b) to the 1975
Act which enacts:

     "It shall be the duty of every local authority
      to enforce within their area the provisions^
      of this Act and the regulations made under it
      and for that purpose to arrange for the
      periodical inspection of designated sports
      grounds.}" but nothing in this subsection to
      be ....

     "2.  In performing the duty imposed by sub­
      section 1 above so far as it requires ■
      designated sports grounds in_their areas
      to be inspected local authorities shall act
                            21

                                                     MR. COLLINS

      in accordance with such guidance as the
      Secretary of State may give them,"-and
      for the purposes of Subsection 1 above
      periodical means at least once in every
      12 months.

So it is made quite clear that it is the responsibility
of the local authority to enforce and, indeed, it is the
responsibility of the local authority to set the require­
ments, relevant requirements, in the safety certificate.

     Sir, you   will note by Subsection 2 of Section 10(b)
the reference   to guidance from the Secretary of State.
The Secretary   of State has given guidance and, sir, if
I may ask you   to turn somewhat out of order to page 423
of the bundle   you will there see the guidance that he
has given and   I think it is convenient to refer to it
at this stage   as we are looking at the statutory back­
ground .

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        These statutes apply England,
Wales and Scotland?

       MR. COLLINS:        Yes, they do.     It does not extend to
 Northern Ireland and does not extend to the Isles of Scilly
 except by an order provided under the section.              I-was
-goin'g-to-■sayf-’-ii- '-day- be-there- ar-e'not--a--great number of
 stadiums.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       No.

      MR. COLLINS:   Page 423 of the bundle is the letter
 from the Home Office which includes the guidance. I
 think we can look at 425 which is the statutory guidance.

     "The following guidance is given by the Secretary
      of State in pursuance of Section ■10B(2)“ and of
      course this has statutory effect or at least it
      has binding effect by virtue of the statute.
      "The local authority should be satisfied that
      inspections are carried out by a person or
      persons qualified." And in the Scope of the
      inspection, ".... should, where practicable,
      include .... certificates of testing and
      records ...." which are set out.

  (b)   records of spectator attendances, accidents, maint­
 enance, tests and checks on lighting, public address,
 fire warning, etc, emergency evacuation and steward
 training.

     Then 3, should normally include inspection of
items, part of the ground whereTan accident or incident
has occurred, recorded defect or deficiency, major
                          22

                                                MR. COLLINS

 remedial work, public stairways, egress routes, fire
 fighting equipment, accumulation of litter, emergency
 lighting, first-aid facilities and equipment. That
 has some relevance here.   Then 10 per cent of crash
 barriers, balustrading and hand-rails for overt signs
 of weakness which might signal the need for further
 testing, remedial action or additional restriction on
 number°of spectators, 10 per cent of terraces or
 viewing slopes for general surface condition, even­
 ness, slip resistance, anchorage, fastening of 10 per cent
 of fixed seating, provision for the disabled. And then
 where the inspection of a sample of matters gives rise
 to serious concern for safety the authority should go
 on to inspect all the crush barriers and so on.   So if
 you find a number you must go, with a badge, you go to
  inspect the rest.  Testing of equipment is then set out.

       If one goes over to page 428 one sees the Home
  Office has included supplementary advice and
  explanatory notes which of course are not part
  of the statutory guidance under the Act but are - or
  should be taken into account.   There sets out in para­
  graph 2 the Objective of Inspections, to monitor the
  suitability of" the terms and conditions of the safety
  certificate where issued in the light of any change in
  the condition of the ground and, secondly; to assist
" local authorities in enforcing compliance'with the
  terms and conditions of the safety certificate or
  other notice served on the ground occupier.

      "3 . Local authorities may wish to note that
       the inspection is not intended to shift
       responsibility for spectator safety away
       from the holder of any safety certificate
       or ground occupier, but rather to help
       see that he succeeds in achieving (and
       maintaining) the safety standards intended
       to be set by any certificate for the number
       of spectators authorised to enter the ground
       for a specified activity."

 I assume what that is intended to indicate is that as a
 matter of law of course   the responsibility for those
 who attend at any stadium is that of the occupier of
 the stadium.  He has the primary responsibility to
 ensure their safety.   But of course the local authority
 has th* power under the Act to require certain
 provisions in the safety certificate_as a precondition
 of allowing people to go to the stadium at all and,
 of course, it has emergency powers which I have not
 specifically referred to under Section 10 of the 1987
 Act to issue effectively prohibition notices if
 satisfied there are any immediate dangers which
 require the stadium to be shut down or part of it not
                           23
                                                   MR. COLLINS

to be used at any specific time.  Sir, I_lo not <think it
is necessary to read any more of this guidance in detail.
I would simply ask you to turn over to page 429 and
note paragraphs 6 and 7, that the concept of the inspection
team is encouraged.  First sentence of paragraph 7:

     "Local authorities are also asked to bear in
      mind the potential advantages of a team
      approach to inspections under the Statutory
      Guidance and the role of the fire authority,
      building authority and the Police.^ Local
      authorities in London and metropolitan counties"
      - we are of cosurse in a metropolitan county -
      "may therefore wish to arrange at least one
      inspection per year to be carried_out with a
      representative of the fire authority in
      attendance," and so on.

  You will see, sir, from the approach of the South Yorkshire
 Council up until 1986 and thereafter the City Council
 that they have approached it in that way with a team
 covering all the relevant disciplines.      I n o t e while I
 am here°- someone behind me can do something about it,
 perhaps - my page 430 is merely a duplicate of page
 429 and there is thus an error in my bundle.         I do
 no t know whe ther that i s the same ■in everybody s....      ...

          So that is the statutory background. As I say, I
   hope it is helpful to have gone through that because at
    least- then we all know the framework within which we
/•' are supposed to be operating.

      May I go back to the beginning of these documents
 because what, as I said, I propose to do is to give
 effectively a historical exposition and we can see
 how the matter develops? May I say that the pagination
 to be taken is that at the top, in the middle of each
 page at the top? There are various other numbers,
 bundles from which they have come, that is the guiding
 one.




                                / Page 1 is
       ft.

                                                    24
                                                                  MR. COLLINS

                                 Page 1 is simply Notes for the Guidance ofApplicants
                           for Safety Certificates, but there is attachedto it at
                           page 3 some notes - and I think this comes from Mr.
                           Eastwood's file, so I think that is in the writing of
                           someone, I .think, in Mr. Eastwood's employ or possibly
                           Mr. Eastwood himself;  I am not certain of that, but we
                           will no doubt discover it from Mr. Eastwood - and they
                           would appear to be notes made by reference to the then
                     B     Green Guide which, of course, would have been the 1976
                           edition.
                                 I do ask you to note that there is a reference to
                           ramps and the requirement that ramps should be less than
                           one in ten, in the middle of the page.

                                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

                                 Mr. COLLINS: Amongst various'other references.
                           At the bottom there is a reference to an exit time of
                           eight minutes or less.  At page 4 there is the Home
                           Office Circular on the coming into force of the 1975
                           Act.  I am not going to ask you to read through all of
                           it, but I would ask you to note on page 5, the first
                           full paragraph beginning "It is suggested..."
                      D
                                 "It is suggested in parag ra ph ^ of the annex
                                 that local authorities will wish to keep in
                                 mind the guidelines set out in the Guide to
                                 Safety at Sports Grounds when framing the
                                 additions which they consider should be included
                                 in the safety certificate.    Some of these
                                 recommendations have been revised in the light
                       E         of the experience gained in the prime guidelines
                                 during the past year or so. The guide has been
                                 reprinted and should be available well before
                                 the first designation order becomes effective.
                                 A copy will be sent to you as soon as it becomes
                                 available."

                           And then they say that they are going to set out the
                           amendments.   Then page 6, paragraph 3:

                                  "The local authority is required, by section 3(3)
                                  of the Act, to send a copy of any application for
                                  a safety certificate (general or special) to the
                                  appropriate C h ief’Officer of Police and building
                                  authority, and must consult them about the terms
                                  and conditions to be included in the certificate.
                                  In framing such .conditions, local authorities will
                                  no doubt wish to keep in mind the principles or
                                  guidelines set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports
                                  Grounds.   In this connection local authorities are
                                  reminded that, as was pointed out in paragraph 6 of
                                  the Annex to Home Office Circular No.150/1975, this
                                  non-statutory document is not a set of requirements
                       H          to be rigidly applied regardless of individual



J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                             25
                                              Mr. COLLINS

     circumstances.   The maximum flexibility should be
     maintained to take account of the different
     circumstances at individual grounds deriving from
     differences in such matters as age, size and mode
     of construction.  In this regard, it should also
     be noted that the Act provides that the terms and
     conditions should be such as 'necessary or expedient
     to secure reasonable safety' and it would be
     unreasonable, even if it were practicable, to seek
     the absolute safety of everyone attending the sports
      stadium."

That of course, as a matter of common sense, must be right,
but it does create the problem that it may sometimes encourage
the best possible steps not to be taken.  Paragraph 4:

      "It is envisaged that there will be a g o o d deal of
      consultation between the local authority and the
      stadium representatives in the^process of drawing
      up the certificate conditions.'

Does that substitute page 430?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  It has not got a page number at
the top.  It is 430, is it?

      Mr. COLLINS:   Y e s ,. that is the substitute for page
430. - • '    ’•                ■• ' - :                     '
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Very well, I will just put it
in before it gets lost.

      Mr. COLLINS: We will reach it in due time. Now
back to page 6 . I was coming on to paragraph 4, which
reads as follows:

      "It is envisaged that there will be a good deal of
      consultation between the local authority and the
      stadium representatives in the process of drawing
      up the certificate conditions.  In this way, if
      evidence is advanced that a ground is rarely filled
      to capacity, the local authority may consider it
      proper to base its requirements on actual levels of
      attendance over a given period rather than on
      maximum capacity.  On the rare occasions on which^
      a capacity crowd could be expected, separate provision
      might be made for this contingency^on the lines
      indicated in paragraph 7 below...."

 and so on.   Paragraph 5:
      - "It will be apparent from theforegoing paragraphs,
        the form and content of a safety certificate is
        likely to vary according to the circumstances of
        the individual case.  Accordingly, a standard form
        of certificate would not be appropriate.   It must,
        however, contain full details of the terms and
                          26
                                        Mr. COLLINS

       conditions imposed including, in particular, the
       matters referred to in section 2 (2 ) ...

and you will remember those requirements.

   ’   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS:   Sir, over the page, I draw attention to
paragraph 7 , about two-thirds of the way down at the bottom
of that paragraph after the two insets:

       "In order to overcome this difficulty, it would seem
       desirable for local authorities and stadium
       authorities to seek to work out in advance the
       modifications to the normal terms and conditions
       which might be appropriate to such occasions, e.g.
       the admission of increased numbers to certain areas
       on the condition that extra stewards and police are
       employed, that notice is given to the local authority,
       and so on, and to provide for their incorporation in
       the general safety certificate."

That is to say, where you have activities of a fundamentally
different nature or likely to draw a fundamentally different
sort of crowd.    It was more relevant at the time that we
are thinking of, sir, because Sheffield Wednesday's normal
crowds at that time were, I think, in the region of 9,000,
 10,000 or 11 ,000 , except for the semi-finals when they
would expect a full house, so there was some relevance in
 that approach, although it was not actually specifically
.a crowd.

       Then at page 8 , paragraph 11:

       "In this connection, Regulation 7 requires a local
       authority, on issuing o r amending a safety certificate
       or refusing to do so, to give notice to certain
       specified interested parties and also to advertise
       their action in the press.   It is regretted that it
       has been necessary to incur the trouble and expense
       of advertising,  but, since Section 5(5) of t h e A c t
       is not specific in the definition which it provides
       of 'interested party', no other means could be found
       of ensuring that all persons who might validly claim
       to be 'interested parties' within the mean of the
       Act should be able to acquaint themselves with the
       local authority's decision ..."

 Sir,   the importance of that is this - and I refer to it
 for’this reason - thatthere is the right of an interested
 party to appeal against the grant or indeed the failure to
 grant a certificate in any particular case;    and, as we shall
 see as we go through the history, there was a failure to
 comply with those Regulations in relation, for example, to
 the extension to the Kop and the capacity, and in certain
 other respects.   There was indeed a similar failure, in so
 far as it was a failure - and I am not pre-judging that at
                           27
                                             Hr. COLLINS

the moment - in relation  to the putting in of the pens
on the terraces.  Therefore, it may be that those who
might have been interested in appealing were deprived
of the opportunity of so doing.  The Regulations referred
to are the ---

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  This is what I am looking for
at the moment.  Which are they?

        Mr. COLLINS:   I forget the number of them in 1975,
but   they were effectively   the procedural regulations on
how   to apply for certificates and how to appeal against
any   refusal.  They are referred to somewhere - forgive
me,   sir - in this Circular.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I would have thought they would
be.

      Mr. COLLINS:  But I have not noted, stupidly, precisely
where they are referred to.  It is page 5. It is the •
paragraph under the one that I read:

        "Section 6 (l)(b) of the Act enables the Secretary
        of State to make regulations authorising local
        authorities to determine the fees which may be charged
        in respect of ..."

and so onj and then it refers to a particular regulation.
It is paragraph 2 on page 4 where the reference is made
to the regulations:  SI 1976 No.1263.

■       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS: We have not actually put them in the
bundle, sir. We have put the up-to-date Regulations in,
which are the 1987 Regulations.  They are, in fact, included
in the City Council bundle, which I do not know that you
have yet had and I do not think it is necessary to refer
to them specifically at this stage.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: All right.

      Mr. COLLINS:   Then on pages 9 to 11 there is a
specimen application form.  On page 13 there is an
indication of the amendments to the Guide.  Paragraph 4
on page 13 says:

        "The main amendments in the attached list are as
        follows:

        a.   Exits from each area of spectator accommodation
             should enable the spectators to leave that area
             in 8 minutes or less.

        b.   Every spectator on the terrace should be within
             12 metres of a gangway or exit.
                         28
                                      Mr. COLLINS

     c.   Railings and fences dividing sections of the
          ground should be of the same strength as handrails.

     d.   Depending on the condition of the individual
          stand, the time specified for the evacuation
          may lie between the prescribed maximum and
          minimum.

     e.   A recommended distance from terrace to touchline
          is now given only for a terrace gradient of 30
          degrees or more.

     f.   The recommended flow rate from all sections of
          the ground has been increased to 60 persons per
          minute per unit of exit width except in the case
          of stands (where it remains at 40).

     g.   Recommended strengths are given for handrails in
          various situations.

     h.   Recommendations of the Working Party on Crowd
          Behaviour.

     5.  It is again emphasised that the recommendations
     made in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds are
     essentially guidelines and should be applied to
     existing football grounds with the necessary degree
    ■of flexibility to- take account of the particular
     circumstances at individual grounds.  The aim of
     securing a reasonable degree of safety should be kept
     uppermost in mind;  it would be unreasonable, even
     if it were practicable, to seek the absolute safety
     of everyone attending a ground."

Sir, that is reflected in paragraph 8 of the latest edition
of the Green Guide in very similar language.  Then there
is a list of the amendments.  I am not going to take you
 through those.  I go on to page 21.  This is the Fire
Service Order, "Scheme for Peacetime Major Disasters .
I do not propose to take you through it in any detail,
but I ask you to note page 22, Section 5, that it is there
indicated that it is the police who will normally act in
accordance with the major disaster scheme because they
will normally be the body to be first notified.

      "The Police have a responsibility on site tocontrol
      and to co-ordinate aspects relating to the disaster
      so as to enable Emergency Services and other bodies
      to discharge their responsibilities.

      The extent to which each of these services is
      involved will depend upon the nature of the disaster,
      but, whatever form the incident may take and
      notwithstanding the size of the task facing each
      of these services, the senior police officer on_
      site will be responsible for control and co-ordination
      of action at the scene so as to enable the Emergency
      Services and other bodies to discharge their
      responsibilities".
                                         Mr. COLLINS

And the same point is made on page 24, Section 9(a):
"The Police are the co-ordinating service." On page 27,
a document produced by the South Yorkshire County Council
on the implementation of the 1975 Act, there are set out
the primary areas of responsibility, and they say:

      "In order to avoid duplication and division of
      resources, the primary authority has been designated
      for the carrying out of inspections, reinspections
      and making final technical recommendations necessary
      using the headings given in the contents summary of
      the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds' with some
      additions.   Where there is an overlap of the spheres
      of control, the primary authority responsible must
      consult the other authorities concerned before
      finalising any recommendations.   The following
      abbreviations have been used ..."

and    then we see         various headings.   So far as ingress to
the ground is concerned,        the primary authority's the
building authority in respect of 'structural' and to be
consulted are the Fire Brigade and the Police.         On means
of escape, it is the primary authority of the Fire Brigade,
and those to be consulted are the building authority and
the police;          egress from the ground is similar.    Then
terraces are dealt with:          Structural is the building_
au'th‘o ^ t ^ :a^:':
                   ' the~primaryauthoritywit-h-the^ consulta-tion
of the Fire Brigade and the Police;^ means of escape is
the Fire Brigade with the consultation of the building
authority and the Police.

      So far as the building authority and the police are
concerned, sir, you will recall that by sub-section 3 of
Section 3, they have to be consulted on everything. The
Fire Brigade does not specifically independently have to
be consulted, but clearly it was sensible that they
should be.

       Over the page, the primary authority for access for
 emergency vehicles is the Police with the Fire Brigade to
 be consulted;  that is the second one.  Perhaps slightly
 oddly---
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     No reference to ambulance.

       Mr. COLLINS:    No reference to ambulance, sir,to
 be consulted.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      No.

       Mr. COLLINS:  Then a little lower down, "Terrace
 to touch-line distance" and the primary authority there
 is the Police.  "Estimation of safe ground capacity has
 the Council as the primary authority, in consultation
 with the other three.  "Communications" has the Police
 as the primary authority in consultation with the Fire
 Brigade.  I think the rests speaks for itself, sir.
                                                                                                                                    Mr, COLLINS

      Then we have a letter from the Council to the Chief
Constable, July 1978:

            "You will be aware that the County Council has
            delegated its responsibilities under the above Act
            to the    Fire Service Committee.   I enclose a copy
            of the    draftSafety Certificate   which I   proposeto
            submit to the Fire Service Committee at its meeting
            in September  and shall be grateful for your comments.

            If approved,  the draft  will form the basis of the
            Safety Certificate to be carried by the County
            Council in respect of any stadium in South Yorkshire
            which may be designated under the Act ..."

I will be corrected if I am wrong, but I think that at that
stage   there was no stadium in South Yorkshire which was a
primary designated stadium, that is to say, one in the
First Division at that time.   I do not think Sheffield
United was in the First Division.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Is there any particular_reason
that you know of why the First Division should excite
interest in safety but not the Second?

    ' Mr ■ COLLINS:
   r 7 ‘I V U >
                     I think probably because it was
                   '*■* 'V   »   v*
                                                      -■ _
                                      »T -V» X / . * > '1 .1 *   r *   ‘ n’   ' - « • * '   ’ ' 1‘ ’ * * V   * < ’’ *   ' *'**’ "   '   .   .   1   •   .   •
 anticipated that larger crowds would come to the First
Division and it was recognised that it simply was not
feasible to expect everyone to do its updating at once
and it was a question of implementing it piecemeal.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                                            Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS:  I                                 should say - and it must be obvious -
that there are plenty                                 of documents in between but we have
only picked out those                                 that are relevant, so you will find
that I will jump some                                 in dates.

      The next document is a letter of 1st December 1978,
the Club resolving Dr. Eastwood to act on their behalf
in relation to the designation of the ground.  You will
recall that it was designated as from the 1st January,
1979.
      Then we have the notes of the first meeting of the
Officers' Working Party concerned with the safety
certificate.   One sees that the representatives_of the
Working Party, apart from the Club, of course, include
two from the Fire Service - I am sorry, three f r o m t h e
Fire Service _ one from the Police;   a representative
of the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council;
a representative of the Architect's Division of the
South Yorkshire Council;   another police representative^
Mr. Sherriff of the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
Council;   and then two more from the South Yorkshire
County Council.    % think Mr. Vaughan was the lead so
far as the South Yorkshire County Council was concerned
at that time.
                         31
                                        Hr. COLLINS

      Hl.   On behalf of the Club, Mr. Whitehead" (who
      was the director) ’’welcomed the Working Party and
      gave the apologies of the Chairman. Mr. Whitehead
      stressed that the Club wished to see the Stadium
      used for big matches as regularly as possible.

      3.   During the course of the discussion, the
      following points were made:-

      (a)  the Stadium had been used for many capacity
      matches over the years and its safety record was
      the equal of any in the country;

      (b)   if the Code of Practice were to be applied
      literally, then there would probably be minor
      discrepancies such as in the width of the steps
      on the Spion Kop and in the width of the gangways
      and exits in the Stands;

      (c)  in order to form a base from which to work,
      all of the crush barriers would require to be
      tested initially, with up to 20% tested annually
      thereafter;

       (d)  it was likely that the fire risk in theNorth
       and West stands would be minimal, but the main
       stand would probably r.equire more detailed attention:
.......however, only”a detailed inspection by the Fire
       Service would reveal the true position."

;'Sir, that, as far as the minimal fire risk in the West Stand
  is concerned, is of some importance, as we will see later;
  and that indeed was something that the Fire Service
  accepted, because it is basically concrete.

       "(e) the police would be happy with the existing
       position of the Police Control Centre, but felt
       the present structure would not meet their
       requirements;

       (f)  the North and West Stands were modern structures
       but the main Stand had originally been built some
       50 years ago and there were now no records, which
       would mean a complete survey would be necessary;

       (g)  the only activity which normally took place
       at the Stadium other than football was the
       annual Jehovah's Witness Rally, and an endeavour
       would be made to make provision for this in the
       General Safety Certificate ..."

 as we will see in due course it was.    I do not: think I nee>l
 to~ read the rest.

       Then the City write to the County Council in
 December, 1978, saying:
                                                 32
                                                                Mr, COLLINS

                               "Following the joint meeting ... it was agreed that
                     A         Dr. Eastwood would prepare and submit a comprehensive
                               survey report on matters relating to the above Act.

                               You may consider it advisable before receipt of that
                               report that members of my staff make a joint survey
                               of the premises under consideration with
                               representatives of the Fire Service and possibly
                     B         the Police."




                      c




                           G




                       II
                                                        /Then we have a note


J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                          MR. COLLINS


      Then we have a note or a memo         from the Chief Fire
Officer to the Chief Ex e c u t i v e :

       "I thank you for your letter dated 22nd December,
       1578, and the copy letter of the Building Surveyor
       of the Sheffield Metropolitan District Council.

       It would seem essential that the officers Ot tne
       County Council and Metropolitan District Council
       involved in.the production of the general safety
       certificate required by the Sheffield^Wednesday
       Football Club under the above Act, undertake a
       comprehensive survey of the ground,   i feel sure
       that it would be beneficial to the Club it, _
       initially, each department acted in unison in
       this resoect rather than separately and I would
       make the*necessary arrangements with my crficers
       for this to be achieved.'

 That ic o*‘ course following up the suggestion made in the
 previous letter and clearly a very sensible suggestion.

       Then a little lower down:

       "It is my opinion that the necessary comprehensive
       survey could not be undertaken satisfactorily
       without plan drawings.  In tnis respecu i refer
       to paragraph 1.3 of the 'green code';

        "The oroblem of crowd safety at football grounds
  >,    j_s complex and cannot be solved simply by ensuring
        that each component of a ground, such as stairs,
        passages or sections of terracing, is sauis^aci.Oj.y
        in itself.   The inter-relation of components is
        essential:   they should be compatible and combine
        to form a balanced unit .

        Following the receipt of drawings I suggesu tnat      ^
        Officers meet to agree on identification procedures..

 And so on.   Then he says:

        "The^e should be further visits ....  bindings
        frai visits other than the survey referred to
        will be limited and if we involve ourselves
        in consultation with the Club following the
        submission of Dr. Eastwood's report with limited
        information this could prove unfortunate in Lhe
        long term."

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  What essentially, Mr. Collins,
  are the issues which are going to arise on all these
  documents?
        HR. COLLINS:  Sir, the issues that are going^to arise
  I think really are these:  a consideration as to wheuhe*.
                                   34

                                              MR. COLLINS



the ground was, first of all whether the ground did conform
to the Green Guide requirements•

       Secondly, insofar as the ground did not comply with
the Green Guide requirements, whether those failures were
ca usative.

      •Thirdly if, and to the extent that any such failures
were causative, whether they were matters which were recognised
bv any of the relevant Authorities.   If they were recognised
why was nothing done about it. If they were not recognised
why were they not recognised.

      I think that, putting it broadly,               is the relevance of
this aspect of the matter.

      Sir, of course what we are not concerned with in going
through this is apportioning blame in any way or seeing
whether and to what extent any individual party was or may
have been liable in perhaps civil terms, but wnat we are^
concerned to do is to see where there v/ere failures so that
we can, if we identify them, you sir can see whether there
are matters that need to be tightened up in due course
whether by legislation or in the Green Guide.

   ..... .iOIiD ,JU S TI-.GE.-TAYLOR • ,Y,esthank;., you...... v.       •••*>•• '

      MR. COLLINS:  Then we have Dr. Eastwood's report,
m^is is a report to the Club, January 1979 . Iu is described^
as an "Interim Report".  He says on page 36, second paragraph:

       "The green guide has been used as a basis for
       our calculations, although as wit.i prooably all
       existing grounds, it will not be possible to
       satisfy all the recommendations in the guide.
       Reasonable compromise will be needed on the part
       of the fire officer and the police."

 *hen he deals with the Kop and I ask you to note in the_middle
 of 37.that of.the barriers tested on the Kop, no less tnan
 35% proved to be defective in one way or another.

       He deals in some detail with the capacity of tr.e Kop.
 I am not going to go through that in detail because we are
 not directly concerned with it although we are indirectly
 in some respects, but on page 40 (b) he deals with the
 Leppings Lane terrace.  He says:

        ".The west terrace is not quite so well endowed
        with barriers as Spion Kop.   The present layout
        is shown on the attached drawing lol0/2.   Our
        measurements show a total of area o_ 1430 sc.m.
        but there are no gangways.   We feel that some allowance
        should be made for circulation space as spectators
        have to move quite considerable horizontal distances
        to achieve good packing.   The full area would
                                    35

                                          MR. COLLINS
                          7 Cfr

        justify about( ^ 0 0      spectators   ”

Tn fact if w , arithoetie is correct 8192 is the precise figure
taking th e.54/10 sq.m. but I d o n ’t guarantee my arithmetic.

        "      v;e suggest it would probably be appropriate
        *-o*allow 10% as the equivalent of gangways giving
        i cJpaclty of 7200 spectators.    The barriers should
        be designed to natch this figure appj.oxi3iauely.

Sir of course as is perhaps obvious, that does not include
the#north-west area that we have heard about.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  It does include, does it, the
south-west corner, does it?
      mp  c o l l t >i s - Yes, it does. It includes all along from
the south-west~*to the edge of the West Stand, the Horra enc.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  It just does n o t #cover what has
been called the "cantilever" bit.  Is tnat n g n t .

              rnTLTNS*  ^ a t is right. That is my understanding.
 I a* a o i ‘s“ e wheiher it includes that bit Mr. Poole is pointing
 out. I think it doesn't but I will chec*.
      " ' LORD JUSTICE' ‘'TAYLORr" Including""lower 'level'of nortn-
 we s t .
        MR COLLTMS:  I beg your pardon, it does include that.
 I 'am wrong. It is just the cantilever bit.

            "The barriers should be designed to match J u s
            figure approximately.

            T’he shaded area on drawing 1610/2 is that which
                    be counted if the existing b a r r i e r are o*.
            Cla=s A. About 15 of the existing b a r n e y are
             1 ■!I'elv to need strengthening to achieve u.is
             Standard.     Even with this strengthening only
             4   3 S0 spectators could be accommodated, representing
             a'loss of nearly half. We presume tnis would oe
             unacceptable.

            rphe extra barriers required to achieve approxi­
            mately 7 200 capacity are shown m red on -_ne
            second copy o£ drawing 1610/2.     You may reel tnat
            c-one o‘ the proposed new barriers whicn are c-
            - o ’--he-entrances might restrict the passage or
            spectators undesirably.     In that case they coulo
            be omitted.

             "The three exits ....

   That of course would be the three tunnels, one at eacn enc
   and one in the middle.
                                                               36

                                                                         MR. COLLIHS



                                       "The three exits have 21 total width 0 1 about.
                                       11.5:a which would permit about 1250 people^per
                                       minute to leave the ground.   Thus the stand
                                       could empty in about six minutes which is very
                                       satisfactory.

                                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Somebody has written:       "What about
                      B         perimeter gates"?
                                      I1R. COLLINS: Indeed.  It is important          and.we shall see
                                through consideration or exit flows uroiu the         uerraces, tr.a<-
                                the oerimeter gates have not been taken into          account.
                                has been assumed in all considerations, even          after the ....

                                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  No", no, I think we are talking
                                about perimeter gates on the pitch.

                                      HR. COLLINS:  Even after the construction of the racial
                                fences that the perimeter gates would not be taxen into
                                account in assessing exit times.

                                      I       am told that my learned junior Hr. Goldsack confesses
                                to that note and thus it is not a note which is on the original
                       D        document, so that can perxiaps be expunged.

                                 ..... -LORD JUSTICE-TAYLOR:     Yes ..... •••   -•         •    ....

                                       • JiR. COLLINS:   It continues:

                                  •'    "The guide suggests that everyone on a terrace
                           -p           should be within 12m of a gangway or exit.   Tr.ere
                                        are no gangways and some spectators will be 25a
                                        from an exit.  But we reel tnis is of no con-
                                        secuence as movement horizontally along tnis
                                        terrace will be easy and quick."

                                That of course, sir,      is of importance because there were then
                                no radial fences.

                                         Then there is a reference to the north-west corner.

                                         "Unfortuantely, the crush barriers in this area
                                         were shown to be very inadequate when tested
                                         in 1973."

                                 They did not test any others because they thought they were
                           G     in such poor condition and they are liable i_o collapse.
                                 He goes on:
                                         "Assuming chat the barriers are strengthened
                                         it will be seen from the dra$j.ng 1610/2 that they
                                         also need considerable supplementation.     The
                                         scheme shown on the second copy of this drawing
                                         does not quite justify the whole area being taken
                       H                    the calcu lat io ns. B ut it would be reasonaol<_



J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                           37

                                                                    MR. COLLINS



                                 to count say 2900. This would bring the total
                                 standing at the Leppings Lane end to 10,100.

                           t t-hink t need to refer no more to his Interim Report,  I CTO
                           on to page 48 v/hich is the report which I think was Procuced
                           or in the form it was produced to the Council.   Page ^1 ana 5-
                           deal with the West Terrace and you will see, sir, rua- it
                           contains in a rather shorter form of the material tnat we have
                     6     looked at in the Interim Report.

                                 "The west terrace has a total of 1430 sq.m. but.
                                 there are no gangways.              We feel that so^e
                                 allowance should be made for circulation space as
                                 spectators have to move quite considerable
                                 horizontal distances to achieve good packing.
                                 The full area would justify about 8000 spectators,
                                 but we suggest it would probably be appropriate
                                 to allow 10% as the equivalent of gangv;ays
                                 G i v i n g a capacity of 7200 spectators.          The
                                 barriers should be designed to match this figure
                                 approximately.           Those barriers w h i c h cannot _
                                 w i t h s t a n d the h i g h e r force should be^appropriately
                                  strengthened, and extra ones provided where
                      D          neces sar y."

                           He deals with the extras on the plan.

                                  '••'T’he three exits have a total width; of 11.5m
                                  which would permit about 1250 people per
                                  minute ... could be emptied in about six
                                  minutes which is very satisfactory.
                       E
                                  The guide suggests that everyone on a terra.ce
                                  should be within 12m ....

                            The same point we saw before.

                                  Page 57 j_ 5 a record of the meeting following t.ie
                            submission of that reoort of the Officer VJorxing Par-v.

                                  Page 58 at the top:

                                  "It was AGREED that the plans supplied had
                                  inaccuracies and inadequacies.    In particular, tney
                                  lacked indications of cross sections, profiles,
                                  structural stability, position of handrails ana _
                                  balustrades _____    Where appropriate, these coulc,
                                  as an alternative, be described in a Report.

                                  ‘f’he County Council's hope was that, in vie-.-; o.'.
                                   limited resources in the Architectural &       ^ ^
                                  -'uild-'rc Services Division, the plans suppliec
                                   ?nd finali" accented by the forking Party coulc
                                   fSrm the'basls of the certificate Drawings."

                       H

J . L, H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                            38

                                                                    MR* COLLINS


                                      Sir, that is I think a real problem, the question as             .
                                to who in these instances should be responsible for the
                                detailed drawings.

                                      All I can say is that I-have noted that in the Liverpool
                                Certificate I have seen the 'drawings appear to have been done
                                by the Local Authority, whereas here of course they were
                                drawings which were produced by the Club.   X am not sure i~:iau
                      B         it need make any difzerence.

                                      Then "General

                                      It was recocmised that the criteria set out in               —
                                      the Home Office "Guide to Safety at Sports
                                      Grounds (Football)" required new work or re-_
                                      construction to be to a standard not lower than
                                      the standard set out in the Guide, and that in
                                      existing situations the criterion was that of
                                      a reasonable degree of safety.  As the Guide
                                      stated, it would be unreasonable, even if it
                                      were practicable, to seek the absolute safety
                                      of everyone attending a ground.

                                      With these factors in mind, both the Fire Service
                       D              and the Police felt that the flow of spectators
                                      was the most important criteria to be adopted.
                                      Whilst not disagreeing with this viewpoint, the
                                      Building Authority suggested it would be
                                      useful to know the reasoning behind the
                                      recommendation in the Guide that gangways ssiouic
                                      not be less than 1.1 metres wide.  The County
                           E          Council AGREED to try to find this information
                                      out, and the Fire Service AGREED they would
                                      contact their colleagues in other areas who had
                                      been involved in the Certification process to
                                      ascertain how nearly the 1.1 metre gangway
                                      recommendation had been observed in existing
                                      situations in their respective areas.

                                       At the request of the Fire Service, the County
                                       Council also AGREED to try and find out if there
                                       was any general recommendation on reduced
                                       admission if a ground were used at a night time
                                       instead of during the day time."

                                 r>
                                  ’hen over the page reference to the Kop. The third last paragraph
                                 on page 59 may be of some interest, with reference to the Police.

                                       "For the purposes of crowd control, the Police
                                       suggested there should be some form of lateral
                                       separation.  The Working Party AGRiu^D, and it was    ,
                                       suggested that three metal rences sitec cenurall^
                                       in the blocks (as opposed to adjacent to the
                                       gangways) should be provided, witn acess oetwsen
                           tt          each limited to a padlocked gateway under the
                                       control of the Police."



J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
     C- \
                                                               39
V
                                                                       MR. COLLINS



                          A               t don *t think that ever actually was put into errect
                                   although it appears to have been agreed to in the documentation,
                                   but is oerhaps of some interest because it shows tne Police
                                   th 1
                                      'nkinc, very understandable in connection with crowd control,
                                   that it^is easier to control.crowds on terraces ir you are aola
                                   to split them up into smaller -units.

                                         It is perhaps worth saying here that we would suggest
                          B        that the Police input is fully understandable and reasonable
                                   because what they must have most in their mind is the question
                                   of disorder and crowd control.   That is at tnis s a g e or -ie
                                   proceedings when we are concerned with tne input m , o tne
                                   requirements of the sa£ei-y Certificate.         —

                                         Insofar as the Police requirements or input on crowd
                                   control contain elements which for other reasons are unsa.e,
                                   cuch as for example questions of capacity, questions or egress
                                   and c-uestions of the mechanics of packing, that we would
                                   suggest was primarily for the other parties who were involved
                                   in'the certification process.

                                         So at that stage we would suggest that it is as I say
                                   not unreasonable for the Police input to be very mucn
                                   or towards crowd control, which after all is tneir eicpej. tise.
                           D
                                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: How it is resolved in tne end
                                    is a very difficult equation.

                                          MR. COLLINS:  That is a matter for the whole forking
                                    pnrtv and obviously other matters are material and at <_he
                                    end of the day it is of course the Local Autnority tnar. aos
                                    the responsibility of deciding what are the requirements tnat
                               E    ought to be in any Safety Certificate having or course ta;>.en
                                    the appropriate advice.

                                          Then “(d) The West Terrace

                                          in view of the lack of depth of this terrace,_
                                          the Club's offer ...." in fact it is I tnink I
                                          am right in saying 13,1m from the mouth of the
                                          -unnel as it were, from the bottom of the West
                                          Stand to the front of the terrace.   "In view _
                                          of the lack of depth' of this terrace, the Cluo s
                                          offer to reduce the spectator limit to 7,200,
                                          and the discharge time of 6.6 minutes, the
                                          Working Party AGREED that it would be unreasonaole
                                          to*"insist that gangways or additional exits must
                                          be provided.

                                          However, even if the existing crush barriers were
                                          to pass the tests, the Working Party AGRi^L* uia-c
                                          the barriers would require special attention m
                                          view of the apparent sharp edges, corrosion,
                                          etc."

                           H

    J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                     40

                                                              .HR. COLLINS


                     A         Now it is not entirely clear, but you will recall j.rom
                          Mr. Eastwood's report, certainly from his Interim Report although
                          it was not contained in the final report, he was saying^hat
                          as the crush barriers stood, without any new ones, the ^ 5 ure
                          of 7,200 should 50 down to something in the order or 4,3u0.

                                Nov: unless I am misreading this, it would seem that
                     r»   the v«orking Party agreed to the 7,200 capacity without tne
                     15   need to saahe any modifications to the crush barriers ouier
                          than attention about sharp edges, corrosion etc., tnat_is to
                          s’
                           av the working Party was n o t requiring the erection or rurt*.er
                          crush barriers, so that they were accepting apparently a breacn
                          of the Green Guide on the capacities in relation to tne
                          existing configuration of the barriers.

                                I don't think I need read any more of that forking
                          Part", save to draw your attention to page 62 which sets out
                          the capacity of the ground, where we see:

                                II jf additional exits are not proviced on uhe
                                Spion Kop, this will have the effect of
                                reducing the ground capacity to 45,140 ....

                      D   Seating 24,000; standing on Kop 11,040; standing at Leppings
                          Lane 10,100, a total of 45,140 and you will remember, as 1 _
                          told you, in fact they were putting. 54,000 in at: tnar porioc.

                                 LOUD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Can you give me, I know I a-ra
                           going ahead, the date of the addition to the ?:ou and tne
                           roofing?




                                              /MR. COLLINS:   Sir,   1936


                      H

J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                     MR. COLLINS

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, 1986.   I am not sure, off the
top of my head, when it was completed. No doubt someone
will tell me but I think it is August or September, 1986 -
anyway in time for the season commencing 1986/87.
     Sir, page 63 is a letter indicating acceptance by
the Health Authority of advice on First Aid and medical
facilities.   A note on the next page from the Chief fire
Officer to the Chief Executive indicating timing of
meetings and the last paragraph:
     "However, because of evident differences of
     opinion on mearts of escape, the original time
     and date of 10.00 a.m. on 30th March ... is
     being retained to discuss these differences, prior
     to meeting the Club."
     Sir, I think those differences relate to the Kop,
in fact, so that it may be that that is not of importance
as was thought.
     Page 65, note of a meeting of 30th March.     Paragraph
3:
     "Report.
      General
      The County Council had contacted the Home Office
     but had been given little information additional
     to that contained in their various Circulars.
     Basically, they had said that anynew work or
     reconstruction had to be to a standard not lower
     than that set out in the Guide.   However, the
     maximum flexibility had to be maintained in the
     case of existing structures and differences in
     such matters as age, size and mode of construction
     had to be taken into account."
I am tempted to say it sounds like the usual helpful
advice.
     "The Fire Service had contacted four other Brigades with
     designated grounds, and only in one case had the
     recommendations of the Guide been strictly adhered
     to"
which may or may not be a matter of concern.    And then
there is reference to the Kop, third paragraph:
      "The Fire Service queried the exact form of
      the lateral separation discussed at the meeting
      on 12 t h February, as this wouldnaturally have
      a bearing on the means of escape recommendations.
      After discussion, it was agreed that the metal
      fences should not be of the climb-proof type
      and it was not intended that they should obstruct
      the gangways and that in consequence the padlocked
      gateway recommendation should be dropped.
                                             MR. COLLINS


     "However it was agreed that it was still desirable
     to seek 3 x 2 central barriers but if the Club
     really resisted the suggestion, 2 x 2 could reluctantly
     be conceded.   The Building Authority stressed that
     whatever barriers wer.e. provided would have to pass the
     appropriate strain tests.11
      Sir, that is of interest and importance because it
illustrates the point I was seeking to.make.--earlier that
the Police input is on the crowd control;     they wanted the
lateral barriers, but here-we have the Fire Service saying,
"Well, wait a minute, because that has a clear effect upon
egress and you have gotJto take that into acount." And
then:
     "The fact that the height of many of the existing
     crush barriers was below the recommendation in the
     Guide, in some cases well below, was pointed out
     by the Building Authoirty.   The corrosion point
     mentioned at the last meeting was also reiterated. ’
     It was agreed that these points must be drawn to
     the Club's attention."
Again I refer to that because on the West terraces as
we shall see, the height was and still is below the
recommendations in some cases in the Green Guide.. . . . .
     "The West Terrace
     As well as the condition of the crush barriers
     mentioned at the last meeting, the Building
     Authority drew attention to the poor condition
     in places of the terracing in small areas near
     to the stand.   The cross-fall on the steps on the
     north-west corner exit would also require attention
     ... The height of the crush barriers mentioned in
     regard to the Spion Kop also applied."
And then on page 67 at the bottom, "General Requirements" --
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am bound to say I do not myself
quite see how having the crush barrier at any particular
height is going to --     it cannot be ideal for everybody;
we are not all --
     MR. COLLINS:   We are not all the same height.    No,
I think, sir, and I emphasise that this is my view and
no-one else's at this stage, as I understand it the purpose
in not having them too low is that if they are too low
for an average person it means that they operate as a
sort of fulcrum - if you come up against them, if there
is any pressure behind, you tip over, if they are below
the centre of gravity of the body.    If they are too high
and are at chest level, as it were, or perhaps even higher
for smaller people then there is liable to be damage to
the lungs and the ribs up here and it may be thought that
if they catch you in the stomach, that is the least vulnerable
part, and the average stomach or lower abdomen of the average
                                         MR.   COLLINS


person expected to be on a terrace comes at about 1.1m,
but whether that is right or not, I do not know.   That
appears to be consistent with Paragraph 110 of the Green
Guide, although that says:
     "In order to locate t'h'e top rail against that part
     of the body most able to tolerate pressure.     The
     height of crush barriers should be between ..."
I do not know the part of the body most able to tolerate
pressure is necessarily there but thefc appears to be the
thinking.
     Bottom of 67 (h):
     "As well as the Fire Service pointing out that
     the present temporary structures used for police and
     first-aid purposess would need removal from a
     means of escape point of view if the capacity of
     the North Stand was not to be reduced, the Police
     stated that they were ready to discuss with the Club
     the facilities they would require.    Briefly, they
     envisaged a permanent structure almost twice as large
     as the existing temporary structure..."

and so on.
     "So far as First-Aid was concerned, the Sheffield
     Area Health Authority had confirmed their willingness
     to   ...11

assist with Dr. Bailey.
     Page 69, minutes of the next meeting:
     "Mr. McGee" - the Club Chairman, I think - "welcomed
     the representatives, and stressed that the Club were
     ambitious and wanted to make the Stadium the best in
     Europe. Crowds had been averaging 11,000 this season
     and, viewed purely as a football operation, the
     Club had been losing money since 1967. Commercial
     ventures had made the Club viable and it was hoped
     to expand this side of the Club's activities."
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: ' What does that mean?  Is that
letting off the gymnasium or what other commercial -- ?
     ~MR. COLLINS:  May be that but I think largely that
if they could attract other events - pop concerts, I
suppose, is the sort of example, or whatever.    Obviously
if you have a sell-out you get more money.    And Semi-
Finals, in the football context.
     And then at 71 :
      "B. West T e r r a c e .
      It was agreed -
                          44


                                             MR. COLLINS


      1. That the Club's proposals for the installation
      of additional barriers and the reduction in capacity
      ...without the need for additional gangways should
      be implemented."
So here we do have the’ additional barriers. It may be
that I was wrong in the earlier one; it certainly was not
specifically referred to but it is now.
      "2. That the question of the cross-fall on the steps
      on the north-west corner exit" -
— that I do not think we need worry about.    And then on
  page 73:
      "It was agreed that consideration would be given
      to the installation of an improved public address
      system, with the Police having access... together
      with its use as a fire alarm system, subject to
      an emergency back-up."
     "First Aid Facilities
      2. The Police would supply the Club Secretary with
      a copy of their initial sketch plan showing the
      facilities they wished to see and that Dr. Bailey
      would inspect the existing ...and then discuss
      future facilities."
      "Future Action
      The Club stressed that they wished to carry out as
      much work as possible ..before the issue of the
      Certificate by the start of the 1979/80 Season."

 Then the next meeting, 18th April, 1979, page 74, over
 on 75, although it refers to the Kop it is referrable,
 too, because it deals with the height of the barriers.
 Paragraph 6:
      "It was agreed that the question of the height of
      some of the crush barriers be considered again
      after it was seen which of them failed on testing."
 I suppose there is not much point, it is true, in dealing
 with _the height of a barrier which is going to be replaced
 because it fails anyway.    I imagine that was what was in
 mind.    Again, the same in Paragraph 2 in respect of the
 West Terrace.
      The   bottom of page 76 - "Communications":
      "...upgrading...   It was agreed that the Police
      should have the over-ride facility...   Dr. Eastwood
      undertook to look into the possibility of achieving
      this through radio rather than wire means."
                                        MR. COLLINS


     "Police and First Aid Facilities
     The Police stressed that it was essential that
     there w a s n o gap in the provision of Police
     facilities when the temporary structure was
     replaced by the permanent structure. With this
     in mind, they were happy for the safety aspects
     to receive first priority and to wait for the
     1980 close season for the work to be carried out.
     It was understood that Dr. Bailey had not yet
     completed his investigations."
Then 1st May, 1979, we have the Building Surveyor of
Sheffield City's input into the certificate and on the
West Terrace he refers to the downward slope of the exit
steps and:
     "2. Limitation of numbers as agreed between Police
     representatives and club.
     Subject to these two points this area is acceptable."
Then under "General" at the bottom of 79, Paragraph 1, he
refers to:
    .."All crush .barriers, balustrade walls, fences and
railings .to be tested and replaced or strengthened where
necessary."
      Then there is the input from the Fire Service Department
^although page 81 is headed, "South Yorkshire County Council"
 it is in fact from the Fire Department of the County Council.
      You will see, sir, that in relation to the Kop the
 gates on to the perimeter fence were to be taken into
 account in consideration of exit points because Paragraph
 2:

      "To secure a crowd capacity of 16,850 people the
      following work to be undertaken, in addition to
      item 1 .
      (a) Provide four gates of at least 1.1 metre wide
      from the radial gangways to the perimeter track of
      the ground area."
 Because they were to be used as exit gates, they were
 required to be the 1.1 metres because that is the width
 in the Green Guide, the minimum width for gates which
 are to be used as means of egress. We will hear in due
 course that the gat^s in the perimeter fence on the
 Leppings Lane end were not of 1.1, they were in fact under
 1 metre width 0.8 something or other and 0.9 something or
 other respectively.   And then (b) - provision of an
 additional e x i t .
                                                MR.   COLLINS


Then, at the bottom of page 82:

      "West and North West Terrace.
      The exit routes from*-these parts of the ground
      are satisfactory"
and, as I emphasise, not including the perimeter fence.
      The Fire Brigade also refer at the bottom of 83:
      "Training of Staff.
      To ensure that the staff are conversant with the
      safety precautions they will be expected to administer,
      a meeting can be arranged with this Department
      suitable to all parties."
And on 84:
      "Access for emergency Vehicles
      Adequate roads should be provided to ensure that
      speedy and direct access can be obtained by emergency
      vehicles to all exterior parts of the stadium.

      2. Ensure that parked vehicles will not obstruct
      emergency vehicles on these access roads."
Crowd capacity is then set out in somewhat more detail:
      "The following numbers are considered to be
      satisfactory to the Fire Authority providing that
      the recommended work as detailed above is carried
      out"
and then we see the two figures for the West Terrace,
North West Terrace, 7,200 and 2,900 making a totalof
  ,
10 100   .
     Then the Police input at page 85.    The requirements
the Chief Constable requires are existing crush barriers
to be tested to a load of 400 lb./ft., the maximum required
by the guide to the Act.    This is to be done immediately and
thereafter 20So of the crush barriers chosen at random to
be tested.
      "2. Vertical barriers be placed on the spion Kop
      to prevent lateral movement of the crowd.
       3. Gateways in the existing perimeter fencing be
      realigned with the gangways of the Spion Kop.
      4. The Police have the facility to override the
      public address system.
      5. A suitable Police room be provided.
                                          MR. COLLINS


    "Representatives of the Sheffield Wednesday Football
    Club have accepted these proposals without demur and,
    with the exception of item 5, will be carried out
    during the close season of 1979.   The police room
    will be provided during ’1980."
And then there is a sketch over the page of the required
police room.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     _ But "2" never was.
     MR. COLLINS:   "2" never was, so far as one can tell
and there is no indication in the documents that I have
seen indicating why it did not happen; it just did not
happen for some reason.
     Then, 31st May, 1979, this is Dr. Baily indicating
what he would require, after consultation with St. John's
and over the page on 88 he sets out the requirements:
     "Structure
     The existing facilities are much below an
     acceptable standard and I would suggest the
     Club consider providing a more permanent
     structure which is not likely to require upgrading
     for a very long time."
     "Treatment A r e a .
     The Treatment Area should be sufficient to accom­
     modate two or three patients at any one time and
     consideration should be given to the needs for
     privacy ...bearing in mind that the three patients
     may well be lying on couches."
Supply of hot water and cold water.
     "Storage facilities are required for six stretchers
     two sets of wheels for stretchers, blankets and
     other bed linen.
     "Equipment.
     The following is a minimum list to provide a basic
     service.      Treatment couches with lift up ends,
     -two or three in number depending on space available
      and/or number of cubicles, if the accommodation is
     cubicled.      Six stretchers.   Two sets of stretcher
     wheels.      20 blankets.   6 pillows.   One Minute-Man
      re s uscitator.
      Telephone Facilities.
      A telephone facility would appear to be basic in
      1979.   This can be achieved by an extension from
      the main switch, or sharing with Police."
                                      MR. COLLINS


     Sir, it is perhaps interesting to recall that despite
that there is or was at the afternoon in question,
according to the evidence we have heard, no Minute-Man resusc-
itator and there was no telephone either in the room.
I am not sure whether we t%a-ve heard specifically about
the number of blankets, etc-.    There were, I think, six
stretchers, is the evidence and two sets of wheels.
     And then at the bottom, "Ambulances":
     "Access for ambulances at the present time appears
     to be adequate but must not be overlooked in any
     redesigning.   It is understood that the perimeter
     track is insufficient in dimension to easily run
     the ambulance around the football pitch."
     Then the letter from the County Council in June
sending the comments to the Club in the form of a schedule
which is at pages 91 following. 92    (e) refers to the
limitation of numbers as agreed and additional barriers
as indicated on the plan.   "L" on 94 requires training of
staff, safety stewards.   "0" on 95 requires the access
and "R" requires or sets out, really, in extenso the
requirements that Dr. Bailey set out that we have already
looked at.   And then the numbers capacity is set out
at 97.     . .
      Then on 98 we have an internal memo from Eastwood
& Partners.    In fact that is a memo written I think by
Mr. Strange who was the gentleman in Eastwoods who was
'largely concerned, together with Dr. Eastwood, dealing
with the football club.
      There is a reference to perimeter fence found the
pitch wants testing and strengthening.    Is it "Don" or
"Dan Sherriff", I am not sure which "wants to witness
tests."    Mr. Sherriff is or was the South Yorkshire
County Council or was he the City Council, I forget
which.    City Council.
     "Barriers, General.
      Replace barrier 8 1,.far too low, only about 730
high.    OK had already instructed this one to be
removed.    Corrosion, all dangerous items to be repaired
that could cause injury, e.g. caps on ends of corroded
tubes" and so on.
     Then we have the Working Party, 12th November --
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Then it adds, "Thin plates welded
over corroded gusset plates."
     MR. COLLINS:    Indicating what work had been carried
out.   At- (e) on page 100 you will see that the West Terrace
requirements had been carried out.    (q) 102, "Police
Facilities and First Aid Facilities":
                        49


                                           MR. COLLINS


    «As agreed, a suitable permanent Police Room would
    be provided in 1980.   Club explained that it would
    be preferable from a building point of view for both
    the police and first aid facilities to be.in the same
    overall building, although physically separated.
    The police representat-ives reserved their position
    on this point, pending the outcome of detailed
    discussions with the Club.
     The question of parking for both police and St. John's
     personnel purposes would also need to be looked at
     in detail."
And then "T" over the page, 103:
     "The Club were anxious that the Certificate should
     be in force by the derby game with Sheffield United
     on Boxing Day morning."
Meeting of the 18th December, the purpose, in "1", to
check that outstanding matters referred to in the Note
of the meeting had been completed or were in the course
of completion. Various minor matters.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Mr.   Duckenfield was in on that.
     MR. COLLINS:    Yes, he was.  "Major matters, emergency
lighting and South Stand structure" which we do not, I think,
need to go into and then we have the certificate itself
on page 107, the terms and conditions, dated, you will see,
21st December, 1979.
     "3. The terms and conditions hereby imposed are
     those which the South Yorkshire County Council consider
     necessary or expedient".- that is, of course, following
     the wording of the Act."
It comes into force on 21st December for an indefinite
period, sub-paragraph 6.
Page 110, I am not going to read through all the general
terms and conditions.     (3) is the numbers. If we
look at page 117, and may I emphasise, sir, that this
is the certificate still in force, unamended.  117,
Schedule (3) Part 1, crowd capacity, note the Kop, 16850
and, of course, the West Terrace and North-West Terrace
7,200 and 2,900, and those are the figures we have seen
in th”e reports hitherto.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   So there was no change made
in 1986 when the Kop was enlarged.
     MR. COLLINS:    Not to the Safety Certificate.   As we
will see, there was a note which indicates the County
Council approved it. but it -never was amended on the
Safety Certificate and never formalised.

                        / C3) We have dealt with.
                            50


                                                  MR. COLLINS

3 we have dealt with.     Then 5(2).

      "If whilst the Certificate is in operation it
       is proposed to alter or extend the Stadium
       or any of its instalLations in a manner men­
       tioned in Section 8 o*f- the Act the Holder
       shall at least 21 days before the carrying out
       of the proposal give notice in writing of the
       proposal to the Councy Council."

I did not refer you to Section 8.   I ought perhaps to
have done because that requires or that states, 1975
Act of course, if while a general safety certificate
is in operation with respect to a stadium it is proposed
to alter or extend that stadium or any of its install­
ations and the alteration or extension is likely to
affect the safety of persons at the stadium the holder
of the certificate shall before the carrying out of the
....   Subsection 1 in particular requires notice when
it   is proposed to alter the entrances to or exits from
the stadium and so on.    Over the page ....

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That is relevant simply
 to   the extension of the Kop, is it?

    .MR. COLLINS:   No, because on the face of it
putting in the radial fences would be an alteration
within Section 8 because ....

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Not an extension but an
•'alteration.

      MR. COLLINS:   .... it would affect the safety
 or potentially affect safety.  I may say it is not
 suggested the club did not give the necessary notice
 to the local authority in respect of all these
 extensions.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes.

       MR. COLLINS:     Or alterations.   6(1).

      "The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable
        at least 21 days (or such shorter time to which
        the Chief Constable may consent) prior to every
        Specified Activity the methods^of admission to
       -be employed .... and (in relation to a Football
        Match) the methods to be used for the segretation
        of home and visiting supporters.

       (2) The Holder shall refuse admission to, or
       evacuate spectators from, the Stadium or any
       part thereof at any time before or during a
       Specified Activity upon receiving instructions
       so to do from the Chief Constable.
s-sv'.S
 1^                                                      51


                                                                                MR. COLLINS

                                     7. The Holder shall at his own expense
                                     arrange for the attendance at every Specified
                                     Activity of an adequate number of Police
                                     Officers to secure the orderly and lav/ful
                                     behaviour of the spep£a.tors and the number of
                                     Police Officers shal-l-be agreed between the
                                     Chief Constable and the Holder at least 21
                                     days before."
                        B
                                 Note the requirement to secure orderly and lawful
                                 behaviour because that appears so far as the safety
                                 certificate is concerned to be the role of the Police.

                                     "8(1).  Subject to such interim arrangements as
                                      may be agreed by the County Council the Holder
                                      shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to
                                      the satisfaction of the County Countil a
                                      suitably equipped'First Aid Room." Adequately
                                      signed, capable of being lit by emergency power.

                                     "(2) The Holder shall ensure that during every
                                      Specified Activity a physician employed or
                                      retained by the Holder is available to attend
                                      at the First Aid room if required and that his
                         D            whereabouts are known to those in the Police
                                      Central Control- Room at the Stadium."

                                 Sir, there was in fact a doctor present, as we will hear
                                 in due course.  We have not yet received direct evidence
                                 about it. A Dr. Purcell.

                                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    He is the club's doctor?
                             E
                                      MR. COLLINS:   The club's doctor.

                                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Who we see on the video?

                                      MR. COLLINS:  Indeed.  Whether his whereabouts
                                 were known to those in the Police Central Control Room
                                 I am not sure.  I am not sure we have had any specific
                                 evidence about that.

                                     "The Holder shall arrange for the attendance
                                      at every Specified Activity of such numbers
                                      of qualaified First Aid assistants as the
                                      County Council shall require but without
                                      preiudice to the foregoing the Holder shall
                                     ‘ensure that at every specified activity there
                                      is at least-one First Aid-assistant for every
                                      2,000 spectators."

                                 Then the question of stewards.   The holder shall -arrange
                                 for the attendance at every -specified activity of such
                                 number of Safety Stewards as may be required by Part 2
                                 of Schedule 3. Page 117 gives the minimum number of




  J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                     52


                                                                               MR. COLLINS

                               stewards to be required.     That is 26 for the exits.  That
                      A        is of course the exits from the ground to the public roads
                               outside or to the road down by the river. 26 to the main
                               exit. ^Control a n d •direction of spectators leaving the
                               stadium 38.    One per vomitory.   Patrolling the stadium
                               and dealing with any emergency 2. And they should be
                               distributed at each main exit 26, South-Stand 12, West
                               Stand 8:,- North Stand 18, under South Stand 2. And
                      B        going back to paragraph 9, they shall be:

                                   "(a) fit and capable to carry out their duties
                                    (b) properly trained and instructed (c) ident­
                                    ifiable by dress (d) provided with .written •
                                    instructions as to their general duties in order
                                    to carry out the following^ manning of exits,
                                    control*and direction of spectators entering,
                       C            using or leaving the stadium" - which of course
                                    may be of importance - "patrolling the stadium
                                    and dealing with any emergency including raising
                                    an alarm and extinguishing any small fire."

                               Then page 113, paragraph 14, sub. 3, there is a requirement
                               that there should be provided to the satisfaction of the
                               Chief Constable inter alia a public address system audible
                       D       in all parts of the stadium which the Police may override.

                                114, 24, inspections by suitably qualified chartered
                                engineer.  25 deals with the requirement of inspecting
                                the crush barriers.  28 on 115 requires the keeping of
                                records and notification of accidents.  29 at the top
                               }of 116.
                           E        "The stadium shall be maintained with the
                                     facilities and structures including all
                                     crush barriers, entrances, exits and means
                                     of access tothe entrances and exits in the
                                     number, size, position and strength existing
                                     at the date of the Certificate and indicated
                                     on the plans and no alteration shall be made '
                                     thereto unless prior notice in writing is
                           F         given to the County Council in accordance
                                     with paragraph 5(2) of this Schedule."

                               That is 6f course a reflection of Section 2 (2)(c)(3)
                               of the 1975 Act.  So that,' for example, the crush
                               barriers that were altered when the radial fences
                               were put in and the crush barrier which was removed
                           G   from'the mouth of pen 3 - that is the tunnel end of
                               pen 3 - notification of that would have had to be
                               given to the County Council under the provisions of
                               the certificate.  Then we have details on 119 of the
                               evacuation procedure.  Rather than appears in the middle
                               of that page, you will"see, sir, rather than an announce­
                               ment in the form that we have seen playing of music was

                       H

J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                MR. COLLINS

anticipated.  I am not quite sure whether the tune was
changed for musical reasons or for other reasons but,
any way, I do not think we need go into the details.

      Then on the 28th Jan.u^ry, 1980, we have Dr. Eastwood's
  formal report on the load-tests on the crush barriers
 carried out between June and December and he says over
 the page (b) Leppings Lane, page 122, "In the first
 series of tests six barriers had failures of the tube
 retaining clips.   Five barriers suffered permanent_
 deformation of the horizontal rail. All were repaired.
 In addition 13 -new clips and five rails which were badly
 corroded were replaced*and any_protruding or sharp edges
 removed.  After construction of the new barriers they and
 all the repaired barriers were tested and all withstood
 the test load satisfactorily."

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   At some stage, I imagine, we
 may be going to look at a safety certificate from else­
 where?

      MR. COLLINS:   We have some, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:-  I leave it entirely to you
 how you do it but a comparison might be of interest.
 Maybe better to do it later on.

        MR. COLLINS:    Yes. We have in fact got the Liverpool
   one which can be compared and we have also got, I think,
   the Aston Villa one which, as you know, was the other
■’ ground used for ....   Page 125, County Council to
   Eastwood, July, 1980, thanking him for his letter.

     "After consultations with the Building Authority
      and in view of the fact that all of the barriers
      were tested prior to certification, the County
      Council is able to agree this year with the
      course of action which you propose.  I would
      stress this agreement is conditional .... accepted
      without prejudice as to what may be required in
      future years."

 That is the question of retesting under the certificate.
 Then he deals with that over the page, Eastwood.   "In
 July I made inspections and had approximately one-fifth
 of the crush barriers tested by members of my staff
 under my control." You will see, sir, there were a
 number which failed of that one-fifth.  Perhaps the
 importance of that it indicates that in a period of
 12 months the possibility of the failure of a sig­
 nificant number of the barriers because of course
 all had been tested as we have seen prior to the
 safety certificate.  Whether that is because of the
 age of some of the barriers I do not know.  But we do
                         54


                                                    MR, COLLINS

know of course some of them are fairly ancient and
indeed the one that failed was pre-1931.

•• •   127.   Minutes for debriefing of the semi-final in 1981

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:-'- We have seen this document.

     MR. COLLINS:   We have seen this document.  Yes, I
think we have seen it.  This is the one that was referred
to ....

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Tab 4 or something.

     MR. COLLINS:    Tab 4.   I would as well as it
happens to come here in the bundle draw your attention
to the fourth paragraph.
                                       i
    "The Chairman invited views on this point.
     Superintendent Chapman said that the
     entrances to Leppings Lane were controlled
     to ensure an even distribution of;fans.
     However, as the ground lfilled up the usual
     packing problems occurred.   There was space
     in the centre of the -enclosure but fans
     refused to move over and fill it."

The only reason I draw attention to that is it perhaps
is an indication that left to themselves fans do not
actually always even themselves or put themselves evenly
on terracing and, indeed, there is a recognition in
that paragraph by the Police Officer that that actually
did not always happen.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    You mean even when you do not
inhibit them by putting fences?

     MR. COLLINS:   Exactly.  Exactly.   Unless they are
made to move in some way then you get the problem or the
potential problem of them not standing in the places
which perhaps give slightly worse views.   One can
understand that.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Also rather strange that it
seems-to suggest contrary to all we have heard  it was
the centre that they ....

    _MR. COLLINS:   Indeed.  Then we have this, "Police
Officers were placed in the crowd to ensure that the
best use was made of the available space." So there is
a recognition there or apparent recognition of the role
certainly being carried out then by the Police in
ensuring even packing of the terraces.

       Over the page, 128, third paragraph, Mr. Herold
                       55


                                                    MR, COLLINS

said that the capacity for the Leppings Lane enclosure
stated in the certificate is 10,100,must contain a
safety margin.  The actual turnstile reading was 10,435
to which must be added 70 supporters making a total of
about 405 over the authorised.limit.  Assuming that there
is a safety margin in the-10,100 it is not a large increase
over the capacity that one had on that occasion.

      The bottom of the page, 128, and this no doubt is a
matter we will have to ask Inspector Calvert who will be
giving evidence - there is-a reference to Inspector
Calvert expressing concern about the central entrance to
the-Leppings Lane area because it always causes delays
and blockages.   It would benefit from reconstruction.
Not entirely clear from that which is being referred to
because central entrance to the Leppings Lane area
could mean the tunnel but I do not think it is likely
to mean that or it could mean, I suppose, outside at
the gates.   Of course, that was a configuration which
has since been checked but, nevertheless, no doubt we
will find out precisely what was meant by chat in due
time.   I do not think I need go through more of that.

     Next is the report on the same incident by
Sheffield Wednesday to the County Council in accordance
with the certificate, required to report accidents.
Actually they were a day or two late but that, I think,
does not matter.  It gives the details of the injuries.
Board minute, relevant Board minute, on page 134,
"Concern was expressed at the crushing which occurred
at Leppings Lane end of the ground and further
investigation into making it more comfortable should
be looked into.  Then there is the internal Police
report, another internal Police report, from the Chief
Superintendent to the Assistant Chief Constable.
Fourth-paragraph. ' "I have informed Mr.England" - who
was the then club secretary - "that, our consensus view
is that the 10,100 crowd figure specified in the
safety certificate is too high.    Understandably, he
refutes this and defends the position by stating that
the former capacity , prior to the implementation of
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act at Hillsborough in
December, 1979, was 11,100 and that on a number of
occasions in previous all-ticket matches the terracing
has accommodated that number.   Certainly, at the 1980
semi-final, when we again had a opacity crowd of 50,174, we
also had some hundreds of:•forged tickets, all for the
Leppings Lane end, and apart from one very minor
crushing of spectators there was no problem."


                            / M r .'-'England has
                        56

                                    Mr.   COLLINS

      Mr. England has been acquainted with our view that
      the Leppings Lane terracing should be sectioned
      vertically front to back to produce pens to enable
      more accurate crowd control and prevent sideways
      movement, and heis already actively considering
      this. He has also considered using turnstiles 1
      to 4 for one part o'f: the terracing and 5 to 6 for
      another, controlling the crowd entering through
      those turnstiles by the placing of safety barriers
      in that open area between the Leppings Lane
      turnstiles and the back of the West Stand terracing.
      I agree with him that for most matches that would
      possibly work but have grave reservations as to
      its efficacy for the potentially troublesome games.
      Additionally, to implement it he would have to find
      some way for spectators to enter the West Stand
      without crossing the other corridors that support
       * .I*
      Iti-




Then there is the report from the Chief Constable to the
F.A. at pages 138 and 139.  In the second paragraph of
page 139, the Chief Constable says:

       "The capacity at the. Leppings Lane end is 10,100
       and this obviously contains a safety factor. At
       a previous match some 400 holders of forged tickets
       gained entry into this part of the ground and were
       absorbed without any apparent difficulty.   However,
       on this date turnstile readings showed that 10,435
       people were admitted to this part of the ground."

; With regard to the first part of that, one is entitled to
  perhaps comment that that is not wholly consistent with
  the views expressed in the internal memorandum that we
 were just looking at.

       "A policy of packing spectators occurs at most
       football grounds where large crowds are in
       attendance so that all the available space is
       utilised.  On this occasion the Tottenham Hotspur
       fans, who had arrived early in the day and taken
       up advantageous viewing points, refused to move
       into the centre of the enclosure, thereby creating
       a jamming effect at the extremities of it. The
       late arrivals caused an immediate problem ..."

 and so on.  The policy of packing spectators means, I
 assume, that .they should be, as indeed it says, they
 should be spread out evenly, and it is pointed out that
 that did not happen.

       Page 140 is a copy of the Police letter to the
 Club.    I think we have already seen that. In the middle
 of the second paragraph - and I am sorry it is not all
 that   legible - is the reference to the Chief Constable's
 only  criticism of senior, officers for  not opening the
 gates earlier, "thus avoiding the emergency measure of
 allowing and helping spectators to climb over the fence".
                                         Mr. COLLINS

      Sir, what happened was that the gate was opened as
described’by Mr. Vaux earlier, but some people did escape
by climbing over. The Club were criticising the police
for allowing people climb over, the police making the
point "We only helped people.to climb over who were
escaping from the emergency- .

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

          Mr. COLLINS:   Sub-paragraph (b) at the bottom says:

          "The Leppings Lane end is not  constructed to give
          maximum aid to the packing and control of the crowd
          and the accepted crowd capacity is such that there
          is no safety margin."

Again one sees the slight inconsistency in what is said
to the F .A. and what is said to the Club for internal
consumption.
          Then, over the page, at the top, about three lines
do wn :
          "I consider it advisable for the Safety and
          Grounds Committee of the South Yorkshire County
          Council to visit the Leppings Lane end to discuss —

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I suppose the letter to the
F.A. may mean that the capacity is 10,100 and that that
is obviously intended to contain a safety factor?

          Mr. COLLINS:   Yes, sir, to be fair, that may well
be so.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Anyway, there it is.

       Mr. COLLINS:   At the top of page 141, sir, I was
 just reading as follows:

           "I consider it advisable for the Safety and
           Grounds Committee of the South Yorkshire County
           Council to visit the Leppings Lane end to discuss
           the problems encountered at the semi-final with
           a view to taking further preventative measures.
           I do not wish spectators again to be climbing
           over the fence and it is therefore important that
           the construction of barriers and the arrangements
           of the crowd at the Leppings Lane end should be
           looked at critically to ensure that t hepolice and
           the stewards are able to control and maintain order
           more effectively within the terrace.   I am in favour
           of a free zone on the terraces behind the goal to
           which spectators can be moved in an emergency .

 He then talks about getting the whole matter i-nt°
 perspective, considering a crowd of 50,000 and the
 problem that there was not a wholesale condemnation.
                                        Mr.COLLINS

              Then we come to the penultimate paragraph,
which says:

      "I have tried to be constructive in this letter.
      I have not attempted to seek relief from the
      responsibility of ensuring the safety of spectators
      at Hillsborough.  I regard this to be a joint venture
      and I suggest that when we do get problems, as
      inevitably we will, we should stand together and
      refrain from blaming one another, especially
      before all the facts have been marshalled".

So there is indeed, one would suggest, an obvious sensible
approach being put forward there, that each has a
responsibility for safety and each must work together.


      Page 142 is a meeting of the 8th June, 1981, and
at the bottom you will see a reference to the West Stand
which says:

      "Following experiences at the F.A. Cup Semi Final,
      the Club were considering revised arrangements on
      the terracing in front of the stand. An assurance
      was given that the Officer Working Party would.be
      consulted when these had substance." •

Then we have another internal police memorandum of August
1981 from, Ithink, the Chief Superintendent, Mr. Herold:

      "You are botl^iware of my feelings that Club Stewards
      at Hillsborough often do less than they should and
      are at times not aware of our function and operation
      and our respective roles."

Then the fourth paragraph:

      "We should stress to the stewards that the admission
      of spectators and the pa'cking of those spectators ^
      at the bigger games under the terracing is primarily
      their function and not a police one".

A little lower down:

       "We should co-operate fully with them and they with
       us, and not pull in opposite directions".

 145 is a letter from Dr. Eastwood to the County Council:

       "We have been instructed by the Club to organise
       the installation of two radial fences on the
       terrace at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

       It is intended that these fences are so positioned
       that they divide this section of the terrace into
       approximately three.equal areas, each served by
       its own entrance".
                                       Mr. COLLINS

Effectively, sir, what was proposed then a n d in d ee d what
was carried out in the event was the fence dividing 2
from 3 and the fence dividing 4 from 5, and those were
theonly two that were originally to be installed.

      "By dividing the tetta'ce, more control over
      supporters should result.     A visiting team with
      only a few followers will be allocated one section,
      with the other two sections retained by the home
      supporters.

       Larger contingents of visiting spectators could
       be accommodated in two or all three areas as their
       numbers dictate.

       A 1.15 metre wide gate is proposed at the rear of
       each fence to give access for maintenance and
       also policing during a game.    The gate could be
       left opened but fastened back to connect the areas
       during a game if adjacent ones are occupied by
       supporters of the same team. When establishing
       the heigtt we have considered that the views to the
       corner flags should not be restricted any further
       than they are at present by the perimeter fence.
       We therefore propose that the top of the fence
        should be approximately 1680mm above the terrace.

       This may not prevent the odd spectator climbing
       the fence but should eliminate a mass invasion
       from one area to the other.  Fences this height
       appear to work successfully at St. James's Park,
       the home of Newcastle United."

 Then there is an internal note by Mr. Strange referring to
 possible alterations of arrangements at the turnstiles
 and indicating, on pages 149 and 150, possible new plans.
 The only point that I think is of perhaps some_importance
 out of all this, sir, is that it is an indication that
 there are ways of increasing the turnstile capacity at
 the Leppings Lane end which have been considered. This
 one, as you can see, sir, includes the possibility of
 some new turnstiles with a queueing area along the side
 road running beside theriver \ and also the possibility or
 a double system, that is to say, original entry points
 through the turnstile and. then a further turnstile
 allowing those into the stand who might want to pay extra
 to get into the stand.    Those possibilities are all
 cons-idered.

       Page 151 is dated 9th September, 1981;  further
 crush barrier tests in 1981, and one or two showed signs
 of distress - again an indication of the need for the^
 annual test because crush barriers did go in that period,
 this time two years since all the tests, of course.
                       60


                                      Mr. COLLINS

      Page 152 is a Police internal minute, at the bottom
of the page of which there is a reference to attending a
meeting:
      "Members of the- Fire Service and Buildings Department
      were in attendance and the only reservations
      expressed were by t'fie Fire Service, who indicated
      that the security gates - which will be open
      during football matches - should not in any way
      restrict the egress routes which they feel are of
      minimum width as it is.

That, of course, is of some importance, sir, because there
is the Fire Service saying "You have got to keep those
gates  at the back available and clear for exit if these
fences are to be put in".

      153 is a Working Party Meeting of the 11th September,
1981.  Item 2:

      "Whilst there were drawbacks to the division of
      the terrace into approximately three equal areas,
      each served by its own entrance, the Working Party
      felt that increased control on the Terrace should
      result from the proposals.   For instance, there
      could well be problems with the opposing fans
      mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or the
      final exit gates, but the police consider they
      could cope with any problems of this nature.

      The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be
      installed at the rear of the radial barriers was
      also discussed, as well as the u s e o f the existing
      gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the
      front of the Terrace.

       It was noted that the plans submitted did not
       indicate the amount of headroom which would be
       available at the rear of the Terrace should the
       radial barriers and gates be installed.

       It was agreed that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs.
       Eastwood and Partners that the Officer Working
       Party sees no objection to the proposals to instal
       two 1680mm high radial barriers, with 1.15 metre
       wide gate at the rear, on the West Terrace at the
       Hillsborough Stadium, subject to:-

       (i) _   the further calculations required by the
                Building Authority being satisfactory;

       (ii)    confirmation that adequate headroom will
                be available at the rear of the Terrace, and

       (iii)   the new gates at the rear of the(( Terrace
                also being under police control."


                      V.
                      \V
iU:V&                                               61

                                                                Hr. COLLINS


                             Then item 4:
                                   "It was recalled that the ex is ting unsatisfactory
                                   police and first aid facilitie s under the North
                                   Stand had been accepted on an interim basis.    The
                                   Club had undertaken-to provide purpose-built
                                   facilities ... during the 1980 close season,
                                   Whilst some progress had been made in discussing
                        B          details of the facilities, no firm indication had
                                   yet been given as to when they would actually be
                                   provided.  It was ag.reed that Mr. D. Vaughan would
                                   press the Club."

                             And then there is an indication of those decisions written
                             to the Club in the letter at page 155 and 156, and I d o >
                             not need to go through that, sir, because it is repetition.
                             I am sorry, sir, that is wrong.  I said that it was sent
                             to the Club.   In fact, it was sent to Messrs. Eastwood
                             and Partners.  Eastwoods send a copy to the Club at page
                             157:
                                    "I enclose a copy of a letter from David Vaughan
                                    dated 14th September from which you will see that
                                    the proposal to instal the radial barriers on the
                        D           West Terrace and to provide security gates round
                                    the North Stand are accepted, although with some
                                    reservations'..."

                              Then in October 1981 he refers to the test, which I do
                              not think I need go into.  At 160 there is an internal
                              memorandum, or rather an telephone message from the
                              Club Secretary.  Blessvale are the contractors who dealt
                         E    with the installation of the radial barriers:

                                    "Blessvale have cut existing barriers on each side
                                    of fences.  Is it the intention to put rails back
                                    or leave off?

                                    Explained that if left off, some capacity will be
                                    lost (theoretically).  He said that putting them
                                    back would provide a jumping off point for
                                    spectators.  Agreed.  Which does he consider more
                                    important?  Agreed to discuss."

                              The point there, sir, is -that if you remove the barriers
                              you create a gangway down either side and that affects
                              the capacity in accordance with the Green Guide;   and the
                              point is made, "Otherwise they will jump over.

                                    Then we have a letter referring to a drawing of the
                              standing capacities of the five areas at Leppings Lane
                              end.  I am not sure that we have got that.  Unfortunately
                              we do not have that drawing, sir, and I am not quite sure
                              which are the five areas.  There are three in the front.
                              I imagine he is either including the corners as separate
                         H    areas or some part of the north west as being a separate
                              area as well, but I do not think it matters.


  J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                      62


                                   Mr. COLLINS

Then there are further telephone calls from Mr. England
to Mr. Strange:
      "The police have been to inspect fences at Leppings
      Lane. They are not happy that.existing barriers
      go through the fences • Barriers can be used as a
      jumping off point. ISric and I had discussed this
      last week.  We agreed to let the police make first
      comments.  Eric thinks that barriers should be cut
      away.  I explained about calculated loss of spectators
      would bring capacity below 50,000.   He said that
      crush during last semi-final made him suspicious
      of crowd calculation at that end anyway".

I think that is a record of Mr. England, the Club Secretary,
speaking.  It goes on:

      "Said that perimeter fence was cause of this.
      Suggested that Kop could take more because area
      is larger to dispose those affected by fence.
      Agreed to leave barriers in position for QPR game
      to see what happens.   Ring Monday".

Then on the same day Mr. England was ringing to say that
there had been no sign of Blessvales, but I do not think
we need worry with that.  I will simply ask you to note
the Club's reservations, or at least Mr. England s
reservations about capacity.

      On page 163 there is another message on the same
day, Mr. England to Mr. Strange:

      "Asked him if Police, had passed any adverse comment
      about operation of fences at Leppings Lane end. No.
      All went well on Saturday.    Chief Constable has seen
      them.  Agreed that we would leave barriers going
      through for time being.    If they do cause trouble,
      then cut them down.   OK."

 Then we have Eastwoods saying that there is no comment
 yet from the Working Party.

       Page 165 is the 18th January 1982, from the Police
 to the County Council, the second paragraph:

       "Dealing now with the radial  fences which have
       recently been installed on the Leppings Lane
       terracing, I can confirm that the fences are
       working particularly well and proving to' be most
       satisfactory in effecting the segregation of
       opposing groups of fans.  Since the fences were
       put up there has been no fixture at the ground of
       sufficient interest to result in that entire section
       of terracing being given to one group of fans and
       so I am unable to cpmment in that respect, but I
       s£e no problems whatever".
                                                            63

                                                                                    MR. COLLINS


                            At the bottom of the page, about six lines up:

                                    11T would point out that Mr. England totally agrees
                                    w  i t h     p o l U e Observations regarding the construction
                                    Of the radial fences but I understand from him that                     :
                                     it i s b e i n g suggested -that any alterations could
                                          r^roivAbl? result in a reduction in the capacity
                                     o f     t h e  Leppings Lane terracing.     I am not aware
                                     oi the thinking behind that but for my part see no
                    B               reason why that should be.

                            That is on the.question of'cutting them away so as not
                            to allow people to jump over.
                                  Then we have a letter from the County Council to
                            Eastwoods with M r . Strange's comments thereon, about th
                            various comments:
                                        "(a )      Radial Barriers on West Terrace

                                        The matches          a £ ^ f e r s ^ o n f i r m that they
                                              U to10be working well and satisfactorily effect
                                        the segregation of opposing groups of fans.              However,
                                        rte entire section of the Terrace has yet to be
                                        given to one group of fans.
                                        The police inform me that, on installation of the
                                        new radial barriers, the existing crush barriers
                                        Viovp been extended in some places up to and
                                        completely through the new radial barriers at a
                                        height of 4' 6" or so from the ground.
                      E      Mr    S t r a n g e  points   out that they were left there and it
                             was   n o t    a   question   of them being extended:

                                           "The effect is to make it very easy for fans to
                                           rT^mb from one pen to another.     In other places
                                           the existing crush barrier rails have been cut
                                           off short of the radial barriers in a manner which
                                           U a v e s dangerous pieces protruding into some of the
                                           gangways".
                              The note that he has put on is, "Not intended to be gangways
                              If counted as gangways, then you lose capacity .

                                     Then we have a copy of a letter from 1Easc« 00third°
                              the- County Council in reply to that, on 169, the
                              paragraph:
                                           "Tiirninp now to the radial barriers on the West
                                           Terrace    it is of course accepted that where there
                                           is a crush barrier passing through or close to t
                                           radial barrier it will make it easier for.anyone
                                            t i l l wishes to climb over. Nevertheless we
                                           believe it is not unreasonable to leave the crush
                        H                  Harriers as they are.    If all barriers were removed
                                           back to a distance say 1.2m from the fence, it would


J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                   64

                                   Hr. COLLINS


mean a 2.4m wide gap which is not protected by
harriers.  There would be a consequent loss of
calculated spectator capacity which is undesirable
from the Club's point of view. However, from the
point of view o£ safety a strip of that w i d t h without
a single crush barrier would be a major hazard.

Tt should be kept in mind that the introduction of
these radial barriers has affected a very great
improvement from the point of view of sefregation
of spectators but to achieve perf<ectionfrom the
point of view of segregation brings with it other
disadvantages.  I believe that what we have done is    m
a reasonable compromise between the various interests.




                        •/Meeting, 4th February
                                65

                                            MR. COLLIrlS



      Meeting 4th of February on page 172 where the point
is discussed and then it was agreed, at the bottom o. the
page:
        "■That, on balance, it was preferable from a                           \
        safety point of view tir prevent crowd surge by
        the existing barriers being extended up to
        and/or through the nev; radial barriers than to
        completely prevent persons being able to climo
        from one pen to another ....

Then go over to 174 there i s “reference to the Police and
First Aid F a c i l i t i e s :

        "     the Club would shortly be in a position
        to'formally notify the County Council that the
        nev Police and First Aid Facilities would-be
        provided in the forthcoming close season."

175 Br. Eastwood again to the Club about the Annua_l
Certificate of Ground Safety ", testing the barriers on -he
      The only reason ± refer to it is about six or se>/en
lines in the sentence:  "It is inevitable .... this is
referring to tne retaining clips:

        "It is inevitable that water gets under these
        d i p s and they rust thus becoming
        the passage of time."

 Then the Club's reply to that:

         "Many thanks for your letter of the 12th July
         re barriers on Spion i\op and L e p p m g s Lane,
         and I agree that you put the wor.kc in hand as
         detailed in order that we have no dangerous
         j3 £i7£iers for the start oz tne season.

 T’hen Mr. E a s t w o o d ' s re c o r d of i n spection on 173 and 17 9, a
 copy of the same on 130-131 an d e ffectively 182-133.
 Then 184 is the next meeting in January.                  V;e uove on now
 to January 1985.
             Perhaps I should pause there and simply make t;iis
 comment-        you will have noted, sir, that no one seems to
 h a ^ taken account of the potential effect upon tne capacity
 and the question, apart from the barriers going uhrougn ^le
 r a d i a l f ences , as to whether there should be any reconsideration
       th«'capacity of the ground at the i,eppings Lane ena, p a ^ *
 c u l a r l y having ragard to the c o u n t s in 1931 not only c f
 the Police but also apparently t n e view o_ ar. £.ngl»i.c,
 the figure of 10,100 may be a figure w m c h ougnt to oe
 reconsidered.
        We v/ould suggest that the putting of the radial^ fences
  made it imperative to reconsider it when you couple uiat
                            66

                                        MR. COLLINS


w<th the crushing that had occurred without any radial fences
at the Tottenham/WoIves match, but for some reason or owner
that appears not to have been taken into account at all.

      184 3. at the bottom: .- . .

      "T’he Club recalled the practice followed in
      consultation with the South Yorkshire Police^ of
      separating hone and visiting supporters at the
      rear of the Stand at certain matches (such as
      with Liverpool) by erecting temporary barriers.
      This worked well but on all otner normal occasions
      it was the policy of the Police to aim for
      exclusive use by visiting supporters of the West
      Stand and Terrace.   On those occasions wnen -he
      nunber of visiting supporters was small and the
      weather was inclement, it was obviously desirable
       to allow home supporters access to a sheltered
       area.

       IT WAS AGREED -

       (i)  That the   Club would consider at some future
       date a scheme   for permanent barriers at the rear
       o- the Stand,   subject to any proposals being
       submitted for   prior approval by the Officer
       Working Party   in the usual way."

 At the bottom of the page there is reference to an improved
 public address sytem.

       Then we have at 187 through to 204 the Ambulance
 Major Incident Plan.   I hope.I will be forgiven by
 m-   Kallipetis if I don't take you througn thau because     _
 it"can of course be referred to in due course m s o z a r as it
 is relevant, but it is not specific to Hillsborougn, o=
 course, it is the general Ambulance Emergency Plan.

       204, the letter of the 4th of February,         the Police to
 the Club.
       »-.*ith reference to our conversation o.v las'c i/es-k
       regarding improvements required to the West Enc
       of"the ground, I forward herewith our thougnts.

       vou will see that we favour the erection of a
       stone w a 1 1 on the ground side of the current
       terraces, with such wall housing a bank oz
       turnstiles.     Our belief is that once_a_spectator
       qoes through the turnstiles he snould t:ien uQ
       segregated from the other fans, and this can^
       be achieved by the erection of permanent hign
       m*ta 1 railings on that c o n c r e t e ^ r e a at present
       behind the Stand.     Similarly, there should oe a
       high'metal railing down the centre of the Uest
                                                      67

                                                                M R - COLLINS


                                Stand.  What is then created is total segregation
                                of all three portions of the Terrace and tne two
                                areas of the West Stand, with each_of these
                                segregated areas h a v i n g :its own refreshment and
                                toilet facilities."

                           The effect of course being you go through the correct turnstile
                           and you are automatically segregated in going to a particular
                      B    part, either of the terrace or of the Stand.

                                 Then a letter from the ~Club to Eastwood asking ror
                           discussion and we have then in the beginning of A p r i l -1935
                           Eastwood's sketches of a possible layout segregating visitors
                           from home supporters.

                                 If we look at the plan, sir, page 207, drawing 5705/2
                           there Is possible modification which leads, as you see, to
                           29 turnstiles in number.  I think it perhaps speaKs ior itself
                           as to how the division is proposed.

                                 2 ^feetively 1— S would go to the Nortn Stand, cs at
                           present! 7 - 1 2 home supporters to the north-west terrace;
                           13-16 home supporters to the West Stand; 17-21 visiting
                      D    supporters down the tunnel in the middle^to the central
                           terrace; 22-25 visitors to the West Stana ana _inc.lli- 2o 2,
                           visitors to the south-west terrace «.j.ea.

                                  9th of April a letter to the County Council saying:
                            "The club is anxious to segregate" and prepare the scheme
                            for the Working Party.  Please consider that scheme.

                       E         Then a note from, a telephone call ± thin.-;, rrom
                           Hr. Strange to Mr. Chester who had become by then the Cluu
                           Secretary.

                                  "Turnstile at back of West Stand.

                                  ]_) H e   " that is Mr. Chester I assume "... will
                                  speak to his colleagues to decide how many turn­
                                  stiles are required.   (Fundamental to scheme)

                                  2) include in the scheme, nev/ toilers and
                                  refreshment areas.  Keep it basic ...."

                            I don't think we need bother with tne rest or that.

                                     Over the page there is a note.    Sharon i tmn.. is
                            j-i,e Secretary's Secretary at the Club.     A call from Mr. btrange
                            <o s t t l o n about turnstiles.  An indication oJ the total numbers
                            wanted^       In fact a total of 34 rather than the 29 tnat were
                            in the plan.       As he say— .

                                  "We had 29 in our scheme.  Turnstiles have
                                  to be in pairs.  Said I will re-do our sciie^e
                                  and submit it to Dick.''




J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                          68


                                                        MR. COLLINS



         Then we have the Officer Working Party meeting of 18th
of A p r i l .
         "1.      purpose of Meeting

         The ourpose of the meeting was to consider the
         letter dated 9th April and plan from Messrs.
         Eastwood a Partners relating to the proposals
         of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Cluo^uo
         construct two new banks of turnstiles ana
         various runs of fencing and^new gauss xn o.de.
          to achieve segregation ...."

'T’hat of course was the 29 one.

          112.    C o n s i d e r a t i o n ox Propo^alo

          •Toe Police representatives pointed out that tne
          proposals had been prompted in the a a m by coim 8 -.,s
          ? S v   had node       to th e C l u b ,       a t o n e tiae,      ootr. to*
          West Stand and Terrace had been regarded as
          exclusivelv for the use of visiting supporters,
          but recent patterns of attendances at tne otacium
          £ d . ” t n o c e . s * r y to a l i w        for some e l u e n t        oz u s e
          by home supporters as well.

           The proposals now outlined by the ---

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                When did Sheffield go into m e
  First Division?
        MR. COLLINS:    I think it did n o t h in till 158S/,67.^
  I think at this stage it was- rising ana it b e l i e v e
  would get into - - -•
           LORD JUSTICE T A Y L O R :           It was on the up and up?

           IIR. COLLIIjS :         Yes.

            "The oroposals now outlined by the Club were
            generally acceptable to the Police representa,i-/es,
            subject to:~
            (a) additional gates being provided between the
            turnstile numbered 16 and the wal* o^ tne inu-x
            access road*

            (b) the central area of the Terrace (indicatea
            as the neutral area or visiting supporters _ te.ioc<_.
            beinc divided in half by a new central racial
            f„nce running from the tunnel entrance uO tne
             ; l ? o h s L e s e c u r i t y f e n c e « i t h g a t e s . e r e « o c S 0 _uS
             t-o p e r m i t e n t r y to b e d i v e r t e d to e i c n e r n<-U
             aoprowriate (the proposed nev; seconaary _racic.l
             fence"" adjacent to the existing xence m c i . a . t .
             on the plan to be aba n d o n e d ) ;
                                                     69

                                                             MR. COLLIiiS


                                (C ) the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated
                                as home supporters' terrace) also to be divided
                                in half by a new central radial fence running
                                from back*to front with.two gate (the existing
                                radial fence dividing the. present two Terrace
                                areas — neutral area a-ns home supporters - to
                                have a second gate installed;

                      B         (d) the existing pitch perimeter fence to have    ,
                                additional exit gates installed - one in the
                                neutral area and one in-, the home supporters
                                area.

                                The County Fire Service saw no objection in
                                principle to the proposals, subject to more
                                detailed investigation of the means of escape
                                aspects, and the Building Authority similarly
                                saw no objection, subject to submission of
                                detailed plans

                                IT V'iAS AGRuiiD:—

                                (a) That R. Grinshaw should investigate as a
                                matter of urgency the means of escape aspects
                       D        of the proposals and let D.I. Vaughan know the
                                outcome.

                                 (b) That, subject to satisfactory clearance
                                 of these aspects by the County Fire Service,
                                 the outline proposals .... be agreed as now
                                 amended by the suggestions of the South
                                 Yorkshire Police
                       E
                           A letter of the 19th April, Eastwood to Club:

                                 “After speaking to Sharon last Wednesday about
                                 the number of turnstiles ... we have altered
                                 our proposed layout.

                                 The eighteen existing turnstiles will remain.
                                 Ten will serve the North Stand and eight the
                                 terraces for the home supporters.......
                                 Four each of these will be for home and away
                                 spectators ....   We understand the Police have
                                 suggested a central fence to divide he middle
                                 section rather than provide a 2 m wide sterile
                                 area to one side.   This may work providing you are
                                 happy having home and away supporters m the
                                 same area outside."
                                                                                       Ol KO




                           •-Piien we see on page 215 the proposal whicn increases uiie
                           to 34.' Effectively it is done by increasing what was 1-1
                                                                                       0)




                           to 1-13 adding two"extra there and numbers 23-36 there ar
                           there 12 instead of the 8 that were in the original.     That
                           is where the extra ones show.- What of course it does indicate




J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                            70

                                                                        HR. COLLINS



                           is that thought had been given to the possibility o* increasing
                           the number of turnstiles at the Leppings Lane ena^nt. ai. ^
                           indication that in the view anyway of Eastwood anc Partners,,
                           it was feasible that there should be tne increased nuraoei. c^
                           turnstiles.                             ‘'
                                    Sir  i* you care to work out the numbers of spectatois
                           i.rho would' go"through the various turnstiles, I t h i n ^ t n e
                  B        nn-iuiuiti cones    a figure and that is the ones »»no              goii*g
                           ^ o ‘tJe visiting supoorters to the south-west terrace, o: some­
                           thing erouiid 800.per turnstile.     About 800 is the na:;inu^
                                        they are all ^ - a r o u n d ^ o r ^ e l o w tne 700 l.,el ^
                                     account of course of the           una^ ^ne -*.o_o-<-
                           would normally have the 12 ones on the Penistono *oac as „v.ll
                           as the 10 here.
                                    T here are some rough d r a w i n g s on the next pages _wr.icij
                           I d o n ’t for the m o m e n t feel it is n e cessary to re^er to and
                           then a repetition, on page 220 of the original schene ftu
                           29.
                                   On to 227, a note of call from Mr. Strange to Hr. Chester

                                   "Asked him about central fence down terrace.
                   D               v es seems a reasonable idea.  Do it tr.au way t-o
                                   satisfy police,  He isn't worried about loss oz
                                   capacity.

                                   Ke still isn't s a t i s f i e d ._that the^nuabers or
                                   turnstiles are right.          L gj .<- j-t wiuii .i_

                                   R e m i n d e d me a b o u t e s t i m a t e for fences along iront
                       E           of stands.         OK.      I will do one.

                            Then 26th of April, over the page,             it starts on the right-nanu
                            side this message:
                                   "Discussed copies of our d r a w i n g        ...." tnis is
                                   a gain Strange and Chester.

                                    "(I d i d n ' t agree w i t h w h a t he wants but in essence
                                    it is)

                                    1) Area wanted in front of turnstiles to hold
                                    early visitors.  Gate them in.

                                    2) 4 b anks of three t u r n s t i l e s gate to let
                                    people in if all ticket.          (Disaster)"

                             cir   I think wiiat that refers to, if you look at ? acie .2^
                             Trou'will see that in the banks of turnstiles, wiiau oriCj-n«lljf
                             had been banks of turnstiles, there is ynat is aescri^ec. «
                             “tiew gate", the ib are four of them, in tnose turns tile-




L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                              71

                                             MR. COLLINS



/'lnro-t1 to the bad; of the Stand, and I -think what was oeing
sucrcested and what Mr. Strange very rightly I think considered
* o b e a disaster, was that if you had all ticket matches_ you _
wSufd not need to use turnstiles, you could.let people tnrougn
those gates.                       .-r ' ’
      "Don't put partition across 1st floor level.
      Couple of (?) will do.

      4) Hay be 13 turnstiles to North Stand.

      5) OK to use old Ladies toilets            ....

       6   ) Put new radial fence down centre pen.         OK.

       7) Ho separation on seating.

       Agreed to alter drawing.  Send hint a copy ana
       then hold meeting with SY Police early ne::*. «ee;,
       to d i s c u s s ."

 mi.fin he does indeed do the new drawings.  That is the one on
 230 we just looked at.    Then on 231 we have the Fire convenes
 to the County Council:

           "-’urt^'31' to the joint meeting on 18th April 1335,
           to discuss the proposals for new crowd control
           p r rsrae-nents, the means of escape implications
           have now been considered.     The schene would appear
           to be satisfactory providing that certain gates
           have the minimum widths (in metres) as indicated
           on the enclosed plan.     it is understood the**,
           aates v/ill be supervised by either tne po.ice Oi
           club officials."

 Qir t*e gates that are being referred to in that_letter are
 -he'rear aates.  Can I ask you to turn on to 2j 7 ror tne^
 moment.  You will see the widths and the gates rezerrec -o.

       I f you look on this drawing for example, s i r , where
 „ou see'River Don and there is a gate just above -Visiting
 suooorters, South West T e r r a c e ” there is a ficu.e_O l o me.__e^
 and'you can see similar figures relating to^all tnose ca.e*
 at the back, all those nev,- gates at trie .oac^.

           c-i r this does not refer in any way, as indeed as one
  would e'oect, because it is only concerned witn tne turns-i-^
  a c c e s « M t does not relate to the gates or tne proposed new
  radial fence down-the centre of the terrace.

           Page 232:
            "Would like a note from us with a guess at cost
            of work at Le p pings Lane end. 0:C. Can t uo it
            accurately.   Mo matter.
                                                                                           72

                                                                                                    HR. COLLIES



                                            Also agreed that we include
                                            S pieces requested to be done by SYCC in
                                            contract i.e. pointing ••••

                                             Make sure note is with hia by no later than
                                             tomorrow p.m.  Board m a t i n g @ 7.00.

                               --    • a -a■f-ori fhe 1st of 1-iav for the purpose of a board n e e t m
                               in“ theS 2nd of May and then we ^ e the estimate^in^riuing on
                      B
                               the 2nd of May and J                              ^ ^ ^ ^ c o m S s      to E 1 3 0 , 0 0 0 ‘ a t the end
                               S .n c L   0 1 0 0 3 3   !» ri   3 .c .C ti u —        j.
                               Of the letter on 234.
                                                  ~~                 .              e -t-       hoprd neetincr on the 2nd nay
                                          5 andG it was leclde? to 'adjourn consideration to the 22nd
                               19S
                               of May.




                       D




                           F




                           G




                                                                                  /There is a letter on the 2nd of May ..




J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                          73



                                          MR. COLLINS


     There is a letter on 2nd May from the County Council
to Eastwood indicating to Eastwoods what the reaction was
of the Fire Service and really that repeats the matters
that were set out in that letter from the Fire Service,
but it is important to not-el(b) "the central area of the
terrace" - because this, of.course, goes beyond the
gates at the back:
     "(b) the central area of the Terrace (indicated
     as the neutral area or. visiting supporters'
     terrace) being divided in half by a new central
     fence running from the tunnel entrance to the
     pitchside security fence with gates erected so
     as to permit entry to be diverted to either half
     as appropriate (the proposed new secondary radial
     fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
     on the plan to be abandoned)."
Sir I think I have misled you. This letter, of course,
incorporates all the comments, Police and Fire, and this
particular one, of course, is the Police requirement.
     "(c) the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated
     as home supporters' terrace) also to be divided into
     half by a new central radial fence running from back
     to front with two gates (the existing radial fence
     dividing the present two Terrace areas -neutral area
     and home supporters to have a second gate installed)."

•Someone has written "Why?"   I gather that could be my
 friend and over the page (e) ---   I think actually it is
 not, he is blaming himself wrongly here, I think it is
 Mr. Strange.
      "(e) certain gates to have the minimum widths (in
      metres) indicated on the attached plan and to them
      being f u l l y supervised."
 Aqain it is quite plain from the letter from the Fire
 Service that that relates not to the gates in the terrace
 but to the gites behind.
      Telephone message, 238, Inspector Calvert phoning
 Mr. Strange:
      "Discussed proposals for fences and terraces and
     "gates.   Gate wanted by Fire Brigade. I do not
      see why.   He explained about extra fence.   Would
      like to meet tomorrow."
 Then Mr. Strange o b v i o u s l y - telephoned Mr. Chester, tells
 him about the discussion with Mr. Calvert:
       "Dick thinks that Board won't go along with spending"

 I cannot read that.
                                                         74
    r*




                                                                                  MR. COLLINS


                   A              LORO JUSTICE TAYLOR:          £110,000.
                                  MR. COLLINS:      L o o k s , l i k e , yes.
                                  "Let him think a b o u t .-lit’.for a while.    Okay we won't
                                  meet Police for now.           I will tell them."
                             Then there is an important letter,             240, from Eastwood to
                    B        the County Council:
                                  "Thank you for your letter...     In the interim period
                                  several of the points which you raised had already
                                  been incorporated in our latest scheme which has yet
                                  to be considered by the Club Board. However I would
                                  ask that further consideration should be given to
                     C            the request in paragraph (c) of your letter for
                                  a second gate to be installed in the radial barrier
                                  and for the new radial barrier which you have asked
                                  for to have two gates. If these- gates    are meant
                                  for use in emergency it would mean having a steward
                                  in attendance on each occasion, the expense of which
                                  would hardly be justified.     It is our view that
                                  in the event of emergency, spectators can be
                     D            evacuated quickly enough by the gates on to the
                                  pitch and by the normal exit gates at the rear.
                                 .W e •will of course be prepared to discuss the matter
                                  with the Fire Officer's staff should you so wish."
                             Two comments on that.    First of all, expense is hardly,
                             .one would have thought, a relevant consideration when one
                             knows that stewards are paid, I think, £9 now a match for
                     E       their services but, perhaps more importantly, there is
                             reference to the evacuation by the gates on to the pitch.
                             You will recall, sir, that those were never intended to
                             be, nor were they, evacuation gates taken into account.
                             Indeed, they were too small to be such and the normal
                             exit gates at the rear, of course, are the tunnel effectively
                             and presumably the gates at the back of the radial fence.
                         F        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           Yes.
                                  MR. COLLINS:   And then there is a copy .letter to
                             the Club.   If one looks in fact at the reference on both
                             those letters these are letters that appear and indeed
                             clearly are written by Hr. E a s t w o o d himself. 8th May:
                                  *•'I understand, following John Strange's telephone
                         G        conversation with you yesterday, that South Yorkshire
                                  County Council did not send you a copy of their
                                  l e t t e r ... H o w e v e r , I do not think that it is realistic
                                  to ask for the gates in the radial fences and have
                                  written to David Vaughan accordingly,"
                             Then Mr. Vaughan writes back, 10th May, page 242:
                     H            "...the extra gates referred to in paragraph (c)
                                  were included primarily at the request of the
                                  South Yorkshire Police.   Provided that the remainder
J . L. H arp h a m Ltd
                                  MR. COLLINS


    of the points raised by the Officer Working Party
    are incorporated in the latest proposals (yet to be
    considered by the Club), the Police are prepared to
    concede the request for two gates per radial fence
    in the right hand area-of the Leppings Lane End
    Terrace (indicated as'home supporters' terrace on the-
    plan)."
Then at the bottom:
     "Agreed over the phone- with Inspector Clive Calvert
     and station Officer Tony Vickers"
who I assume to be the Fire.   Copy to the County Council,
the City Council I suppose that would be, Chief Fire Officer
and the Building Authority.   Chief Constable, yes, quite
right, I am sorry.
     Then we have a further copy of the drawing of the
proposed arrangement on 244..
     13th Hay, 1985, a letter on 243:
     "I would be obliged if arrangements could be made
     for us to meet on site to consider the full
     implications, operations and costings of the above,
    'contained in your Drawing.   Please confirm one or
     two suitable times and dates."
Mr. Glasgow reminds me that was written two days, I think,
after the Bradford fire and so that was something which
no doubt would begin obviously to come into the equation.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Is that a good moment to
break?
     MR. COLLINS:   Good enough, sir.       We are about
half way through, as you see.
                  ( Luncheon adjournment)
I N Q U I R Y   I N T O       T H E        H I L L S B O R O U G H


            S T A D I U M         "V D ' I S A S T E R




                            Before


                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                     MR. B. JOHNSON
        (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                                and

                     PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                          (ASSE SS OR S )




                                At

                      The Town Hall.

                          S he f f i e l d .

                                 on

                 Thursday, 15th June, 1989



                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                    (Afternoon Session)



           From the Notes of J_^L. Harpham, Ltd. ,
                Official Shorthand Writers,
            55, Queen Street, ..Sheffield SI 2DX
                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                      (AFTERNOON SESSION)



MR. COLLINS (cont.)
ALAN KEITH SEAMAN, called
     Examined by MR. COLLINS
                        76




             —TWENTY-SECOND
                '~ ~ 1— — — —DAY'S
                                —  PROCEEDINGS                  \-
                  Thursday, 15th June, 1989
                    (Aftern'oon Session)               '
     HR. COLLINS:   S i r , 'be.fore I go on, there is one
matter that perhaps I ought to have referred to in the
Safety Certificate and did not specifically, and it is
on page 114, Condition 24, but it rather looks as if the
draftsman of the Safety Certificate may not fully have
appreciated what he was doing because if one reads
Paragraph 24, it reads thus:
     "The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to
     be inspected by a suitably qualified chartered
     engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
     a representative of the County Council within
     7 months of the date of the Certificate and at
     least once in each period of 12 months thereafter
     and the Holder shall ;a-s soon as possible after
     each inspection supply to the County Council a
     Certificate by the said Chartered Engineer as
     to the current compliance or non-compliance
     with good engineering" and building practices
     and with the relevant British Standard Specifications
     and Codes of Practice and with the appropriate
     provisions and recommendations of the Guide of
     all structural parts of the Stadium excluding the
     crush barriers and handrails."
So there should have been an indication, it would seem,
from the Certificate provided - I think Dr. Eastwood
appears to have been the person who was providing the
Certificates under Paragraph 24 - as to whether the stadium
complied with the green Guide in all structural respects,
not of course the crush barriers and handrails.    One of
the aspects there, of course, is the ramp or gradient of the
tunnel, which is never referred to anywhere in the documentation
apart from that reference to ramps generally that we saw      v
at page 3 of the bundle.
     Hay I now go back to page 245, which is where we had
reached, which is Dr. Eastwood indicating to Hr. Chester
that discussion would be needed about the gates in the
radial fences.
       Sir, there is then a Board Heeting of 22nd May, 1985.
It is" I fear a document that perhaps ought to have been
but was not included in this bundle.      it may perhaps be
convenient for you to note, sir, that it appears in the
Sheffield Wednesday volume at page 257 which is a record
of the relevant part of the minutes of the Meeting of the
fijpard of 22nd May and if you look, sir, at 2 (c) towards
the bottom of that page you will see that there is
reference to reorganisation-of turnstiles and new toilet
facilities at Leppings Lane end.     "Matter left in abeyance
pending further discussions.     Initial estimated price        y
deemed to be excessive."
                       77


                                       MR. COLLINS


     Then we have on page 246 thp letter of 4th June
from Mr. Eastwood to Mr. Chester in providing the
relevant drawings showing two possible alternative
arrangements for the turns-tiles and toilets at the '
back of the West Stand am^ltfvose two possibilities are
at pages 248 and 249 respectively.
     The point was made that on 248 there is the
possibility of a sort of - I think it is described
as a pinch point where you_have to go round a corner
to get to turnstiles 17-19 and so it was that the
alternative at /8 - and that is the one, of course^
that was eventually constructed, as we know.   The    —
only relevant amendment which we will see coming is you
will note that the new wall inside does not have any
gate in it.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   No gap, yes.
     MR. COLLINS:   Or any-gap in it and, in fact, there
is now, and we will see in the correspondence that there
was a decision and this I think was a decision which came
as a result of Police input, if I remember correctly,
which led to the installation of that gate.
     250 and 251 are duplicates of those pages.   Then we
have a letter on 252 which is from Eastwood to the Club
referring to a meeting with Chief Superintendent Moseley
and the second paragraph:
      "Superintendent Moseley was very concerned about
the segregation of the two lots of spectators on the
West Terrace on those occasions when the centre of the
terrace will be filled by visitors.     He said that on
the occasion of the Liverpool match he had had to
station policemen in pairs down the full length of the
dividing fence and this had been a very uncomfortable
situation for the Officers.     Not least of his difficulties
was that it was not easy for the officers to get in and
out of tht particular area if the ground was packed with
spectators.    He felt that a higher fence than the present
one or a double fence was necessary.     I suggested that
we should have a double fence with a gap between so as
to keep the spectators apart and to provide a space in
which his Officers could stand.     Fewer policemen would
be needed if the spectators had a gap between them.
It so happens that right alongside the existing fence
there" is a gate on to the pitcH' and that is, of course,
Gate 5 or what is now Gate 5 - "and if the second fence
were placed on the other side of the gate it will provide
an easy access gangway for the police and they will be
able to move in and out of the gap depending on the
siutation.    Mr. Moseley was clearly very pleased by
this suggestion and subject to your approval we are
including the work in the__c-ontract for segregating
the spectators at Leppings Lane end.
\c'i
                                                       78


                                                                   MR. COLLINS


                                    "I should point out that it will mean losing about
                                    a metre of advertising space because the hoardings
                                    carry straight on past, that particular gate at
                                    present.    There wil4_ have to be a gap in the
                                    hoardings to enable     ,police;'to get in and out
                                    and of course to evacuate the crowd in emergency."
                               Well, it may be important- to consider the effect on the
                      B        advertising hoardings but, of course, the effect of
                               creating that area was to .reduce the amount available for
                               spectators on the terrace and no-one seems to have taken
                               into account that this might affect the capacity of the
                               terrace and, indeed, of the pens.
                                    The other thing, of course, is that if there was an
                               advertising hoarding in front of that gate at that time it
                               rather suggests that no-one thought of using that gate,
                               certainly as a matter of routine, for any evacuation
                               purposes, but that may not be a fair point.   It depends,
                               of course, on how the advertising hoarding was set up.
                               It may be that it was possible to open it, notwithstanding
                               its existence.
                                    Then there is a telephone note, a call from Mr. Strange
                       D       to Sharon on 17th June:
                                    "Did Dick give agreement to reorganisation of
                                    Lepping Lane?   Yes, in principle. Which scheme?
                                    Don't know."
                               Then   there was a confirmation in a letter   to Inspector
                           E   Calvert of the suggested provision of the     double fencing.
                               On page 256 a note of a call from Inspector Calvert to
                               Mr. Strange, 27th June.
                                    "He has looked at our drawing of the proposal.
                                    1. Could personnel doors be fitted into the two
                                    new walls.    Don't see why not.  (Not a bad
                                    idea, otherwise ground staff have to go all the
                                    way round if they want to go from one side of stand
                                    to the other . )
                               That is, of course, the door in the internal wall and
                               Inspector Calvert does, indeed, seem to have made a very
                               sensible suggestion.
                                    "2. Wants central radial fence to be     added to
                                    "the one 2 metres away from the right   hand
                                    fence.    Don't necessarily agree.  He said that
                                    Inspector Moseley and Dick said yes.
                                    3. Gate in perimeter fence between 2 metre gap OK."
                                                                            ■■ •-* » * §



                               Then we have the application on 5th July for planning
                               permission for the scheme t  The plan we see on 258, the
                               plan of the situation as it now is.   The application
                               then follows, and the relevant copies 8a, 9a, etc., we


J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                       MR. COLLINS


have not put in but we know what the scheme was.
      On 16th July, 1985, again not in the bundle there
is another Board Meeting whJ-ch records, this time at page
258 , the very bottom of            Ir am sorry, sir, this
is the only other document.-.that I am having to go outside
our bundle for but it is really just to complete the story,
it does not add anything particularly material.      It just
records quotations received for the alterations at the
Leppings Lane end and agreement to accept a quotation in
the sum of some £ 73,000-odd.    "Secretary requested to
urge early completion and formulate claim via the Football
Grounds Improvement Trust."
     Sir, then I go on to a letter at 262 in the main
bundle from the County Council to Eastwoods.   The third
paragraph:
     "The Officer Working Party considered and gave
     approval in principle-::to the rear of the West Stand
     reorganisation proposals in May but other than
     brief mentions by the Club or yourselves at routine
     meetings of the possibility of the Spion Kop being
     enclosed, no outline *plans or details of such
     proposals have be£.nconsidered to date."
Now,   the proposals or the approval given in principle
in May refers back to the -letter on page 235 and of course
the scheme involving 29 turnstiles and not the one that
they were actually applying for, and so it is that on
25th July the County Council get details of what is
in fact going to be done, although by then the die had
I think been cast.
     Sir, somewhere in your bundle - I do not quite
know where - there should be copies of drawings 67058A
and6705/6.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    In this vicinity?
     MR. COLLINS:     I am not sure where they have been
put.     I am told they are right at the front.   I do not
think it is necessary to --      It shows the scheme at
the turnstiles in slightly more detail, that is all.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That is of the existing -- ?
    "MR. COLLINS:    No, that is the proposed, /8A.


                                  /Drawing 6705/8A
                        80


                                                   MR. COLLINS

 Drawing 6705/8A is what was proposed at the turnstiles.
6705/6 are details of the new central fence on the West .
Terrace.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR      Yes .
                              ••


     MR. COLLINS:   And the other one is an indication
of the existing crush barriers at the time that I - I
forget the exact time which that one is ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:-         ____   1980.

     MR. COLLINS:    But updated.

     LORD JUSTICE   TAYLAOR: I see that on that      there are
marked capacities   for the various pens.

     MR. COLLINS:    Yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: . Central pen, presumably
 that had not yet been divided.

     MR. COLLINS:   That is right. All I can say, sir,
about the capacities of the pens, whether divided or un­
divided, is this. We have been given the figures of
2,200, I think, for the ....

     LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:   3 and 4 as they     now are.

     MR. COLLINS: . 3 and 4 as they now are and that
is flivided into one thousand and twelve hundred and
those are figures which seem to have been accepted by
everyone, indeed, appear on the original plan of the
ground which was - those are plans that were put in at
the very early stage of the Inquiry, including, you will
recall, the plan of the barriers on the terrace.   There
was a little bundle of plans which included one of the
ground.which had those capacities.   There is nothing in
the documentation which I have been able to find which
 indicates who assessed those quantities, how they were
assessed or when they were assessed.   It appears that it
may have been - I know not - simply a question of someone
when the railings were put in effectively working out
the areas and dividing the figure of 7,900 by the
relevant areas or 10,100 if you include the whole but I
am afraid I cannot help any more than that because
certainly so far as the documents are concerned there
does-not appear to be any indication of anyone re­
considering in detail the capacity.   Indeed, that is
one of the matters which will have to be considered
in relation to the approach of the City Council and,
indeed, of the County Council before it to the question
of the proper capacities for the terrace and for the
pens on the terrace.   It certainly has never been
                                               MR. COLLINS

reflected anywhere in the safety certificate which, as
you know, simply refers to the totality of the terrace.

     .265, the working party of the 29th of July.
Consideration of proposals^. •.These ..plans . 2(a)
Plan /6 - for both securi'&y- access’ and emergency
egress purposes, a pitch perimeter fence gate to
be provided.   That in fact would be or would become
the gate to pen 3 because one of the requirements, as
you will recall, or one of the matters that was done,m
was to divide that central* pen into what is now 3 and
4 as part of the proposals.    When that was done that
would have meant that there would be no exi-t gate in    —
pen 3 at all through the perimeter because the gates
as they originally were went from 2 to 4 and that of
course also explains why the gate in pen 4 is positioned
not central to that pen but, if you look down from the
tunnel, to the right of the pen because that was the
original gate in the original perimeter fence before
there were any pens at all.and was roughly towards the
middle of the pen.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Composite pen.

     MR. COLLIHS:   Of the composite pen. When pen 3
was created it was necessary, so the working party
quite rightly believed, to add a gate in that perimeter
fence and that was done roughly centrally but of course
the pen 4 gate was not central.   That sounds a bit
muddled but I hope it is clear enough.   Then (b) /8A -
the new handrail by Turnstile 23 to be either shortened
or re-aligned so as to maintain the exit width between
the outer (river) wall and Turnstile 23 - that is of
course G - and the exit width between Turnstile 16 and
the new handrail not to be less than the width of the
roller shutter gate between Turnstiles 16 and 17.
The purpose of that of course being that you cannot let
people out of the gate . and then have a narrowing because
that will cause congestion at the exit. And then (j)
over the page, stewarding of new gates - as mentioned in
my letter of the 2ndof May, it is essential that all
the new gates are fully supervised by Stewards, who
must be fit, able and properly trained.

     Again, sir, it is plain in context, one goes back
to the letter of the 2nd of May, 1985., that is
referring to the outside gates and not to the gates
in the new, or in any of the radial fences on the
terracing.

     267 is simply that being passed on to the club.
269, Eastwood to the County, referring to receipt of
the Working Party comments.
                                                  82


                                                                                 MR. COLLINS


                      A            "(a) We are not sure of the location on
                                    the West terrace of the proposed extra
                                    security gate.  There is already a gate
                                    in the 2m wide gap farmed by the nev;                      '   4
                                                                                                   .


                                    radial fence for useliy.-the police.   This
                                    same gate will stili.'^be available for the
                                    spectators in emergency as there are gates
                                    into the 2m gap from the terrace which
                      B             will be under the control of the police.
                                    This point may perhaps be clarified during
                                    the Working Party's visit."

                               And he says Jthe fence is invany event aligned.

                                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That is contemplating peopleg
                               going out of pen 4, round the gate in the radial fence
                               at the back, down 5 and out on to the pitch?

                                    MR. COLLINS:   That is precisely.    From 3 too, from
                               3 rather than from 4, yes....

                                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    From 3?

                                    MR. COLLINS:    I am .sorry. Well, from 4 and from 3
                       D       perhaps.   Certainly ....   Then we have 271. meeting of
                               the Working Party.   Ground inspection.   Leppings Lane.
                               Progress of the works to segregate visiting supporters
                               behind and on the West Terrace and stand were inspected
                               with particular reference to the points raised at the
                               meeting on the 29th of July.    Then there is a reference
                               lto alleged poor workmanship on the wall.    That is the
                               wall at the rear of the stand.    And certain comments
                           E   about irrelevant matters.    Then over the page, fourth
                               paragraph:

                                   "On the terrace itself it was noted that there
                                    was an exis ting gate in the new 2 m. wide gap
                                    formed by the new radial fence for use by the
                                    Police.  This gate would still be available
                                    for the use of spectators m an emergency as
                                    the gates at the top of the terrace under the
                                    control of the Police would enable spectators
                                    to be directed down the 2 m., wide gap.
                                    However, it was agreed that steps or a longer
                                    gate would be required.   It was also agreed
                                    that a new gate would be required from the
                                    new South Central Terrace Pen."

                       G            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That is 3.

                                     MR. COLLINS:   That is 3. Then reference on 274 in
                               a aletter from the council to the club referring to the
                               discussion and the Interim Popplewell Report and over
                               the page after reference to safety stewards and require­
                               ments          from Poppleuell we have:




J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                   83


                                               MR. COLLINS

    “ (c) adequate first aid and first aid room
      facilities should be available 0IOTE - para­
     graph 8 of your Club's General Safety Certificate
      requires that a suitably ^equipped First Aid Room
     must be provided an&pciaintaianed, that such First
     Aid assistants as tfTe- Chief Constable may
      require - and not le'ss than one such assistant
   . for each 2,000 spectators - shall be available,
      a doctor employed or retained by the Club is
      available to attend at the First Aid Room if
      required and that his' whereabouts are known
      to those in the Police Central Control Room,
      and that the First Aid Room is adequately
      signed and capable of being lit by the
      emergency power supply)."

So despite what was being said, as we saw in relation
to the 1980 season it does not appear the first aid
room had got properly off the ground. We have the
letter in reply to that on.page 276.    It confirms
arrangements have been finalised with South Yorkshire
Police  for the staff concerned to be briefed on
matters relating to safety/emergency prior to the
 first home game on the 17-th of August and I think
the rest is not relevant.

      Then there is a letter, copy letter, at 277.
This is a letter written by M r ./Eastwood as one can
see by the reference at the top right.    Indeed, it
 is signed W.E.   There is a note at the top.   "I hadn't
seen this until after I had estimated" - is it -
"Gleesons" - oh, no - "instructed Gleesons to do a"
something "different to the one Dr. E wants." Fencing
I think it probably is.    "What about letting me see
letters before they go on file?" That, I think, is
in t-he writing of Mr. Strange.   This is a letter, copy
of a letter, rather, from Dr. Eastwood to Mr. Chester,
the Secretary of the.Club.   He deals with the complaints
about the brickwork.   And then the bottom of the page,
"Turning to matters on the second page:- 'It was agreed1
My comments on the points you have in mind are as
follows:-    (b) This refers to the existing gate
between the new 2m wide gap formed by the radial
fence which will be used for police access only.
You will notice from the.wording of David's minute
I persuaded them that steps could be used.    I have
interpreted this as being from the inside only which
means that we will not lose any of your advertising
space.   We have added the provision of some timber
steps on the inside to the work being carried by
Gleeson."

     From that it looks as if the advertising board
                   84


                                              MR.. COLLINS

was able to be opened, that is to say, if the gate   opened
so the advertising board would swing away and thus   one
would not lose any space.  That perhaps is o£ less   import­
ance. What is perhaps significant is what appears    now.

    "(c) The other radialr- fence forming the small
     visitors pen has left'a length of terrace
     without a direct access on to the pitch. There
     is of course a gate at thfe top of the terrace
     connecting into the next pen and we had hoped
     that the police would: accept that as an adequate
     means of exit in emergency.   However at the
     meeting they made the point very strongly that
     if someone had to be got out of the pen which
     has no gate or if there was misbehaviour the
     police would only be able to get in via the
     neighbouring pen, passing up the terrace through
     the gate at the back and then down again in the
     isolated pen.  They considered this unacceptable.
     I think that this particular item can be paid
     for out of the contingency sum and suggest that
     it be added to Gleeson's work."

So one canonly perhaps express some surprise anyone
should have thought it was acceptable and recognition
the Police were clearly right in thinking that it was
unacceptable.  I do not think I need read any more of
that letter.

     Then there is a plan on 280 which shows - I am
not quite sure what it shows.  I think it is the effect
of the new fences on the existing crush barriers and
what should be done to the existing crush barriers.

     282 there is Mr. Lock, memorandum, requiring the
new gate in the separation wall to have an inspection hole
and a bolt to the gates at the bottom of the West Stand.

     Then we have a letter about the roof of the North
Stand.   The only reason that is there, I think, is to
indicate that the club suddenly had upon it an un­
expected major expenditure as a result of the need to
carry out repairs to the roof of the North Stand.
It does not have any direct other relevance to these
matters.

     Copy of a letter on the 26th September at 289 to
Corderoy & Company who are the advisers to the Football
Grounds Improvement Trust setting out the works because
of course they would and did give a substantial grant
to the cost of these works.

     291, Working Party in November, 1985, largely
concerned with provision of disabled facilities and
the enlargement and roofing of the Kop which was then
                    85


                                                MR. COLLINS

being proposed but at 5 there is reference to crowd flow
at the Leppings Lane end..

    "The Police reported oa the continuing problems
     caused by the merginj^of- spectators from all
     parts of the stadium lit- the Leppings Lane end.
     It was difficult to see how this .could be
     overcome, as the physical restraints    to achieve
     this could conceivably be more of a danger than
     allowing the present position to continue."

Then it was agreed that the draft of a Booklet prepared
by the South Yorkshire Police outlining the-duties of
safety stewards was acceptable and should be distributed.
That, I think, is South Yorkshire Police document 23.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not quite follow that.
The merging of spectators from all parts of the stadium
at the Leppings Lane end.  Does that mean outside?

     MR. COLLINS:   I am not sure, sir.  Yes, whether it
means at the end of the game everyone comes out there I
am not sure.  I think that may well be so.

     Sir, then we have a document from the Football
Association which is referred to in fact in paragraph •
203 of the Green Guide in which the F.A. sets out some
of its requirements.  Revised memorandum on crowd
management.


    "This document sets out to amplify and' clarify
     the responsibilities of clubs in relation to
     this most difficult problem.  Both our bodies
     are fully aware of the enormous amount of time,
     money and energy expended by our clubs in
     ensuring that the public can attend matches in
     safety."




                            / With the eyes
                  86

                                    Mr. COLLINS

    With the eyes of the world on us, however, we
    cannot afford to relax for one moment.      We ask
    you to study the memorandum in great d e ta i l.
    Failure to act on any of the recommendations
    may be taken into-account should a club
    subsequently be S u r g e d with misconduct under
    Football Association Rules 23 and 24".

That is signed by Mr..Croker and Mr. Kelly.

     295, A,   "Admission of Spectators":

     "1.  Clubs must, in consultation_with the Police
~    and visiting Club, consider whether any match
     should be made 'all ticket'.

           b.  Under no circumstances should tickets
           be sold on the day of the match.  Maximum
           publicity should be given to this fact
           in the areas of both clubs.

           c.  Clubs are entirely responsible for
           the distribution of tickets allocated to
           them and must take all possible steps to
           ensure that -tickets are not sold to supporters
           of the opposing team."

Of course,  that was a matter which, in part, caused
the problems in the 1981 crushing.

     "B.   PRIOR PLANNING:

     1.   Clubs must, in addition to the above, undertake
     detailed liaison with the police, opposing club,
     rail and coach operators and supporters' Travel
     Clubs at least 10 days before a match to determine
     the likely movements of spectators and any other
     relevant matters. . In the cases of Cup ties, due
     consideration must be given, at the time of the
     Draw, to possible replay arrangements.

     2.   The number of police and stewards to operate
     at each match must be agreed with the Police.

     3.    Clubs should consider, in the interests of
     control at particular matches, reducing capacity,
     even when agreed with the competent authority
     under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, either for
     the ground as a whole, or for a particular section.

     4.   Clubs should consider, if necessary, closing
     a particular section or sections of the ground.

     5.   Clubs should consider in full consultation
     with Police,  the Football Association and the
     Football League,—varying the kick-off times or
     even requesting permission to change the day of
     the match".      --
                   87

                                             Mr. COLLINS

Then 296,    "Segregation" ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         When it says "varying the
kick-off times", what does        that mean?

     Mr. COLLINS:  I .understand that to mean when     the
Football Association erf--whoever" in any fixture says
that a match is going to be, say, at 3 o'clock, the
Club can in advance say "Well, we know that such and
such is happening around that time which makes 3 o'clock
an awkward time.  Can we put it back?"

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         So it is not talking about
postponement? _

     Mr. COLLINS:  It is not talking about ad hoc
postponement, certainly not as I read it, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE       TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS: Then we         come to the section entitled
"Segregation" on page 2"96:

     "Clubs must make adequate arrangements for the
     segregation of riv.al supporters. To ensure
     segregation, it will be necessary to reserve a
     section or sections in the stadium for visiting
     supporters.   It is essential in this process
     that adequate information on the likely movements
     of visiting supporters is obtained by the Home
     Club in consultation with the visiting club and
     the bodies listed in Bl."

Then Section 5:

     "Contingency plans must be made to move supporters
     situated in the wrong section ..."

and so on.

     "6.  Wherever possible, segregation should be
     effected by permanent structures such as wall,
     barriers or fences....

     D.     PROTECTION OF PLAYING AREA:

     An adequate number of police and stewards must
     be available to restrict access to the field of
     play.- Clubs must protect  the playing field
     by means of a fence, moat, double-barrier, wall
     or other system capable of denying access to
     spectators.  Any form of protection must incorporate
     an adequate number of &xits, manned at all times,
     to allow access to the field of play in emergencies.

     The Football Association may instruct a Club to
     instal such a fence, moat or barrier, subject to
     any designation order under the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act which may b % in force at the Club."
                                          MR. COLLINS

Over the page:

     "OTHER MEASURES:

     A sufficient number.of police and adequately trained
     stewards must be.-^n’_duty before, during and after
     the game.  Steps must be taken to ensure spectators
     do not bring objects into the ground that may be
     used in acts of violence."

There must be no missij.es, there must be plastic cups,
they must exclude drunks and troublemakers, they must
staff gates properly;   there must be electronic or
other surveillance systems to allow police to direct
personnel to problem areas.

     "9.  All efforts should be made to provide spectators
     with pre-match or half-time entertainment" ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Incidentally, do we have
the programme for this match?

     Mr. COLLINS:  I have not seen one, no.  I am sure
there must be one available somewhere.  Mr. Glasgow
is very kindly ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I only mwention it because
somebody said that there was pre-match entertainment
advertised but not provided.

     Mr. COLLINS:  Yes, sir, I think that is right.
Certainly we know that there is a document in the
bundle in which the Football Association indicated
that they were going to provide the youth competition
which they then for sorne reason cancelled.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  Perhaps it is slightly ironic in
those circumstances that they required all efforts to
be made to provide entertainment and it would seem,
from the evidence that we have had so far, then go on
to cancel that entertainment.

     "F.   FURTHER PRECAUTIONS:

     Clubs should take active steps to prevent the
     operation of ticket touts.  Clubs should take
     active steps to prevent ticket forgeries" ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I do not know whether you have
covered 12.  That might be of some importance.

     Mr. COLLINS:   I am sorry, sir.    I should have read
that:

     "Clubs should take ..hatever steps are necessary to
     ensure the c o m f o r t of spectators before, during and
     after the game."
                    89


                           .....               Mr. COLLINS

And, at 11, there must be an effective public address
system.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:        On ^ [ g e 298,••‘over the page, half-way
down the page:

     "MEASURES TO BE ADOPTED BY THE AWAY CLUB:

     3.  Clubs should appoint stewards to help manage
     and inform spectators at matches and to accompany
     parties of supporters travelling away."

Of course, that is of limited application in a semi-final.
One accepts that it is directed to ordinary League
m a t c he s .

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:        Then-we come to the bottom of 299,
Section I:
                                               i

     "Failure to implement any of the precautions
     outlined in this Memorandum may be taken into
     account in the consideration of any charge brought
     against the Club or may, in itself, lead to such a
     charge."

Then there is a letter on page 301, against which I
have put a question mark and the note "Why is it in?"
Having made that note, I will go on to 305.  It is
about disabled facilities, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   305 is a note which I think we have
seen before, from the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
Officer of January, 1986:

     "As a result of several incidents during the
     recent past, involving casualties within Sports
     areas, I have decided to delegate one of my
     Officers  the specific task of liaison with the
     Football Clubs within the South Yorkshire
     boundaries.  This'officer will have the task
     to ensure that advice and, if necessary, training
     can be provided by this Service to members of
     your staff.  It is also to be his responsibility
     to ensure that the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
     Ambulance Service are totally aware of the geography
     of your ground and of any Incident Plans which you
     may have drawn up in order to ensure the safety
     of the general public..."

and asking for communication and co-operation.  There is
a reply to that, on the next page, from Mr. McCee, the
Chairman:
                                          Mr. COLLINS

     "Thank you for your recent letter, and of course
     we would like to co-operate with you in any way
     possible to improve your service at games played
     at our stadium".

A copy was sent to Mr.l^Ch’e s t e r T h e r e is then a Circular
from the Home Office in relation'to the effect of the
Local Government reorganisation.         The relevant bit is
308e, where you will see:

      "Rights of various, interested bodies (police,
      building authorities or, in the Metropolitan
      county areas after 'abolition', fire authorities)
      to consultation, access to grounds and information
      adn to the appeals   procedure” .

Sir, that is the amendment that I was referring to
earlier.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  I do not think it is necessary to
look at the remainder of   that.   I will go on to 312,
which is   a letter to the Chief Fire Officer from the
City of Sheffield:

      "I enclose for your information a copy of my
      Report to the General Purposes Panel on 6th May
      1986, together with a copy of the Panel's
      Resolution in relation to that Report.  I would
      like to make the following comments:

      (a)   Although it has been decided      to carry on
      with the old administrative system      organised by
      the   County Council, I wish to make    it clear that
      the   system is under review and may    be adjusted
      in the future;

      (b)   I will shortly write to the othei District
      Councils in South Yorkshire with a view to
      establishing a basis for consultation as
      described in the Resolution;

      (c)   the re-drafting of the Certificate conditions
      will shortly be completed and I will then be
      asking for your comments on them.

      If you have any questions to ask on this matter,
      please do not hesitate to contact Mr. Bownes on
      the number given below."

Then there is the report on 313.  This, of course, is
in the context of the takeover by the Sheffield City^
Council of the responsibilities following the abolition
of the South Yorkshire Council.  Page 313, second
paragraph:           '— *
                                           Mr. COLLINS

       "The Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited
       was designated as requiring a Safety Certificate
       in August 1978 and such a Certificate was issued
       by the County Council on 21st December, 1979.    The
       stadium is currently undergoing major works which,
       when complete, wi-kt .form a roof over the Spion
       Kop and thus substantially improve the
       accommodation for-spectators."

Then    314,   "Safety Certificate Standard Conditions":

       "At the moment the'Safety Conditions attached to
       Safety Certificates are standardised throughout
       South*Yorkshire and both the Police and the Fire
       Service have indicated that they woud wish this
       situation to continue for reasons of administrative
       simplicity.  The Conditions do, however, give
       some cause for concern, as they appear to be
       inadequate or inappropriate in some areas. The
       drafting of these Conditions is of particular
       importance as it is. a serious criminal offence
       to contavene any of them punishable by the
       Statutory maximum fine (currently £2,000) or 2
       years' imprisonment, or both."

Actually,      there is no maximum fine on indictment.

       "It is proposed to re-draft the Certificate
       Conditions where appropriate and to submit them
       to the panel for approval. Sheffield Wednesday's
       Certificate would then be replaced in accordance
       with Section 4 ( 1 ) (b) of the Act.  Sheffield
       United's Certificate      could then be issued with
       the new conditions before the start of the 1986/7
       season.  The re-drafted Conditions would, of
       course, be submitted to the Fire Service, the
       Police and Building Surveyor for comment;       other
       authorities in South Yorkshire could also be
       involved in this process."

Sir, I note, as you obviously did, inadequate or
inappropriate reference to some of the conditions, and
I ask you to note the date of this, which is 5th June
1986. "we are now the 15th June 1989 and there is still
no new Safety Certificate.  Perhaps to be fair, one
can say that they are awaiting the outcome of this
Inquiry, so I will then say that as at the 15th April,
1989 there was no new Safety Certificate.

     On page 315 there is a reference to the Health
and Safety Executive.   There is an indication, as is
indeed the position, that the Health and Safety
Executive have made what I understand to be a policy
decision that they will not involve themselves with
football grounds, as the responsibility is on the local
authority under the 1975. Act.

       LORD JUSTICE T A Y L Q R :   Yes.
                                              Mr. COLLINS

     Mr. COLLINS:  Then there is a record on 317 and
318 of the Resolution of the Council to adopt the
proposal set out in that report.  In particular, on
318, sub-paragraph (c):.

      "... the Head of ^ ^ m i n i s t r a t i o n and Legal
      Department be requested to draft new safety
      certificate conditions in consultation with
      other appropriate authorities for approval
      by the Council."

On page 319 we have a record of a meetina between the
Police and the Club on 18th June, 1986:

      "Matters Raised:

      Stewards:  The Club will update Stewards'
      Instructions to take in relevant details from
      the Popplewell Report..." -

and I think by now this-vould be the final Popplewell
Report -

      "Representatives from South Yorkshire Police would
      attend the instructional evening for stewards which
      will take place on the   19th August. South
      Yorkshire Police will brief stewards prior to
      every home game.  This   will be done by the
      Inspector in charge of   each area ofthe ground".

We heard evidence about that being done.

      "South Yorkshire Police requested that all turn­
      stiles, but particularly those at Leppincs Lane,
      to be opened earlier.  The Club agreed to do
      everything possible to ensure this."

Then we have, under "Access at Leppingn Lane":

      "Mr. Chester agreed to discuss with Dr. Eastwood
      and the Board tne possibility of a wider door in
      the wall inside   the Leppings  Lane area and more
      permanent barriers for use on limited areas" ---

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I was just wondering about
this:   "... all turnstiles, but particularly those at
Leppings Lane, to be opened earlier."   This does  not
appear to be in relation to anything in particular?
This is in general.

     Mr. COLLINS:      This appears to be general, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That may suggest an a w a r e n e s s •
that the number of turnstiles there requires that they
should be in operation for longer to get the numbers
through;  I do not knov/-~‘
                    93

                                           Mr. COLLINS


     Mr. COLLINS:  Indeed, sir, that had occurred to
me.  It may be that we will find out more about that
in due course.  I do not know.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:        I t 'continues:

     "West Stand:  South Yorkshire Police requested that
     a steward be made available to patrol the front of
     the West Stand to'prevent visiting fans throwing
     their tickets oveif.   Sheffield Wednesday Football
     Club to sell tickets from Row 7 upwards.   The
     possibility of removing certain crash barriers
     at the Leppings Lane standing area was discussed,
     as this would assist the flow of. fans into the
     ground.  This matter would have to be taken up
     when the inspection of the ground relative to the
     issuing of the Safety Certificate takes place."

Then there is a reference to correct money at the turn­
stiles, keys and plans.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Some barriers were removed,
were they, as a result--of this?

     Mr. COLLINS:  As we will see, yes, sir.  There was
one important one removed at the mouth of Pen 3.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS:  Then we have a letter of 25th June,
1986, on 320, from the Chairman, Mr. McCee to the
Secretary, Mr. Chester, referring to a seminar for the
stewards", attendance o f ’ the police, and the confirmation
by the police to Mr. Chester of the 3rd July about the
proposal for the meeting, and giving "details of the
points we would wish to discuss", which were "1. Stewards
2.   Access to ground - turnstiles, Leppings Lane end in
relation to away supporters", and so on.




                                /Then there is reference   ....
                        94


                                      . OO^jXjX i.L)

      Then there is reference, 323 onwards, I think it is
an Ambulance Document relating to the ambulance requirements
in relation to iiajor Incidents at Sheffield. Uednesday.

       If you look on 324 sir'?’you will, see, I think it is
Ambulance", I will be corrected if I an wrong, it is provided
by 5:

      "On arrival at ground,- Station Officer Higgins,
      after consultation v/ith- Police, will establish
      patient treatment and loading point at Gymnasium
      which, is located at rear of north stand off
      Penis tone Road iforth.,!

Then there is a map as you see on 325 of the ground and of
where the ambulances are supposed to go.  There is another map
on 326 showing the surrounding area.

      Then on 327 there is an indication of the means of
evacuation.

      Then a letter on 323 from Superintendent Marshall to
Mr. Wilkinson of the Arabu lance Service enclosing Appendix 'L‘
of the Force Standing Order which relates to evacuation,
contingency plans for evacuation and which wo have already
seen within the Standing Order.    I am not going to take you
through it sir at this stage, Sc.ve that I think I would note
at the bottom of 33):

      “Details of Deployment, Duties and Instructions
      to Stewards

      These details should be' drawn up by the Club in
      consultation with the Police and Fire Brigade,
      with particular reference to stewards' responsi­
      bilities in assisting police in evacuation
      situations.,!

8 deals with communications and then on 334 at the top
paragraph 1:

      "The prime responsibility for the arrangement
      of affairs at sports grounds lies with the club.
      To that end they should ensure that stewards are
      suitably qualified."

On 336-7a.

       "Specific Duties of Stewards

      Specific duties to be undertaken by S'ce'./ards
      include:

      a) Preventing overcrow d ing, ensuring that
      crowd limits in various parts of the ground are
                                                    95




                                 complied with and that gangways and exits are
                                 kept clear."




                                                                                                tO rr
                           So there is the Police, or there are the Police indicating tha  ^
                           insofar as their Standing OfcSets are-concerned they^are p l a c m
                           the dutv upon the Club Stewards to prevent cvercrcv/aing ana _
                           pr.'-ure that the limits are complied with and the gangways ana
                      g    exits are kept clear.    That, of course is what was in writing
                           in there.
                                 Then we have a letter at 338, 14th July 1986^ from
                           Eastwood to Mr. Chester relating or referring to the update
                           of the Green Guide, the 1986 version, the one that is now
                           in force.
                                 "I have read through the part of the document
                                 which deals with Sports Grounds.   I do not see
                                 any grounds for objecting to any of the
                                 recommendations.  There will be little if any^
                                 change in the procedure- already established at
                                 Hillsborough.  The document envisages that far
                                 more grounds for various sports will be
                                 designated, but in appropriate circumstances
                                 the procedures will not be so onerous as i_hose
                      D          relating to Hillsborough."

                           I am wrong, it is not the new Green Guide, it is the forecast
                           I think of what eventually became the 19G7 Act and the^Home
                           Office views on Fire Safety and Safety at Sports Grounds.

                                 "There is a welcome statement on page 11 that
                       F          due account should be taken of the need to
                                  keep the costs to clubs and local authorities
                                  to reasonable proportions.  There are also
                                  various references to Safety Certificates^
                                  reflecting the circumstances of each particular
                                  ground and the number of spectators who are
                                  likely to attend.  These words may be useful
                                  to us in the future, although we can expect to
                                  have more stringent requirements compared with
                                  some of the smaller clubs.

                                  It is comforting to know that the new Green
                                  Guide will not become a statutory code and will
                                  continue to be subject to interpretation."

                            It may-suggest slightly the wrong attitude to the Safety
                            Requirements in the Green Guide, but that may be unfair to
                            Dr. Eastwood and no doubt he will explain that in due time.

                                  340 is the Ambulance Service writing to Mr. Chester,
                            referring to the visit of Mr. Wilkinson on the 16th of July.
                            Second paragraph:




J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                         96

                                     MR. COLLINS



       "The meeting was held with Mr. Ward, Senior
       Groundsman.  After touring your complex and
       discussing evacuation plans with South Yorkshire
       Police, it was felt that the Ambulance Service
       would normally only jb^bnie involved in any
       events after they had,already occurred and
       therefore, slight delays could be experienced
       on occasions in responding to the incident.
       To avoid this I would ask if two passes could
       be supplied to the Ambulance Service which
       would enable us to ensure that an Ambulance
       Officer was in your ground at all home fixtures.

       There would be no cost to the Club for this
       facility, and it would improve ground safety.
       In the event of any untoward occurrence my
       Officers would be in a position to identify   1
       problems prior to them happening and would
       therefore be in a much better position to
       respond to any emergency."

Someone has written   ....

       MR. KALLIPETIS:   Sir;' that is my writing.

      Perhaps while I am on my feet I should say that the
documents at page 322-327, which is the SYMAS Plan for
Hillsborough, were prepared after the meeting of the 18th
of July to which this letter refers.

       MR. COLLINS: I am grateful.

        I think though Mr. Kallipetis' comment is an accurate
one,   the two season tickets were indeed not made available.

      Then at 341 we have a manuscript reference,  I think
this is Mr. Strange's writing again, to the inspection
by the Working Party on the 7th August 1986.

        "Items of safety work requested to be carried o u t .

        1) Remove three barriers on Leppings Lane end
        terrace.  Add new barrier."

2 refers to the removal o f another barrier.   Nov; I think
sir it is 2 that is the relevant one because that should
show and does show, I think, the exit from the tunnel
on to" Pens 3 and 4 and if you look at the right-hand side
where it says "OUT" that goes altogether.    The left-hand
the part of the barrier which goes up to the fence is
removed.

       If you would be good enough sir to look at the plan
of the barriers  that we have somewhere, you will see sir
that the'one in question i'5“*the one, or what is left is
                                                   97

                                                                MR. COLLINS



                           that one described as "Design 3.  Height 3 ’11", 1.2 metres"
                           nearest the tunnel entrance in Pen 4.

                                 That originally was barrier 144 and was originally
                           stretched across what is no^fcthe central fence, and effectively
                           there was a barrier across^the mouth of the tunnel.

                                 LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:   It went all the way, did it?
                      B
                                 MR. COLLINS:  All the' way across the mouth of the tunnel.
                           What is removed effectively"is the remnants of that barrier,
                           effectively that position of the barrier in Pen 3 which should
                           have corresponded to what is now left in Pen 4 is removed.
                           The proposal was to remove it altogether ana indeed it was
                           removed and the bit that linked up with the fence in Pen 4
                           was also removed.

                                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    If the drawing at 341 is correct
                           itlooks as though   the Pen 4 bit was continuous with what
                           remained up to where the fence is, dividing fence is, but
                           the other one was not joined on.    Is that right?

                                 MR. COLLINS:  That would appear to be the case.   I
                      ^    suspect the reason for that-may have been when they put in
                      ™    that central fence, and I think we can see this actually
                           if we go back to the plan, they took a bit of it out when
                           they put in the central fence.   I forget the page number
                           of the plans but it perhaps does not matter for the moment.

                                 I don't think it is necessary for me to read any more
                           of that.

                                 At 342 onwards there is a submission by Mr. Eastwood
                           relating to the application'for increased capacity on the Kop.

                                 Sir, we have put that in not because it is in itself
                           of direct relevance, but it perhaps worth noting on page 350
                           where there is a discussion of the fire requirements because
                           there were arguments about the evacuation times, there is
                           a note in the middle of 350 in the paragraph beginning:
                           "The present Chief Fire Officer, Mr. Harry Wright" it goes
                           on about four lines in:

                                  "He was prepared to count the exits onto the
                                    pitch as part of the evacuation system in an
                                  emergency (each gate is controlled by a policeman)."

                           That you will recall, sir, was the difference between the Kop
                           end and the Leppings Lane end.

                                  Mr. Eastwood takes that up on 351:

                                  "With this as background the Club has been
                                  quite shocked by the suggestion that the gates
                                  onto the pitch should-be ignored in the
                                  calculations of evacuation times, and that




J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                    MR. COLLINS



      eight minutes should be achieved by means of
      ordinary exits.  They feel this change of view
      cannot be justified."

Sir, I think all the relevajtfc-'documents were included for
the sake of completeness, biit 'we can in fact go on to page 368
that still refers to the Kop and is referring to the H S E .

      369, the reason for the inclusion of that newspaper
extract is the point I made earlier:  you will recall the
regulations require advertisement in the newspapers.  You
will hear in due course from the City Council that they accept
that they did not advertise or did not require an advertise­
ment as they should have done, but they say:  "Well anyway
everyone knew about it because it was given a lot of publicity
and there is the publicity being given.

      I am not sure that is a very good excuse for failing
to comply with statutory requirements but still.

      Page 370, a letter of the 27th August 1986, or a copy
of a letter from Mr. Bownes to Mr. Chester:

      "I refer to the meeting of the General Purposes
      Panel of the City Council which took place on
      Thursday 21 August 1986 which you and other
      representatives of the Club attended.

      I am writing to confirm that the Panel agreed to
      increase the capacity of the Kop to 21,000
      spectators subject to the following conditions:-

      (a) that the infilling of crush barriers takes
      place prior to the match on 25th August;

      (•b) the other work referred to before the Panel
      be completed within 2 weeks (i.e. by 4th
      September 1936);

      (c) extra stewarding be provided during the
      next 2 matches to the satisfaction of the Fire
      Service and the Police.

       Obviously, all work is to be carried out to the
       satisfaction of the Certificating Authority and
       the Panel authorised me to take any necessary
       action to secure compliance with the above
      'conditions."

Well they got that permission but no one ever thought to
change the Safety Certificate.

      1st October 1986 is the next letter, 372.  Eastwood,
or somebody in Eastwood's firm on behalf of Eastwood to
Mr. Chester:              *—
                                   MR. COLLINS



     "During the summer inspection Inspector Calvert
     asked for some of the barriers at the Leppings
     Lane end of the ground to be removed so as to
     allow easier access into the various pens.
     Rather than ask . .. s.u^-contractor to do the
     work, who were at tha^-t-ime working overtime, we
     instructed a firm to have the work completed
     before the Everton game.    This they did and today
     we have forwarded a certificate ---       Payment
     should be received by'them no later than 16
     October 1986."

There was a reference you will recall when-that was mooted to
it having been put before the Working Party and notification
given.  There was no record that we have been able to find
that it ever was put up in that way.




                        /On~~the face of it
                      100


                                       MR. COLLINS


On the faee of it there is a breach, therefore, of
the terms of the Safety certificate and no-one at any
time seems to have considered the effect of removing
that barrier upon the cap^jgi.ty of Pen 3 or upon the
likely effect of people ctna-ing into'Pen 3 and their
means of access because, of- course, the removal of that
barrier as becomes clear from looking at the plan
of the configuration of the barriers means that there
is a channel from the mouth of the tunnel down effectively
to the barrier that collapsed.     I do not say that
the two are necessarily connected, one perhaps does not
know, but it is a_t least significant that there was the
capability of a surge down in that way.     There is evidence
that we have of people going diagonally or being carried
diagonally down that pen and it is a fact that the collapse
of the barrier was in such a position that was consistent
with pressure being applied through that diagonal and, of
course, that is the effect, or one possible effect, of the
removal of that barrier and it was, therefore, we would
say of the most vital importance that this removal should
not be carried out without considering what effect, if
any, it would have upon the safe capacity or the safe use
of that pen.               _
     373      is the internal Police memorandum in which the
relevant Superintendent writes to his Chief Superintendent,
who I think at that time would have been Mr. Mole, saying:
     "I have gone through the whole of this extremely
     comprehensive document" - that is the revised
     edition of the Green Guide - "and whilst a consider­
     able amount of the contents is applicable to manage­
     ment of the Club, engineering problems and fire
     officers, certain paragraphs are worthy of mention
     in relation to Sheffield Wednesday's Football
     Ground at Hillsborough.
      Paragraph 16 relating to crowd pressures.    As you
      are aware the Kop has had a tendency at recent
      matches to produce this wave effect and it is
      necessary that when a large match is anticipated
      in the future we should ensure that the numbers
      allowed onto the Kop strictly adhere to the capacity
      allowed.   it is imperative therefore that the
      automatic counting system is always in working order
      for 'A' and *B ' category matches, such as the visits
    __of Manchester United, where almost capacity crowds
      can be expected."
Interesting to note that capacity on the Kop is there
emphasised but there is no similar emphasis in relation
to the Leppings Lane end.
     "Paragraph 23 onwards lays down the management
     responsibility very "’clearly and is to be welcomed,
     since there have in the past been grey areas as to
     who is responsible for crowd control etc."
                      101


                                         MR. COLLINS


I fear that not only in the past, in the light of what
we have been hearing in the course of this Inquiry.
     "Paragraph 28 recommends the appointment of a
     safety officer and ximrit'ifies-‘his duties. I can
   ,only presume that the.safety officer is in fact
     Mr. Lock"
actually, no - as we shall see in the later documentation
the Safety Officer is M r . M a c k r e l l
     "although I have never heard him designated as
     such, and this should be clarified with the club.
     Furthermore, in the discussion of a central
     control point being designated (other than then
     police control) one would assume that the central
     control point designated in respect of the Sheffield
     Wednesday ground would be the video viewing room
     in the south stand.
     Paragraph 43 relates to records of tests kept and
     examination of the ground.   I am not aware that
     these are kept by the club.
     Paragraph 199 relates to exercises of stewards
     regarding emergency procedures and I am not aware
     that the club have ever carried out exercises in
     this respect.
     In conclusion, Sheffield W e d n e s d a y Football Club
     have complied with the guide to a very large extent,
     more so I would suspect, than the majority of clubs
     in the country, and it is only on minor points as
     identified above where improvements could be made
     so far as police procedures are concerned."
Then we have, on 18th February, 1987, the Fire input in
relation to the proposed new Certificate.    Sir, the
letter of 3rd November, 1986, is merely a letter requesting
that the Fire Service do the necessary checks and make
the necessary recommendations. . For the record, it is
Exhibit 67 in the Fire Service bundle.    It is not included
in this bundle.   it says:
     "An inspection of the'ground was carried out on
     17th November, 1986.    Comments appended below
     do not take into account the numbers of persons
    ~~using individual areas, lateral and radial gangways
     or units of exit widths, as it is assumed that
      from various correspondence and documentation
      that the various working parties and committees
     have adequately dealt with these items."
Then it deals with escaping fire, and then "6" on the
Spion Kop:                 -
     "It is understood that the gates in the pitch perimeter
     fencing form part of the emergency exits.   The gates
                     102


                                          MR. COLLINS


    for reasons of security, fasten with barrel bolts
    secured to the gate both top and bottom and open
    in a sideways direction.     It is doubtful that if
    it were necessary to...evacuate the stand onto the
    pitch in an emergenc-fl-that the" gates would open if
    pressure were generated by a crowd.      No record can
    be found in respect of discussion on gate fastenings.
    It is recommended that a satisfactory security
    device easily openable from the pitch side should
    be found and fitted to all perimeter gates."
And then, a little lower down, "West Stand" under "B":
     "Exit gates to the pitch perimeter as item B under
     Spion Kop above."
It may be said that that implies an acceptance as at that
date that the perimeter gates at the Leppings Lane end
were to perform the same function as the perimeter gates
at the spion Kop end and 'that, of course, may as a
matter of fact be so but I again repeat that quite clearly
from the earlier correspondence those were not treated
as evacuation gates for the purpose of deciding on the .
timings in relation to the safety at the Leppings Lane
end, although undoubtedly they could and would be used
if circumstances made it necessary.
     Sir, I do not think it is necessary to go through
any of the other items. They are all very detailed matters
but do not, I think, relate to matters which are vital to
this Inquiry.
     379 is a note of a message from Sharon to Mr. Strange
and to Mr. Eastwood:
     "Subject: Ground Capacity for possible Semi-final.
     Dated 26th February, 1987.
     Sharon has been sent a form from the Football
     Association to fill in for Hillsborough to be
     considered for this year's semi-finals."
After 1981 and the problems of 1981 Hillsborough was not
considered by the F.A. and it was not until 1987 that
it was put back into favour.
      MR.   GIBSON-WATT: Sir, that is not quite right.
It w.as considered for a replay in 1986.
     MR. COLLINS:   I am sorry, I had forgotten that.
It took place there, did it?
                                  y   ;
     MR.   GIBSON-WATT: No, the replay was not   needed.
     MR. COLLINS:
     "1.   She wanted to *tOiow present capacity of
     Spion Kop - 21,000.
                                           MR. COLLINS


     M2. What is the live reading under the floodlights"
We do not need to bother with that.
     "3. Has any accountl'^reeri taken for alterations
     done an Leppings Lane .over last few seasons?   Is
     the 10,200 or so figure still correct?     I said
     that in my opinion it needs to be adjusted, better
     to do it now than later.     It could also affect
     ticket sales for Coventry game.     She will speak
     to Graham."
Graham, I think, Is Mr. Mackrell.   That is Eastwoods-
Mr. Strange effectively indicating that the figure at
leppings Lane is too high because although adjusted could
mean either way in the context of what we have been seeing
before he is quite clearly thinking in terms of an
adjustment down rather than up, and that is February, 1987.
     2nd March, 1987, telephone message on page 380
from Mr. Strange to Sharon:
     "3. Dr. Eastwood says leave the capacity at
     Leppings Lane end as'lt is, providing police
     have gates under West stand open so that people
     can distribute throughout the terrace evenly."
Now, there we have I won't say the genesis but a
reflection of the policy which appears to be universal
from the evidence we have had that all you need do is to
let the fans settle themselves on the terraces.   Very
strange philosophy in the light of what we saw in relation
to the 1981 match and comments thereafter and, of course,
on the face of it nothing to do with the point which is
being made which is, is the capacity to be changed,
because it does not matter whether they can distribute
themselves evenly or not; if the capacity is too high,
then however they distribute themselves there are going
to be too many of them and if there are too many of them
there are going to be safety problems.   But, anyway, that
matter was raised, as you see, sir, in February, 1987, but
was effectively, on the face of it, sat upon by Dr. Eastwood
on 2nd March.
      Then we have a Fire Service note from file at page
381 of a meeting held comprising a member of the Fire
Service, Mr. Bownes, and other Oficers of the City Council,
Mr. "Moor from Environmental Health, and two gentlemen
from the Building Surveyors Department.
     "Contents of letter dated 18.2.87" - that is page
     374 ... "were discussed and agreed that these matters
     be taken up jvith the Club."     Tnat is the fire
     matters.
      Third paragraph*
      "Stewarding and securing of all gates was discussed
                        104



                                         MS. COLLINS


       and the.Fire Service indicated that existing
       arrangements were only acceptable subject to
       exits being stewarded::and unlocked during 100%
       of the time that tha--§r.o,und was in use for a
       designated purpose. -""-“Any relaxation of this would
       mean an insistence that panic fastenings only be
       provided."
     Now, it is not made entirely clear there but I think
that that relates to or on-the face of it it relates to
the external gates rather than any of the internal gates
in the terracing.              =.
        "Discussion then took place on areas of responsibility
        and ground  inspections.
        On areas of responsibility Bownes did not want to be
        tied down to individual references and even indicated
        that his Department could not act independently but
        must refer all matters to the Council Committee
        responsible for the Act.     Whilst all others present
        would prefer definitive areas of responsibility
        (allowing that there..must be some overlap), David
        Bownes preferred to refer back to a future meeting
        following further consideration of the matter.
        On ground inspections, Bownes referred to the recent
        Lords decision that grounds should be inspected
        annually "
I think that refers probably to an amendment of the Lords
to the 1987 Bill as it then was which became s . 10 (b) (3)
I think.
        "...he anticipated that this would mean a much more
        thorough examination than the present system of bi­
        annual inspections, and that this, would be backed up
        by inspections during games.
        This was agreed by all present but reservations
        about the suggestion that during game inspections be
        carried out by the whole working party were expressed
        by the Fire Service.   It was agreed however that one
        such 'during game' inspection would be set up and the
        outcome monitored.
       __It was also pointed out by the Fire Service that
         the new guide now included a section which defines
         in detail, management responsibility.  It is
         recommended by ;the Fire Authority that the Club
         Certificate specifies as a condition of the licence
         that this section be complied with."
And,    of course, that would be to remove the greyness of
the    division of responsib'iTity or to help to do that and
was,    no doubt, a very sensible suggestion.    Sadly it was
not    put into effect in time.
                        105


                                           MR. COLLINS


       "Note: David Bownes is reluctant to produce minutes
       of meetings, therefore to safeguard the Authority
       we must make our own notes on meeting and forward
       letters to confirm arr'y points as appropriate."
A letter then from the City, of Sheffield on 22nd April,
1987 :
       "In November, 1986 I.asked both the Police and Fire
       Service to comment on the condition of your stadium
       having regard to the"provisions of the 1975 Act.
 “     the Police have indicated that as at 6th January, 1987
       they are quite satisfied with the stadium and have
       indicated that the degree of co-operation which they
       receive is very satisfactory.
       the Fire Service have, however, made a number of
       comments"
and then they are set out, because the letter is enclosed
and again "the gates" is the outside gates, as I have
indicated.   I do not think I need read the rest in detail.
     385, a telephone message from Mr. Mackrell to Mr.
Strange:
       "1. He can't find any amendments to original Safety
       Certificate dated 1979. Do I know if any exist?
       Not that I have seen.   One was to be drawn out after
       meeting about Spion Kop but knowing City of Sheffield
       they have n± done it.
       2. Would I send two prints of the latest ground lay-out.
       OK.
       3. He would prefer us. to meet Officer Working Party
       to discuss their various comments, rather than write
       letters.
       During yesterday's meeting with Graham he asked if
       we would raise the question of increasing the agreed
       capacity on Spion Kop with Officer Working Party."
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:-'- When did Mr. Mackrell come?
       MR. COLLINS:    I cannot off-hand remember, sir.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      He took over from Mr. Chester,
did he?
       MR. GLASGOW:      November, 1986, I think, sir, if you
will    let me check it.    I am sorry.
     LORD JUSTICE T A Y L O R A n y w a y he cottoned on to the
fact that nothing had happened to the safety Certificate
if nobody else had.
                  .<>

                                                  106


                                                                       Mfi. COLLINS


                                 MR. COLLINS:   That is right.   then we have a
                            memorandum from the Building Surveyor to Mr.-Bownes:
                                                                                              2 ,
                                 "I note your request<-Jor:;a report on the condition
                                 of the above stadiunfT-1'- --You will appreciate that
                                 to carry out a complete survey of all parts of
                                 this complex is a long and time-consuming j o b . which
                     B           should not be approached in anything other than a thorough
                                 manner.    I have therefore yet to find available diary
                                 time for my. Officers-to spend on this site."
                            That is June, 1987.   In July we have the first draft
                            Certificate Conditions which are sent to the Fire Officer
                            or Fire Service. "A first draft only and in basic form,
                            (i.e. they have not as yet been tailored to the needs of
                            individual stadia).   I enclose a first draft of the
                            interpretation section" and that is at 388 and then the
                            draft conditions at 389.      1. to appoint a Safety Officer,
                            3. The maximum number of spectators, schedule blank - there
                            was not any schedule.    4 ,'"5 and 6 require arrangements
                            with the Chief Constable for the provision of a sufficient
                            number of Police Officers, providing for police use control
                            rooms and saying no spectator shall be admitted unless the
                        D   methods of admission and the methods to be used for
                            segregation have been approved by the Chief Constable.
                            9. The Holder shall ensure that the Safety Stewards
                            are fit and capable to carryout their duties, properly
                            trained and instructed, and so on.
                                 390. "10. the written instructions given to
                                 stewards must include the following tasks and duties.
                        E        Stewards must:
                                 (a) prevent overcrowding by ensuring the crowd .
                                 limits in various parts 'of the ground are complied
                                 with"
                            and there is a note to the left, written I think by someone
                            in the Fire service which is pretty illegibile on my copy
                            but the effect of it is, "How on earth can they do this.
                                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Can stewards control this - it
                            seems to say, does it not?
                                 MR. COLLINS     Query'.    Effectively it is how can
                            they do this.
                                 "(c) ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear."
                            and then various other details.      Over the page 391:
                                   "The Holder shall provide such signs or notices
                               ’“" o f such type, size and design as the Council may
                                    from time to time require for reasons of public safety.
                                   The Holder shall ensuTre that the signs or otices so
                        H          required are clearly ^legible so that they can easily
                                   be read at all times.

J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                      107


                                           MR, COLLINS


    "26. Without prejudice to the provision of Section 8
    of the Act the Holder shall not cause or permit the stadium
    or any of its installations to be altered (which term
    shall exclude minor remedial works which do not in any
    way affect the safety^of'the stadium) in any manner
    whatsoever without the prior written consent of the
    Council.   The Holder'shall supply the Council with
    copies of such plans, and specifications" etc.
    28. The Holder shall provide and maintain at the
    stadium to the satisfaction of the Council a suitably
    equipped first aid room and shall arrange for
    attendance of such numbers of qualified first aid
    attendants as the Council may require"
and then it goes on to require a doctor.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Just before we go on,leaving
aside the question of the amendment of the Safety Certificate,
26,   the Holder did get the.^consent of the Council in writing
to the amendment of the radial fences, etc.     What about
the removal of the barrier?
     MR. COLLINS:    There 'does not appear to have been a prior
consent in writing to that as far as I can find in the
documentation.    Certainly there does not appear either to
have been an application for consent so it is not, perhaps,
surprising in those circumstances that there was no written
consent.   And then there are what 1 think are relatively
standard requirements for testing and so on, testing
records and inspections.




                            /LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am sorry.
                     108


                                                 MR. COLLINS

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry.  Just to clarify.
This is sent by the Council to the Chief Fire Officer

    HR. COLLINS:    Yes.

     LORD JUSTICE' TAYLORT" "Does it go   to - presumably
passes between the club    . What I am    trying to get
at is what activated this, at any rate,    beginning to
revise the safety certificate? Was it     to do with ....

     MR. COLLINS:   No, if was activated, it would
appear, by the memorandum on the takeover by the City
Council in 1986, the memorandum in which you will
recall Mr. Bownes said there were inadequacies in
the existing safety certificate so it takes them
from 1986 until July, 1987, to get round to preparing
the first draft notwithstanding the inadequacies in
the existing certificate and the first .draft is not
sent to the club, it is sent to the, I think ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: ” 313, is not it, if I am
not mistaken?

     MR. COLLINS:    313 i-s the internal report to
Council, that is correct, sir, and the relevant point
is on page 314.   The conditions, do however give some
cause for concern as they appear to be inadequate or
inappropriate in some areas.    You will recall, sir,
in the resolution of the Council at page 318 at C,
the .Head of Administration and Legal Department be
requested to draft new safety certificate conditions
in consultation.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:'' Yes.   This is when we pick
it up again, is it, next?

     MR. COLLINS:   A year later or so we have the
first draft.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I have got it now.

     MR. COLLINS:   Then 394, there is the response
of the Fire Authority, 7th of July.  It is a slsightly
wider response because the council was also dealing
with a slightly wider matter and if we look at page
399, sir, we will see the letter referred to of the
14th May, 1987, in the first sentence of 394.  This
was*a letter sent by the City to the Chief Officer,
Safety of Sports Grounds Act.

    "Following a meeting on Tuesday, 10th    March
     I have given some further thought to    the above
     subject.  Many points were raised at    the meeting
     but I think that the general feeling    was that
     the roles of each Authority involved    in the
                    109


                                              MR. COLLINS

    systern should be defined perhaps along the
    lines adopted by the South Yorkshire.     I
    have no objection in principle to roles
    being defined in this- way but I should
    make it clear that     it- is agreed that               '
    particular Authorities 'adopt particular
    roles then they wiH'-:be under a duty to
    consult with other interested parties where
    there is an overlap "of interest. As I see
    it the Authority which carries out a
    particular role will-'have the responsibility
    of advising the Council as Certificating
    Authority on all natters falling within
    that Lead Authority role.    I have drawn up
    a draft Schedule which attempts to define
    Lead Authority roles.    I should point out
    that the draft is intended to be open for
    discussion and I would therefore weleone
    your comments on it. Would you please also
    let me know if there are any other matters
    which should be included in the Schedule.

    Moving on to the question of inspections,
    this point was alsoidiscussed. My view is
    that the existing system of bi annual
    limited inspections is no longer appropriate;
    I feel that one major inspection per year
    should be carried out oneach stadium which
    should include all the areas and installations
    within the sscope of the legislation.   To
    back up this inspection there should be a
    number of 'during performance' inspections
    by Officers.  I think that there is general
    agreement in relation to 'during performance'
    inspections as they would highlight the
    performance of the safety system at each
    stadium whilst it is in operation."

Then next paragraph, middle paragraph on 2:

    "Moving on to the 'w.orking party' structure I
     think it is clear from the meeting of 10th
     March that some clarification of its status
     is required.  It is.reasonably clear from
     the County Council's records that the working
     party as such was actually a decision making
     body presumably acting under delegated powers.
   --However, the normal City Council practice iss
     that the principal powers remainwith a
     Committee or Sub-Committee (inthis case the
     General Purposes Panel) with routine matters
     being delegated to a Chief Officer (in this
     case myself).  I would therefore propose to
                                              MR. COLLINS

     ask the Panel to accept the working party as a
     forum for discussion.

    I take a view that the Lead Authority will be
    able to use the Working .Party ..as a useful forum
    for discussion priof-to" drawing up that Authority's
    formal view to be submitted to the Certificating
    Authority.  I propose that when an Authority feels
    that a meeting would be appropriate contact should
    be made with my Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Bownes,
    who will then make arrangements for the meeting
    to take place. An agenda will be prepared and
    circulated" and so on.                             —

Then in reply to that there is a letter at 394.   First
of all the schedule detailing proposed division felt
it should remain along the lines of the document issued
previously, so the new schedule is 398, new proposals.
Building surveyor should have responsibility of all
matters relating to structure of stadia including
crush barriers, walls, etc.   Fire service, fire
precautions, fire alarms, means of escape, emergency
lighting, stadium capacity.   Police, stadium policing,
ground security, evacuation procedures, assess of
emergency vehicles and emergency planning and the
Director of Environmental Health and Consumer Services,
miscellaneous safety hazards such as nosings, trip
hazards, floor surfaces, defective seating, electrical
safety, food safety and hygiene, toilet accommodation,"
etc.  Then we see also- is the old one, sir, which we
looked at at page 27 and 28 in the bundle.   It is the
South Yorkshire one.   There is not actually an enormous
difference really when one analyses it between the two
but the fire response is they would prefer the South
Yorkshire as it has stood the test of time with few
problems.

    "Whatever the outcome," they go on, one area
     where there may be a need for emphasis is a
     reference to the fact that all authorities
     should be more aware of other authorities
     responsibilities and that when considering
     any proposals all aspects of the green
     guide

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR.:   Where are you reading now?

   " M R . COLLINS: I am sorry.  I have gone back to
394, the second paragraph in No. 1.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Right.

     MR. COLLINS:     "Whatever the outcome one area
     where there may be a need for emphasis is a
     reference to the fae-t-that all authorities
                                               111


                                                                         MR. COLLINS

                               should be more aware of other authorities
                               responsibilities and that when considering
                               any"proposals all aspects of the green
                               guide should be taken' into account in
                               order that full consultation can take place
                               with other in teres tid-authorities," which
                               clearly is a very proper and sensible
                               approach.
                      B
                              "2. The proposal for one annual inspection
                               by the working group “in conjunction with
                               individual inspections by authorities as
                               and wherv- considered necessary is agreed
                               with although it is envisaged that because
                               of manpower resource limitations the degree
                               of central co-ordination referred to may
                               cause problems.

                               The Fire Authority would wish to carry out
                               such inspections subject to the limitations
                               referred to above and under varying conditions
                               at the ground. Obviously any adverse comments
                               on crowd safety would be forwarded to your
                               department.  As to t-he annual inspection, a
                      D        good time would be at the end or towards the
                               end of a season in order that any necessary
                               work can be followed up before the commencement
                               of a new season.

                               Whilst the situation regarding the status of the
                               working group is fully appreciated, this
                               authority feels that the recognition or
                       E       the group as a decision making body by the
                               City Council is imperative if it is to remain
                               effective. As under the County Council
                               however, the terms of reference of the group_
                               would be within the conditions of certification
                               laid down by the City Council, anything beyond
                               these terms being referred back via your
                               Department for a Committee decision.

                                The procedure outlined for calling additional
                                meetings of the working group is agreed with
                                although it is considered essential that full
                                minutes of all meetings are produced and
                                circulated and in particular should make
                                direct reference to outstanding matters from
                              -■previous meetings in order that these are not
                                'lost' in the-minutes. "

                                MR. GLASGOW:    I am so sorry.  I think there is a
                           little confusion crept in with the speed at which it
                           has been done. Could I just ask my friend to clarify
                           that he read us the draft new certificate.

                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR    39




J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                            112


                                                        MR. COLLINS

     MR. GLASGOW:    Yes, sir. Then 394 or course is not
a reply to that and it is very confusing because this is
the one point in the bundle at which the chronological
order gets out of place. -394 in fact is a reply to 399.
I think very importantly^piie'-has to go on to 409 in^
order to get the Fire Service's reply to the certificate
point where they deal with' it seriatim and it i s v e r y
important in view of what they say about stewaraing.

     MR. COLLINS:   Mr. Glasgow is absolutely right and
I apologise for not making it clear.  It is indeed right
the bundle, 394 to 399, should be read together in
isolation from the letter, the Fire Service letter or,
rather, the letter to the Fire Service, enclosing the
certificate at 387, enclosing the draft certificate at
387. As a matter of chronology, what has happened is
there were two letters of the 7th of July which are
relevant.  There is the letter at 387 and there is
the letter at 394.  In fact, ideally, the letter at
387 should have been placed after pages 394 to 399
so that ideally it should run 386, 394 to 399, then
back to 387.
       MR.   GLASGOW:   No, no,     399 has got to go before
394.

       MR.   COLLINS:   Yes, I am     including 399 ....

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Then back to 387.

     MR. COLLINS:        Then back to 387.     I am sorry
about that, sir.

       LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:'     Then 409 follows on.

     MR. COLLINS:   That is   the fire answer.  409 is
the fire answer or, rather, the fire comments on the
draft safety certificate.   May I go back to 401? You
will see, sir, that this refers to the Police r e c e i p t
of the City Council letter referring to - and the
letter is on 402 - referring to the arrangement of
a meeting.  Hope it will produce a consensus view
on future administrative procedures.    That of course
is the same or are the same matters, I think, that
were referred to in the letter of the 14thof May
at 399.
   " T h e r e is a letter from the Chief Constable
which is undaded but someone has written at the
top 16/17th July.      Says, "Thank you for your letter
of the 14th of-May.      Overlap of interest,  as you
rightly point out.       Helpful to have a meeting."
Then there is another copy at 404 of the letterof
the 14th of May.      This is the Police copy. 407 is
the draft Police response to that, I think.   I do not
think we need go into it. 408 is a note of the meeting.
Discussions were divided into four areas 1 "Definition
of Rolls"-of the wrong sort - "Inspections, Status of Group,
Admin Machinery of the Gr^jjp.. 1. It was agreed that
roles should be broadly sleiihed and responsibilities taken
on by the appropriate of Jthe three 'lead authorities'
i.e. Police, Fire and Building Surveyors subject to
agreement where overlap occurs.   All contact with the
ground should be through -the licensing authority.
Environmental Health would take a 'general safety role'
and not be a 'lead' authority.   2. The annual inspection
is to be a joint full inspection to be carried out near     _
the end of each season.   Hatch inspections to be done on
an individual basis.  3. The meeting was informed that
legally the group is essentially an advisory authority -
only the council can be the ultimate decision making
authority."

     Then we have 409, the Fire Service comments on the
draft certificate and you--"will see, sir, Section 10(a)
which is the one relating to the requirements the
stewards should deal with the control of the crowds.

     LORD JUSTICE LTAYLOR:   That follows the marginal
comment we read before.

     HR. COLLINS:   It does indeed. And over the page
on 410 they say two additional items for consideration:

    "(i) That a competent electrician employed or
     retained by the Holder shall be present during
     a specified activity.

     (ii) The Holder shall provide and maintain
     within the stadium to the satisfaction of the
     Council the access routes for emergency vehicles
     shown on the plans."

And then we have the input, August, 1987, from the
Health and Consumer Services in the Council.  Health
and Safety - General at the bottom.

    "2. The main first aid room requires to be
     supplied with adequate first aid equipment
     for the treatment of spectators should they
     become ill or injured.

     3.  In order to ensure that the football club
     fully discharge their duty to supply an
     adequate number of first aiders, I would
     require that a minimum of 12 be employed to
     render first aid to spectators during an
     activity.  If the club continue to use the
     voluntary services of_St. John's, then it
                                                      114

                                                                               MR. COLLINS

                                   would be necessary to formalise their
                                   relationship with them in order to ensure
                                   adequate deployment.

                                   4. I am to understfiQd, .that the club is now
                                   prepared to appoint-fiin'writihg, a safety
                                   officer of adequate status and authority.
                                   I would propose that he has the functions
                                   described in the draft safety certificate
                      B            conditions.

                                   During the inspection of the football club's
                                   stadium it became obvious that the stands and
                                   associated areas are subject to excellent
                                   standards of maintenance and upkeep.  Bearing
                                   in mind the size of the premises the above-
                                   mentioned points are of only minor significance
                                   and I was suitably impressed with the level of
                                   ground management being maintained.

                                    I would advise that t'fe identity and role of
                                    the Ground Safety Officer be formalised in
                                    accordance with "the green guide and without
                                    undue delay."
                       D
                               Then a note from Mr. Strange of Eastwoods to the
                               City Council, "Further to the recent discussionss
                               with representatives from the Police, Fire Service
                               and Building Surveyors Department .... we have
                               pleasure in enclosing four copies of sketches ...."
                               This is the device for the gates and that is shown
                               at 415 and 416.  Then we have the report, September,
                           E   1987 ___

                                     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not want to take up
                               time.   Do we gather from,this as to whether these gates
                               are only intended to be opened from outside or whether
                               they are supposed to be capable of being opened under
                               some pressure?

                                     MR. COLLINS:   My understanding is they are designed
                               only to be openable from outside. As you know, sir, there
                                .has been evidence in the Inquiry of those who .say that
                               they were opened by pressure from within.    We were
                               hoping to be able to carr.y. out some tests to see
                               whether it was possible to open them by pressure from
                               within.

                                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    And by what pressure.

                                    MR. COLLINS:  And by what pressure.  As far as I
                               am aware either it has not been possible to organise
                               those tests or we have not got the results if they have
                               been organised.


                       H

J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                        115


                                                   HR. COLLINS

      LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:   I am told Dr. Eastwood has
 tested them and they cannot be ....

      MR. COLLINS:    Thank you, sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:-'" We shall hear him.

      MR. COLLINS:    I did not know that.

      MR. GLASGOW:     May I iust help you on thatbecause
 we have asked the   questions as well and we have not had
 an answer and when we do we will help you. Possibly
 particularly for Professor Maunder's guidance if you
 look at the plan on 415 the matter which concerns us
 is the dishing area at the bottom of the catch because,
  to be candid, we   do not understand how that can be
 consistent with alocking from pressure within.      It
 appears to be designed to slip up under some pressure.
 One would ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Clearly we had better have
 this looked at when the expert ....

      MR. GLASGOW:    We have asked but we cannot help
 further.

      MR. COLLINS:   I think we are in m u c h ’the same
 position at the moment.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:_ Yes.   There is then the
' report of the Head of Administration.  The Panel will
  recall the City Council inherited the role of
  certificating authority, etc.  The Current Situation.
  I do not think really I need it.  It is all history.
  Except for the penultimate paragraph.

     "The drafting of new safety certificate conditions
      in consultation with the Council's advisers has
      been progressing steadily and new draft conditions
      are currently under consideration by those advisers.
      It is hoped that the new conditions will be
      submitted to the Panel at its meeting in October
      for final approval."

 I suppose that depends on what you mean by steadily.

 418. "Future administration of the Council's
 certificating function.  Following a thorough review of
 the legislation it has become clear that a detailed
 administrative system needs to be established in
 connection with the Council's certificating function.
 Discussions have been underway.  Accepting that the
 Council as the certificating authority will act on
                                                MR. COLLINS

    the basis of advice from experts (such as the
    Fire Service) the question arises as to how
    that advice may be best formulated.   In the
    past the County Council organised an Officer
    Working Party which was- apparently used as a
    forum for discussion Between Officers prior to
    the final formulation‘of advice to the Council.

    As it is essential that meetings take place
    due to the potential overlap of requirements in
    many areas, all the Authorities and Officers have
    now agreed that it would be appropriate to
    establish a revised form of the working party
    to perform a similar function for the City Council.
    It is recommended that the 'Safety of Sports Grounds
    Advisory Group' (which would consist of rep­
    resentatives from the Police, the Fire Service,
    the Building Surveyor's Division and the Department
    of Health and Consumer Services), would function as
    a forum for discussion between Officers," and so on.

Then at the bottom:

    "Under the old County -Council administrative
      structure the different Authorities represented
      in. their working party had fairly clearly defined
    . roles within..which to operate. A1 though-it can--- --*
      be seen that there is some merit in this idea the
      areas of potential overlap of responsibility are
      quite extensive.   However it appears that the
      various Authorities and Officers wish for some
      definition of roles and the following have been
      agreed." Building Surveyor, structure, etc.
     Well, they are the obvious ones.     "It is antic­
      ipated that the Health and Consumer Services
      Department would have an input on (a) aspects of
      general safety;   (b) the general safety management;
      (c) various special items such as first aid
      requirements.   It will be appreciated that these
      areas are not exhaustive."      Inspections, large-
      scale annually.   "Delegations.   There is also a
      further question to be dealt with at this stage
      and that relates to the day to day decision making
      required for the running of the Certification
      System" and so on. Recommendations to note,
      approve and delegate as appropriate.

Gate'release device is approved at page 420.   421,
Council to Mr. Mackrell.  "I refer to the revised Guide" -
that is the 1986 edition - "which was recently published
by H.M. Government following the Popplewell Report." I
suppose that again depends on what you mean by recently.
"I would like to draw your attention to the new Guide
and in particular Chapter 2 entitled 'Management
Responsibility.' This chapter sets out in detail the
<>Y^
CvO                                                    117


                                                                                MR. COLLINS

                                sort of matters which ground management should be
                                responsible for and I regard it as essential that
                                the management of designated stadia should be entirely
                                familiar x-;ith it and follow its guidance. Would you
                                therefore confirm in writing that you have obtained
                                and intend to retain a copy and that your Company and
                                its Officers are familiar ‘with it. You should also take
                                immediate steps to appoint a Safety Officer."
                       B




                       D




                            F




                                                             / 422.   Mr. Mackrell



                        H

 J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                     118


                                      Mr. COLLINS


At 422 Mr, Mackrell writes back saying that he does have
a copy and has had one for many months and that with
regard to the appointment of safety officer, his duties
encompass those of safety .officer/ and he would be
crrateful if they could -amend the"records accordingly.

     We then have the Home Office Notes to which I
referred earlier on, to take us through to 430.

     Then we come to the 4th December 1987, a letter
from the Council to Mr. Mackrell enclosing comments
made by officers arising from the inspection.  The
last paragraph:
      "The Fire Service has recently reminded me that
      no reply has yet been received to my letter of
      22nd April enclosing their letter of 18th'February."

Thev are respectively 383 and 374 in the bundle.

      "You will recall that you were asked in that letter
      to comment on the points raised by the Fire
      Service and X would appreciate those comments
      as soon as possible.  I take the view that it is
      appropriate for a Certificate Holder to have the
 ■•   opportunity'to comment on the views of-'Of-f ice-^s-
      before final decisions are taken on works that
      are required".

Then the comments occur at 4 32 and 4 33.   Page 433,
under "Miscellaneous Points":

      "4.2 The main first aid room requires to be
      supplied with adequate first aid equipment for
      the treatment of spectators should they become
      ill or injured within the sports ground".

 I think the other matters are relatively minor or not
 relevant for our purposes.   Then there is an interesting
 memorandum at page 4 34, internal to the City, dated 2nd
 February 1988,'from the Building Surveyor.   He says:

      "I am advised by a member of my staff who has
      attended recent games that there has been a lack
      of effective stewarding on the Kop, resulting in
      the crowd occupying the radial gangways as
      additional standing areas throughout the games.

      Although it is appreciated that these games were
      important Cup-Ties and therefore attracted increased
      crowd capacities, stewarding must be of a quality
      and of such numbers as to maintain these ganqways
      free from congestion during performances.

      •It is also understood that the turnstile capacity
       on the Penistone Road frontage was insufficient,
       and that many of the spectators were still entering
       the ground up to 15 minutes after the kick-off.
                    119


                                      Mr. COLLINS

     The combination of late arrival and ineffective
     stewarding could lead to dangerous occurrences.

     It is considered that the Club should be made aware
     of these matters a*id be required to confirm that
     stewarding will b'e'made available to keep these
     areas clear.

     This is possibly a matter that should be raised
     at the next meeting of the Working Party so that
     police and fire authority comments may also be
     sought."

There are three things arising from that memorandum.
First of all, although it refers to the Kop, it identifie
a problem which, of course, is essentially the problem
which has given rise to this tragedy, although of course
at the other end, the combination of late arrival and
ineffective stewarding,  the combination of late
arrival causing the turnstiles to be unable to cope.
When I say "ineffective stewarding", I must not be taken
tomean that I am saying it is the Club's fault;    all
I am sayingis stewarding in the sense of generally
ensuring that spectators go evenly on the terracing,
whoever may have been responsible for it.  I am using
the word "stewarding" in that sense, in that context.

     Secondly, it does not appear that the Council took
any action from that, they did not get in touch with
the Club and they did not raise it, or so it would
seem - certainly there is no record of their having
raised it - for police or fire authority comments.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do you mean nothing flowed
from this memorandum?

     Mr. COLLINS:  It would seem that it was put on
file and that is as far as it went.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Bownes is the ...?

     Mr. COLLINS:  Mr. Bownes is the officer of the
Council who is responsible for the implementation of
the certification responsibilities under the 1975 Act.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   So it did not go to the
Working Party?

     Mr. COLLINS:  There is no record in writing that it
did do, although I think it is fair to say that the
City Council in their evidence may say that there was
reference to its contents rather than to it itself, at
the next meeting of the Working Party.  Sadly, we do
not appear to have, and certainly I have not seen in
the >documents, a record, of that Working Party.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.
                      120

                                          Hr. COLLINS

     Mr. COLLINS:   Maybe because no-one took any Minutes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  On ©a g e-4,35 is a letter from Eastwoods
dealing with their responses to the various matters. Can
I go on to 441?    These'are all the matters set out in
letter, you will recall, sir, most of which I said were
relatively minor.     I simply referred to 441, the last
paragraph, where it said:

     "The Club have expressed to us their increasing
     concern that with the introduction of each new
     member of the Fire Service to the Officer Working
     Party new or different recommendations are put
     forward by that officer, which in some cases openly
     contradict the recommendations offered by his
     predecessors.  Whereas we agree that many of the
     observations and recommendations are of a subjective
     nature, the Club cannot be expected to continue
     spending money on matters which are purely a matter
     of personal opinion ..."

and so on.     The Fire Authority's response to that is not
in the bundle.     For the record, it is document 81 in the
Fire Service bundle and the effect of it is to indicate
tftat tho.se> strictures were, in their view, a-little-' ■' '
exaggerated, to use their words.

     442 deals with the gate    safety device, and so does-
443 - a demonstration to the    police.  444    is   another
letter, but a round robin, I    think --

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am sorry, do     we   get a
reply to the document at 431, or have we not got there
yet?

     Mr. COLLINS:    Yes, sir, we do, and we have not
got there yet.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   All right.

     Mr. COLLINS:  444 is a round robin letter.   I call
it a round robin letter, but it would appear to be a
common form letter addressed no doubt to a number of
bodies, including Sheffield Wednesday, in April 1988,
and I think I suspect Mr. Kallipetis again in the no
response;  he confirms that.  The middle paragraph says:

      "We acknowledge the very valuable contribution
      which the St. John Ambulance and British Red
      Cross make.  There are, however, areas where the
      level of care which we can provide, of necessity,
      exceed those which can be provided by the
      voluntary societies . .. Can we be of assistance
      to you?"
                          121

                                         Mr. COLLINS

     Then there is the response of the Fire Service of
the 25th May 1988, the note of matters following
inspection.  I do not think there are any matters that
I need specifically refe.r.to there.

     Then there is a memorandum of the form of inspection
from the Director of Health and Consumer Services, and
again there is nothing there that I need specifically
refer to.    Sir, if you will give me a moment, I said
that there was a response from the Club, and I am sure
there was and I think I ..must have gone over it to the
next one.  431, sir, is dated 4th December, 1937, and,
of course, refers back to a reply to the letter of the
22nd April enclosincr the letter of the 18th February.
Jf one’goes to 435,'one sees that that is a r e p l y to the
letter of the 22nd April, 1987;    so that is the reply
referred to.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I see.

       Mr. COLLINS:       I atn sorry, I should have spotted
 that.    I apologise.    Can I now come on back again to
 449? That is an internal communication to the Club,
 written in the Club, with a copy sent to Inspector
 Sewell of the Police. ’We have seen that. That is the
 instruction to the match day staff.         You will recall,
-s-ir, -that i-t does, not on -the. face of -it..hAV&.jaoy. scape... .....
 for stewarding in the terraces.

      455 is Sheffield Wednesday's instructions to stewards
 Again there is nothing in that*that refers specifically
 to any duties in the terraces;  it refers to nothing^
 specific to the terraces as opposed to the stands. That
 again is a document that we have already seen.

      457 is August, 1988 and refers to the testing of
 barriers in the third line:

         "The barriers tested were numbers 121 to 124, 124A" -

 and that is the barrier that went.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Were do we find these
 labelled?

      Mr. COLLINS:   Sir, there is a plan which should
 be at the front of your ---

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes, I have got it, thank
 you.
         Mr. COLLINS:      459 and 460 is the same plan.

    **    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes, I have got it.

    '• Mr. COLLINS: And 124A can in fact be seen on               459
 at the front of pen 3.
                                        Mr. COLLINS

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you very much.

     Mr. COLLINS:   In the third paragraph of this letter
he says:
     "In all but one case'the barriers tested successfully
     withstood the applied load. A clip over the rail
     of barrier 124 broke before reaching the full test
     load".

A visual inspection revealed some of the ends being
corroded.   And there are the plans, as you have pointed
out.                                        _

     There is a copy of the report at page 461 and 462,
and on page 466 we have the Certificate relating to
124 and 124A --

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    466?

     Mr. COLLINS:  Page.466, sir. You will see at the
bottom, if you turn it sideways, 124A and the test of
the two spans.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

      Mr. COLLINS: -Sir, the method of testing is that
set -out in Annex C to the Green Guide...............

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   You will see that there are three
tests there set out on the Certificate which are
required by Annex C.   I am reading from paragraph 1
of the Green Guide:

     "The test is to consist of the application of an
     evenly distributed force of either 6.0 KN/metre
     width (400 lbs f/foot width) or 4.3 KN/metre
     width (290 lbs f/foot width) of barrier as mentioned
     in paragraph 13.

     4. The force to be applied for three consecutive
     periods, the full force being maintained for 5
     minutes each period.  The interval between
     applications to be as short as possible, i.e.
     to enable complete unloading and reloading only.
     A record should be kept of any deformation during
     the loading periods, during the periods of
     maintained loading, or during the recovery period.

     5. If on the removal of the force for the third
     time the recovery of deformation is at least 75%
     the barrier or handrail may be deemed to have
     satisfied the loading requirements.   If this
    '[requirement is not-met but the recovery is more
     than 50%, then the test should be repeated and if
     on retest the recovery is at least 75%, the barrier
                     123

                                      Mr. COLLINS

     may be deemed to have satisfied the loa-ling
     requirements.  If the recovery is less than
     50% on the first test or less than 75% on the
     retest, the barrier shall be deemed to have
     failed.

     6.   If during any'test, even though the barrier
     or handrail satisfies the above loadina require­
     ment, doubt should arise for any reason (including
     such matters as cracking of the terracing or
     distortion of connections) as to the safety of
     the barrier, or handrail, a detailed investigation
     should be carried out ... and a record should
     be kept."-

What is required      is that you have three consecutive
tests and provided it does better than 75% on the third,
then all is well.      If on the third it does 50% to 75%,
then you have got to go through the whole thing again;
and if on the retest it performs better than 75% on the
third, then all is well.      Mow, if we look at the actual
figures of the barrier in question and if we turn back -
forgive me - to page 459 for a moment, you will see
that it runs from the right-hand side as 1, and the
 left •hand side is 3, so that it was 1 and 2 that went.
 It was spans 1 and 2 of the barrier which collapsed.
 So we are concerned largely with the upper of the two
.'teats .recorded an- that certificate for- -12-4A,^that 4s,—
 1 to 2. You will see that the application of the force
 is 6; applied load tonnes 1.44.      I am looking at page
 466, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   "Test 1: Rest 0; load 29; unload
12;  59% recovery." That is on the first of.the three.
So that barrier moved, under load, a distance of 29
millimetres, as I understand it. When the test ended,
it recovered to 12 millimetres from its original
position, and thus its recovery was only 59%.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   On the second of the three tests,
it moved 19 millimetres;   it recovered to 5, and thus
achieved 74%.  On the final one, it moved under load
19 millimetres but recovered to its original resting
position, i.e. 100.   If you flick through the records
on the other barriers, you will find that 29 millimetre
movement under load is high but not the highest of all
the movements - indeed by no means the highest of all
the movements - but it is certainly on the high side.

     Now, there is an apparent ambiguity in th^wo r d i n g
of this to a layman, if not to an engineer. The
ambiguity is perhaps the obvious one. You have got
three tests.  If you start the first test and that
(demonstrating) is your zero, as it were, your upright,
                                                                               124

                                                                                                          Mr. COLLINS

                                                     when you put it under load, it will move# let us say,
                                                     that much.  If it recovers 50%, it will recover to
                          A                          that, which is still, of course, at a slight movement.
                                                     Now, if you start your second test with that as your
                                                     base-line, then you are.going to get recovery of, say,
                                                     75% to that'and not to,.that. Similarly, if you start
                                                     your third test at your-second test base-line, then
                                                     your recovery to that is going to be 100 per cent but
                                                     it is actually going to be from your original base-line
                                                     of the first test, a recovery of much less than 100 per
                          B                          cent.

                                                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  The question is whether you
                                                     go back to first place each time or --

                                                          Mr. COLLINS:  It is question of whether you go
                                                     back to first place each time.   We would say, as a
                                                     matter of common sense, you must. Otherwise, to use
                          C                          an exaggerated example, you could have a barrier that
                                                     went that much on the first test and on the second test
                                                     went a little more and on the third test came back to
                                                     that, and would still pass the test because on the third
                                                     test it came back to that ; and that, frankly, would
                                                     seem on the face of it to be absurd.   So we would
                                                     suggest that any sensible interpretation must mean that
                                                     you go back to first base.
                          D
■_ yu_-    r    •_»•> ^   X »' *-*1 «*e j •*_ t» •
                                                         „,LQRILjJUSTICE,-- TAYLOR: .„Well , -if. it, was- no-t— P a r l i a m e n t .•« -
                                                     that drafted the Green Guide,' we can now ask the people'
                                                     who drafted it what they meant, can we not?

                                                           Mr. COLLINS:        We can, sir, if we can find out.

                           E                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Yes.

                                                           Mr. COLLINS:         I may say, sir, weare trying.

                                                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Yes, thank you.

                                                          Mr. COLLINS:  These certificates, of course, do not
                                                     indicate how Dr. Eastwood did it.   I do not think we
                             F                       have had any indication yet from Dr. Eastwood of how
                                                     he did it. No doubt we will find out from Dr. Eastwood
                                                     how he did it.

                                                          Sir, those go on, and the calibration follows them,
                                                     to 475, which was Dr. Eastwood's certification that the
                                                     various structures were in a satisfactory condition.
                                                     That is page 475.
                           G
                                                          476 is a reply to the letter at 462, which I did
                                                     not read in detail but which was effectively Eastwoods
                                                     indicating what the damage was and asking did the Club
                                                     want the repairs to be done, and the Club said :

                                                            ."I am writing to confirm our instructions that
                                                           'all work necessary on the crash barriers be
                           H                                completed prior to the commencement of the season".



  J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                    125

                                              Mr. COLLINS


     Then we have Inspector Sewell's note on the
emergency evacuation procedure and I have already
read that.   That was in the Police bundle. .

     479 are the figures: for the Manchester United
football matchy which again we have already seen.

     480 is an extract from the Football Association's
instruction about the "soccer star scheme", which has
been referred to before.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That was what was going to be
staged, was it?

     Mr. COLLINS:   That is what   was cancelled,sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  Then 481 is a letter dated 30th March
1989 from the City to the Chief Fire     Officer:

     "I refer to your letter of 13th     August 1987in
     connection with Safety Certificate Conditions.

     I now enclose for your attention a copy of the final
     revised Safety Certificate Conditions which, as far
     as possible, incorporate the comments made in your
   .letter.   You will appreciate that the wording of. ■
     certain of your comments has had to be amended
     slightly but I hope that the objective has none the
     less been achieved.

     There are four points which require some further
     consideration:

     (a) You say in your letter that an age range should
     be specified in connection with stewards.  I think,
     however, that the wording of Condition 11 should be
     satisfactory without stipulating an age range ...

     (b) police knowledge of the whereabouts of a
     doctor - I believe this is adequately covered in
     Condition 7;

     (c)  identifiability of press T.V. and radio
     personnel - I am not sure of the justification
     for such a Condition and wonder if you have any
     further comments on it;

     (d) the attendance of competent electrician - again
     I wonder what the justification for this would be.

     Would you please let us have your comments in due
     course."



                          •/One does feel bound to point out
                                                       MR. COLLINS



      One does feel             bound to point out that there appear to
have been 18 months             to draft or to act upon the FireService
comments.

         483 is the draft conditions.

        " The H o l d e r s h a l l p r o v i d e s u c h s i g n s o r n o t i c e s
        o f s u c h type, s i z e a n d d e s i g n as the C o u n c i l
        m a y f r o m t i m e to t i m e r e q u i r e f o r r e a s o n s of
        public safety."

12 amends the written instructions of the Stewards.                                     It says:

         " T h e y m u s t i n c l u d e the f o l l o w i n g ta s k s   and
         duties.         Stewards must:

         (a) U n d e r t h e d i r e c t i o n o f th e S a f e t y O f f i c e r o r
         the Chief St ew ar d o r an A ut ho r i s e d O fficer prevent
         o v e r c r o w d i n g b y e n s u r i n g the c r o w d limits in
         v a r i o u s p a r t s of the g r o u n d a r e c o m p l i e d wi t h. "

      LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR: But those didn't in the 1979
certificate send the particulars as to pens.

         MR. COLLINS:           No, they didn't.

    ■    -LORO J U S T I C E -TAYLOR :' And there was no .proposalat J                             ^
this time was there in April 1989 that the revised certi­
ficate should either?
      MR. COLLINS:  That is quite right, sir.  If you look
at page 506 you will see the Draft Schedule 3 referring to
Condition 27 and Condition 27 is the one that deals with
capacity.  You will see that it still does not break down
the West Terrace at all.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, I am probably asking the
 obvious, but there is nothing then in this certificate which
 takes account at all of the radial fences having been
 introduced?
           MR. C O L L I N S :    No, a n d i t d o e s n o t s e e k in a n y w a y
 to a m e n d t h e a m o u n t s , th e c a p a c i t i e s a n d t h e y d o n ’t s e e m to
 h a v e t h o u g h t , n o o n e s e e m s to h a v e t h o u g h t to r e c o n s i d e r
 the c a p a c i t i e s .

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:             T h e y could not have had any
 i m p a c t " o n t h is o c c a s i o n .

       MR. COLLINS: No, no, of course as far as the capacitie
 are concerned by then they had lost what is now Pen 5.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                The slim bit of Pen 5.
                                          MR. COLLINS



      MR. COLLINS:  Going back to 12 I think other than the
first one they are much the same as the one we looked at
before.

        Over the page, 485:     .1=

        "13. Training exercises organised by    the Safety
        Officer relating to the duties of stewards shall
        be held at least once every three months. A
        written record of the exercises shall be kept."

        .... The other duties detailed in schedule 2
        shall be carried out by stewards."

If we look at page 489 we see what tne duties Oi        theoafeuy
Stewards ar e:
        "The number of Safety Stewards on duty at each
        specified activity shall not be less than 66.

        The Safety Stewards carry out the duties set out
        below:-

        26    2 for each main exit

        12    1 per vomitory in the       South Stand   .

         g    1   "      "       "    "   West Stand

        2_g   1   "      "       "    "   North Stand
 /
         2    Beneath South Stand"

Ho duties in relation to Stewards on the terraces# o±. course.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am sorry to take time# but
the new bit that you referred to which related to overcrowding
which is at 484# can we just loo>c back to uhe certificaue
as before, it was 107 wasn't it onwards.

        MR. COLLINS:   The existing certificate sir?

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes.

        MR. COLLINS:   Yes, the existing certificate is at 107.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Where do we find the relevant
 bit?
       MR. COLLINS:  There is nothing so specific, but insofar
 as there is it is paragraph 9, page 111, which is much more
 general.
         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     So this is a total recast really?
                                      MR. COLLINS


      MR. COLL INS:   Oh yes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: And when'you pointed         out that
passage it is not that that      has been inserted, it isa
complete recast in which t h a t now appears?

      MR. COLLINS:   Yes, if   you recall, sir, the original
draft which was commented on by the Fire Service wasspecific,
that the Stewards should effectively sort out the levelling
on the terraces.   I am paraphrasing.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, I thought the Fire Service
-queried how on earth they were going to be able to do it?

      MR. COLLINS: Exactly and then 12(a) is a redraft
intended, I imagine, to take account of the Fire Service
objection and the redraft says:

       "Under the direction of the Safety Officer or
       the Chief Steward or other authorised Officer,
       prevent overcrowding by ensuring crowd limits
       in various parts of the ground are complied with."

 But with respect one would have thought if there was a diffi­
 culty in doing it, identified before, that does not cure that
 difficulty if it is a difficulty.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Again we went rather quickly over,
 it was a letter from Eastwoods wasn't it, that was the reply
 to the Club being invited to comment?   Did the Club comment
 on the suggestion?
       MR. COLLINS:  No, the Club weren't asked to comment
 on the draft Safety Certificate.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: • Shouldn't they have been?

       MR. COLLINS: Well I would have thought so and one
 imagines "they will. The intention is that they would have
 been but I don't think taht stage has yet been reached, as
 I understand it.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Can you help on that, Mr. Maxwell?

       MR. MAXWELL: I seek to assist on another point,^sir.
 Condition 12(a) contains reference to "an authorised Officer"
 and the definition there includes a Police Constable and
 therefore the Stewards are to be deployed at the direction
 of a Police Constable as a possible way of dealing with
 the terraces.
       MR. COLLINS: Yes, certainly that is right. An
 authorised Officer is defined on 482 to include a Policeman,
 kut so far as putting to the Club is concerned, I think I
 am right dn saying that stage has not yet been reached.
                                   MR. COLLINS



     NR. MAXWELL;   It hasn't.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Thank you very much.    That is
what I was seeking. Thank. ygu_.
      MR. COLLINS:   Sir, I don't think it is necessary to
refer to more of that save to refer you to paragraph 33 at
the end on 487.    It says:
      "The Council may fron._time to time issue written
        guidance to holders on safety matters.   j.he   ^
      holder must pay due regard to any such guidance.

The guidance is at page 492, the draft guidance.

      "This note has been prepared by the Sheffield
      City Council in order to inform Certificate
      Holders as to the general background of the
      Safety Certificate Conditions....

      GUIDANCE
      Where advice is given to the holder by any of
      the four Officers mentioned it should be
      acted upon in accordance with the time constraints
._   _given --in -the’advice. The holder is reminded,.,
      "that failure *t0 take steps to ensure the
       reasonable safety of spectators could give rise
       to a prosecution.

■      The Chief Constable and his Officers have a
       particularly important role in relation to
       'public order' situations the correct handling
       of which should reduce any risk to spectator
       safety.
       The Chief Constable must therefore be provided
       with appropriate facilities at the stadium
       for control, crov/d surveillance, detention
       and administrative purposes. These facilities
       are essential if public order is to be
       maintained and the risk to spectators minimised.

       The Chief Constable must also be informed at
       the earliest possible moment of the proposed
       date and content of all specified activities
      _so that appropriate planning can take place.

       In addition there must be consultation and
       agreement between the holder and the Chief
       Constable veil in advance of specified
       activities about the proposed methods of
       admission and the segregation of spectators.
       Consultation must also take place ie advance
       information is such that public order difficulties
       may arise. As a result of this consultation
                                                   MR. COLLINS



      it is possible that the Chief Constable may require,
      for reasons of preserving public order, that the
      specified activity is "all ticket" or the specified
      activity should not beipiayed at all at the Stadium
      or the day and the ti'Htel of the specified activity
      should be changed.

      The Chief Constable should also be able to use
      whatever means are appropriate to exercise^control
      over spectators for reasons of safety ....

Then there is a Police note 493, reaction to that:

      "Enclosed for information is a copy of the
      Certificate issued by the then South Yorkshire
      County C o u n c i l Also attached is a copy of
      the first Draft prepared by the City Council
      in August 1937.

      R e f e r r i n g to the l a t t e r c o u l d I d r a w y o u r
      a t t e n t i o n to p a r a g r a p h s 4, 5 & 6 w h i c h h a v e b e e n
      t o t a l l y d e l e t e d f r o m the n e w draft."

 Sir, the original 1987 draft you may recall included - p a g e 2
 I think - included specific reference to the holder making
 arrangements with the^Chief Constable providing a. r,p.Qnv, fpr
“P o l i c e 'use and not admitting spectators unless methods have-
 been approved.        Those have been removed, as is pointed out
 in this document.

 :
 •    "Similarly could I draw your attention to                        paragraph 10
       which outlined the duties o f ‘stewards.                        To some^
       degree the first draft made the stewards                        answerable
       to police officers.  In the latest draft                        the reference
       to police has been totally removed."

I am not sure that is entirely fair, because as Mr. Maxwell
pointed out, it is covered by the definition of ".authorised
Officer", although of course that is a Police Officer rather
than the Chief Constable, although I suppose the Chief
Constable is a Police Officer.

       "Generally speaking the new draft certificate,
       apart from matters relating to the police, is
       reasonably consistent with the first draft.
       H o w e v e r y o u m a y c o n s i d e r i t a p p r o p r i a t e a t some
       s t a g e to s e e k t h e v i e w s of Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t s
       Broomhead and Duckenfield."

 Then the ie is a letter from the Chief Constable to the Joint
 Secretariat.    It says:

       "I enclose a copy of correspondence received
       from the Administration and Legal Department
       of Sheffield City Council and relating to the
                                                            MR. COLLINS



        C o u n c i l ' s p r o p o s e d g e n e r a l c o n d i t i o n s to a t t a c h
        to c e r t i f i c a t e s u n d e r th e a b o v e Act.            I also
        e n c l o s e a c o p y of m y i m m e d i a t e r e p l y f r o m w h i c h
        y o u w i l l s ee t h a t I a m 'concerned t h a t the
        p r o p o s a l s d o n o t take.tfuil a c c o u n t of the
        l e g i s l a t i v e p r o v i s i o n s . r e g a r d i n g the a t t e n d a n c e
        of police at sporting events."

That letter is at 495, the Chief Constable says:

        "Meanwhile, I am concerned to note that the
        conditions do not appear to require^the attendance
        of police officers at football matches, as
        provided by Section 2 of the Safety of Sports
        Grounds Act 1975 (as amended by Section 21 of the
        Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
        1937).   I am forwarding a copy of your corres­
        pondence to the Police Authority Legal Department
        for advice on the matter and will contact you
        when that advice is available."

496, the response of the City:

         "I refer to your letter ....

         I have carefully considered this matter and
         have c o m e to--the c o n c l u s i o n t h a t C o n d i t i o n s . . ....
         which purport to delegate the Council's
         functions to outside bodies are unenforceable
         as they are beyond the powers of the Council.
         Therefore several Conditions which were included
         in t h e f i r s t d r a f t ( r e l a t i n g to fo r e x a m p l e
         d is cu ss io ns b e t w e e n C er ti fi ca te holders and
         the P o li c e) 'have b e e n d e l e t e d o r m o d i f i e d .

         I am, o f c o u r s e , c o n s c i o u s o f the v e r y i m p o r t a n t
         P o l i c e r o l e in c o n n e c t i o n w i t h the s a f e t y of
         spectators at sports grounds and I have therefore
         t a k e n t w o s t e p s to e n s u r e t h a t this role is
         p r o p e r l y r e c o g n i s e d in the c e r t i f i c a t i o n s ys te m .
         F i r s t l y the d e f i n i t i o n of "authorised officers"
         in t h e C o n d i t i o n s i n c l u d e P o l i c e O f f i c e r s .
         S e c o n d l y t h e r e is a l s o a n e w C o n d i t i o n w h i c h
         r e l a t e s to g u i d a n c e g i v e n b y the C o u n c i l on
         safety matters."                  T h a t is 33.       "A d r a f t of
         the p r o p o s e d g u i d a n c e is e n c l o s e d w i t h the n e w
         C o n d i t i o n s and you will see that it refers
         l a r g e l y to P o l i c e / C e r t i f i c a t e h o l d e r r e l a t i o n s .

 Then   there      is a c o p y of         th e c e r t i f i c a t e   that we have already
 seen   that follows.

       Sir, this stage of the Inquiry is I think perhaps not
 the time or place to go into whether the second paragraph
 is right or not.  I don't think it is right speaking for
 myself, but as I say this perhaps is not the time or place.
V                                                             132
                                                                          MR. COLLINS



                                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR;       No.

                                          MR. COLLINS:  Sir, we then have the Ambulance log
                                   which I don't * think we need .-to refer to in detail at this
                                   stage.   That Gan be dealt wifch-when the Ambulance give
                                   their evidence because it is iiot really material to safety
                                   of the ground because it relates to the events of the day.
                                   That is at pages 510 to 517.
                         6               May I say I am not seeking to decry its importance
                                   or minimise its importance, it is just that^ it is more   ^
                                   relevant to the events of the day than to tne issues in this
                                   bundle.
                                             I don't think 518 matters.

                                         gir that is the bundle. I am sorry it has taken
                                   rather longer than I had hoped to go through it but I hope
                                   that it has been valuable and I know that it will mean
                                   that we don't have to go through a lot of evidence of
                                   reference to the history which really is there in the
                                   documents.
                                         I


                                            I hope too that I have indicated in the course of
                          D         qoing through it the areas where there might be criticism
                                    of certain of the bodies which are directly concerned and
                                   ■•’“t is not neces'sary* for me-tO'spell those out^ Insofar as    - >•
                                    they are not a l r e a d y covered‘by standard letters. As I^say
                                    I hone they hava already been spelt out in tne course Oi
                                    qoinq through, but insofar as they haven't, may I just
                                     indicate in relation to the City Council that it would seem
                                     that the major matters are first of all the inordinate
                                     delay that took place in doing anything about the perceived
                                     inadequate and inappropriate’safety, matters in the Safety
                                     Certificate; that the delay was inordinate I think cannow
                                     be doubted, whether or not.it was excusable will remain
                                     to be seen.
                                             Secondly, there seems to have been a failure on anyone s
                                    part, and this may be more in fairness a matter that one
                                    should take against the Club rather than the City Council,
                                    failure to consider the effect of the removal of that p a r n e r
                                    144 on capacity and generally, but certainly so far as the
                                    f 3rtificating Authority is concerned and I am not at this
                                    Q-t-acre limitinq it to the City because clearly their
                                    responsibility is that the City inherit from South Yorkshire
                                    in these matters, there seems to have been a failure to ua^e
                                    anv steps as the pens ^ere divided and subsequently redivided
                                    in 1981 and 1985, to take any steps to consider what effect
                                    that should have on the capacity and to reflect that in the
                                    Safety Certificate.                       ^
                                          There appears to have been little if any consideration
                                    - and again this is a matter which affects the Club as well
                                    as the Certificating Authority - in 1985 or thereafter ox
                                    the number of turnstiles needed at the., Leppings Lane end
                               H

    J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                         133
                                    MR. COLLINS



to cope with any reasonable flow that might be expected o_
spectators into tne ground.

    ' There are a number of bireaches of the Green Guide both
in respect of the capacity of^the pens, the crush barriers,
the width of the gates, the perimeter and the tunnel. Tnose
are matters which are really are already covered.

      The first aid room situation ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, you put that in criticism
of the City or just the Club?
      MR. COLLINS: Both.   The first aid room never seems to
have got its proper equipment and again that is a matter
really for both and I think this is also a matter for 00 J 1,
no one really seems to have applied their minds properly to
the problems of even distribution and ensuring evendistribution
of the fans on the terraces, coupled with and ensuring tnat
the capacity of the pens were..not exceeded.

      Now in that regard, sir, it is perhaps worthwhile
pointing out that there will, be in due course evidence, and
this is a purely factual matter, that as the pens stand it
is a matter of measurement their capacities even at l,0u0
and 1,200 are exceeded.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: You mean 1,000 and 1,200 is
more than the Green Guide says it should be?




               /HR. COLLINS:   'That is right.
                       134

                                      MR. COLLINS


     MR. COLLINS:   That is right, yes.    Sir, if one
looks at Paragraph 222 of the Green Guide one sees that
it is there stated that the extreme allowances for packing      ,,-
density are as follows: .54 persons per 10 sq.m. when           S
the terrace or viewing (inaudible ) is in good condition
and 27 persons/10 sq.m. when it materially deviates from
the recommended guidelines so as to constitute a possible
hazard.   There are then various elaborate --
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: _ It seems rather extraordinary
that you immediately halve the capacity without any kind
of sliding scale but there we are.
       MR. COLLINS: There is a sliding scale because
223 says that it may be necessary to interpolate between
these figures where conditions fall between the two
e x tremes.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am sorry, I misjudged them.
     MR. COLLINS:   Although it is done in rather general
terms and then there are various elaborate provisions for
working out the capacity at less than maximum where the
crush barriers do not conform in one way or another,
either because they are the wrong strength or because they
are wrongly positioned..        ,
     If one takes, 54 as the maximum, which is the maximum
allowable assuming everything is right, and I may say everything
was not right so far as the crush barrier configuration is
concerned but taking it at 54 which is the maximum possible
the area of Pen 3 is 14.35 metres x 13.1 metres and at
Pen 4 it is 14.645 metres. . 14.350 x 13.1 . Pen 4 is 14.645
x 13.1.   The areas are therefore - and I am reliably
informed - respectively 188 sq.m., that is Pen 3, and 191.8
square metres, that is Pen 4.    Assuming, therefore 54/10 sq.m.
the capacity of Pen 3 is 1,015 and the capacity of Pen 4 would
be 1,036, making a total of 2,051 as against the 2,200
for the two which is in the Safety Certificate and which has
been assumed.
     Those, I emphasise, are the figures assuming the
configuration of the crush barriers to perform exactly
with the Green Guide. They do not and therefore those
are in themselves figures which are too high and the
true capacity in accordance with the Green Guide would
be less than those figures.
     Sir, you will recall that somewhere there is a plan
which gives the 1,000 and 1,200 and off-hand I am trying
to remember whether 1,200 is Pen 3 or Pen 4.   The 1,200
is Pen 3, I am obliged.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    it would help me if you reminded
me which document it is we -have it on.
     MR. COLLINS:   I have "it in a little aerial sort of
plan of the ground -- not aerial, a plan of the ground
                                                   MR. COLLINS


with   the figures.I think it may be that one, sir.

       LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR: ,Tha is right, it is.
   ' MR. COLLINS:       And i i i s 'Pen 3-,- is it, sir, which i s - - -
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Pen 3 is 1,200, according to this,
and Pen 4 is 1,000.
     MR. COLLINS:   That is right.   Actually Pen 3 is
smaller than Pen 4 and it just shows how arbitrary the
1 200 and 1,000 were because one must remember that Pen             4
has had taken out of it --    No, I am wrong, Pen 5 was
taken out of Pen 6 next door.
     Sir, those are, as we see it, the major matters
which we would say should be considered, if there are to
be criticisms against the City Council and Club.     There
are other matters against each of them but they have had
Salmon letters which cover-the other matters. So far
as the City Council is concerned, I think probably I would
substitute what I have stated for matters which are in
the Salmon letter and which, as the thing has gone on,
as the Inquiry has gone on-perhaps are not of such vital
relevance.    There are breaches of the Green Guide,
as I have indicated which are referred.to.
     I hope that makes it clear enough but if Mr. Maxwell
wants it in writing I will, of course, give him it in
writing so that he can have a formal Salmon letter but
Ihope he has sufficient information to know what the
possible areas of criticism are.
     MR. MAXWELL:   No, sir, I do not require it in
writing but I wonder if I could mention a point which
may well be a false point which I feel I ought to deal with
now so that others do not build upon it and it relates to
page 434 of the Inquiry core bundle which is a memorandum
sent from the Building Surveyor about the Spion Kop
and which it was said --
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Can we just get it first.
     MR. MAXWELL;    434, sir, a memorandum relating to
the spion Kop concerning a problem which it was said was
remarkably similar to the one which concerns this Inquiry
and where it was suggested that Mr. Bownes who had received
this 'memorandum had not taken any'action upon it.   Sir,
the position is this, that we did not put into our statement
all of the advisory group meeting documents but one such
which came into existence on 23rd March three weeks after
this memorandum and which relates to the Spion Kop
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    23rd April?         I am sorry,
 February..                 ■-
      MR. MAXWELL;     Thenotes are of a meeting held on 23rd
 March.
                                                       136

                                                                               MR. COLLINS




                                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: . The date on this document
                               is 2nd F ebruary.        •* 1 . .
                                    MR. MAXWELL:   I am obliged, it is seven weeks or so
                               after the memorandum on page 434.   There is a discussion
                               of this memorandum where the Building Surveyor's represent­
                     B         ative outlined the memorandum and the circumstances which
                               gave rise to it and Superintendent Stuart for the Police
                               indicated that the gangway problem had been discussed
                               with Sheffield Wednesday_who were going to take measures
                               with their stewards in an.attempt to resolve it.   Sir,
                               I mention this because action was taken and it is recorded.
                                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very well. It may be convenient
                      C        if you can give us the document to slot it in at that point.
                                    MR. COLLINS:   I am grateful to Mr. Maxwell.   As
                               I hope I made clear, I said that we have not seen any
                               document and I was not aware of any document. Now he has
                               drawn that to myttention clearly that matter does not
                               or should not attract the emphasis that perhaps I placed
                               upon it and I fully recognise that, subject to seeing the
                      D        document Mr. Maxwell refers to.
                                   M R . MAXWELL:    The document is w i t h    •                  •
                                    MR.   COLLINS:     I am sure it is.
                                    MR.   MAXWELL; At least with junior   counsel.
                                    MR.   COLLINS:    I am sure it is. It is no doubt one
                       E       of the 2,000 that we have had to go through.     Wecan be
                               caught out as well as anyone.
                                    Sir, that is all I want to say in going through
                               this history.   I was now proposing to call the representative
                               of the Fire Service input which is Mr. Seaman, I think.
                                    MR. HYTNER:   Sir, before that is done, so that we
                           F   have a comprehensive view of the 2,000 other documents,
                               could I just ask Mr. Collins, at Document 422 there is a
                               reply to the previous document, 421.   It does not
                               actually answer the question put and what I was wondering
                               is whether that was followed up and whether there is some
                               more correspondence or whether the City just let it lie.
                                    ‘MR. COLLINS:  All I can say is so far as I am aware
                       G       there was no follow up --
                                     MR. HYTNER:   Could I just indicate what I am saying.
                               Would you please therefore confirm in writing (b) that
                               your ccmfpany and its officers are familiar with the Guide
                               and intend to perform the management duties outlined in
                               Chapter^'2.   There was no .answer to that question.
                       H            MR. COLLINS:    I t a k e t h e point, there was no specific
                               answer to it.    I will check to see whether there are

J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                              MR. COLLINS


any follow-up documents.     I do not believe thet there are
because if there had been they would almost certainly
have been -considered to be'.-relevant.
     MR. HYTNER:   I am gfateful, and the other question
is this, that although we have got a fair idea of what
may be said from Dr. E a s t w o o d ’s statement, is there
actually any correspondence or any minute of a Board
Meeting or anything of that sort to indicate when and why
kthe Club did not proceed with the turnstile plans.
_    MR. COLLINS:   Beyond the minutes that I have referred
to, no, but I think --   They may exist, other documents;
I am not saying they do not but it would seem fairly clear
from the documentation we have that the reason it was not
proceeded with was expense.
     MR. HYTNER:    We gather that from dr. Eastwood --
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Could I suggest if there are
any further matters of this kind they might perhaps be
discussed --    There may be other people who have got matters
to raise as well.
      MR. COLLINS:      I will endeavour at 5 o'clock to answer
all ’queries j   1 d_o not ■promise I will- be ab-l'e to . ~    ’-
      Sir, as I say, what I was proposing to do was to
deal with Mr. Seaman.     Now, he has a dauntingly long
statement and bundle but the bulk of his statement is
simply a narrative of the Fire involvement which is shown
in the documentation and therefore it is not going to
be necessary to go through it.     For the purposes of this
part of the Inquiry where there are such statements - and
this applies to Mr. Seaman; it will apply to Dr. Eastwood
and it will apply to Mr. Bownes on behalf of the City
Council; it may apply to some extent to Mr. Mackrell
but I do not think perhaps to such an extent - what I
propose to do is to put the statement in as representing
the evidence of that witness for the purposes of the
Inquiry, because we have all had the opportunity of
reading the relevant statements and then I propose to
ask questions on such parts of the statement as I consider
to be worth asking questions about, if I may put it that
way, (a) to elicit matters which are not included in the
general bundle, in so far as relevant and (b) to probe,
if I .think it right, any areas where that witness has
referred to matters in his evidence.
     That, I hope, is a convenient way of dealing with
it.   Certainly it will have achieved the object of going
through this rather tedious exercise today of going
through this bundle if it serves to shorten enormously
the taskof the witnesses who will be called to deal
with the various bundles. ’Therefore I hope, notwithstanding
the size of this, I can get through Mr. seaman relatively
quickly.   Certainly we can perhaps start him now and
j>, 7fc>         c -j> .                           t                                                  *-e*J                                                 $Q
^. t *            f                -c^L*                   <*.?--U-V U ^                                                  C-Cs^On^tA, |u-A            ^

          ^ I      [^                                                      i—-«Ce      e.-^_ ^ «*<^-~-e^^^VujJtfW'''^-"’
           -                                     b$U^Ji \ V~*                     /v *-a o                      ^         T'-— < O ^* ,

 p*       3*5>     £ C                         , (T                    p iVC^<?L       '■r-t^r* — ^          A^           OwVU.          k evw ^ ,



 j? -Q J           A —                              te                           »<   vfy          |\,d/      (T^          /Sej^-*jo          l

 p                /r ~                                                     X.^N, O               vju/I'                                               <4               '/


                                       c4         P</W.                     d«A®          e Vtu.*/                                       4) &t.
  ^> . 10 &           Ar -»"D                        (^s                         L^j^\^~—AS%                 ev^v.        ^“"W*ayV"

                                       ^     f c * /" e .e - t - 4 ~       i \        ' S .,-   ^ -* ---j    C ^ u -V ,        f n       I L „ . ‘V



                                            c*^p-^\Ajvjc^                   Oj^w.<— .               (o-^                  i> cl           ^ Itt            I*      ^^*? fi3

      ^                                 ^AJit—,i                          ^ °                                 ic u y ^ ^ v ^ y rt     tLt*~»-t         %aAf     o ^ 'f '',. 7

                                                                       (-T»V^MS”* a/               /C^5

      ]:> f^ 4            k-j^          fek            fc               § w t              r*               ifL-u^.                     • 4                ~4»

                                                                                 sk~vw^                     -s.^^                    (ftr^             (%?7)

     ^     H 4          ft -   C   _   tc Y ^ iv w i.^                           6 1 4 jr £ S b - e ^                                            ' u n //^

                                                                                                                                                       IC**y*
     h>>                 P>                            ^ Ar/iu )                 *CtJXZ


      |>        '*>      re,. ^              U i C-(L*^                           j|i^W           bav^M-i                  4 ^ ^                                            t
                 rxa      A-fcJ
Sheffield Libraries and Information Service
------------ REPORT                                                                .
          Report to:    Policy Committee


         Report by:     Director of Libraries and Information Services


                Date:   23rd May, 1989


           Subject:     The Hillsborough Tragedy: The Libraries Response


           Purpose:     To inform Members of the involvement of Sheffield
                        Libraries and Information Services and to make
                         recommendations for the future



Recommendations:

           1. To note the arrangements made by Sheffield Libraries and
              Information Services to operate the Hillsborough Helpline

           2.   To investigate the potential for developing arrangesants
                for establishing a "Helpline" as part of the Plan for
                Peacetime Emergencies




Report prepared by:                      1
           Position:    Information Projects Co-ordinator
        Telephone:

Background papers:

                                                  For full details of what
                                                  constitutes Confidential Exempt,
                                                  please contact the Departmental
                                                  Agenda Officer, Tel 734708.




                                                                    Libraries
                                                                    and Information Services
          The Hillsborough Tragedy: The Libraries Response


Following the tragedy at Hillsborough Football Ground in which 95 people
were killed and many more were injured there was an urgent need for
Council Departments to work in a concerted effort to assist those who
had been involved.  To this end this Department approached Family and
Community Services with the offer of running a telephone service as a
way of coping with the many demands being put upon it for information
related to the tragedy.  Family and Community Services accepted this
offer, and this Department's Information Projects Co-ordinator was
requested to bring it into operation as soon as possible.  This report
provides a brief review of this service after two weeks of operation.

On Tuesday, 18th April - three days after the tragedy - a meeting took
place between officers from the F & CS Divisional Office and from
Libraries Department. This decided what form the telephone information
line should take and it drew up a list of key telephone contact numbers
between the two Departments.  It was agreed that the service would be
based at Hillsborough Library and that it would be called the
"Hillsborough Helpline".

Publicity for the Helpline was of paramount importance so this
Department circulated a news release to the two local radio stations,
"The Star" and other newspapers, and the two regional television
services.  Posters and leaflets were produced and sited in shops in the
Hillsborough area and throughout the Libraries service.  Besides the
initial publicity "The Star" agreed to carry a daily free advert
inviting readers to call the Helpline.

For the first three days the Helpline was in operation it was extremely
busy.  Requests for help fell into the following categories:

(a) People wanting to find out if relatives or friends had been involved
    in the tragedy;

(b) Survivors wanting to re-establish contact with people who had helped
    them in the aftermath of the tragedy;

(c) Requests for counselling services from people who had suffered
    trauma from the event;

(d) Enquiries from bereaved relatives in relation to the Disaster Fund;

(e) Many calls from all over the country asking about methods of making
    payments into the Disaster Fund;

(f) Many offers of assistance - people offering free transport between
    Sheffield and Liverpool for survivors and bereaved families, offers
    of accommodation.

The Helpline was staffed by volunteer helpers who usually staff the
Department's annual Winter Hotline and by staff at Hillsborough Library.

To ensure that as much information as possible was provided to callers
close liaison between this Department and other agencies was maintained.
The co-ordinator attended the daily F & CS Task Team meetings which
                                         2


      consisted of Hillsborough F & S staff, hospital social workers and a
      representative of South Yorkshire P ol i c e . The co-ordinator also met
      with voluntary agencies in the city which were providing counselling
      services for those who had been deeply affected by the tragedy.

6.    After two weeks of operation the Helpline is now much quieter, dealing
      mainly with requests for information concerning donations to the
      Disaster Fund.  The Helpline will be kept open for the next couple of
      weeks, and the decision to close it down will be made in consultation
      with F & CS and with relevant voluntary groups.

Conclusions

The experience described above demonstrates that the City Council does have
the ability to set up and operate a Helpline Service very quickly and
effectively.  With foresight the "Helpline" could have been operating from
the evening of the tragedy.  This suggests that arrangements for setting up
an emergency Helpline should be specifically written in to the Planning for
Peacetime Emergencies.

Recommendations

1.    To note the arrangements made by Sheffield Libraries and Information
      Services to operate the Hillsborough Helpline.

2 .   To investigate the potential for developing arrangements for
      establishing a "Helpline" as part of the Plan for Peacetime Emergencies.




May 1989                                        Patricia M. Coleman
                                                Director of Libraries
                                                and Information Services
NE I
            from SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                                 21st April 1989



           HILLSBOROUGH     "D O N 'T TAKE YOUR P A IN OUT ON OTHERS"   CALL


 Sheffield's Director of Social Services, Neil Kay, has joined those calling

 for an   end to Public expressions of accusation and blame of the

 Hillsborough disaster.




 Many people in the city are suffering from severe emotional shock, he says,

 and one of the common reactions to this condition is bitterness and an

 overwhelming sense of anger.




 Mr Kay adds:     "Such anger is often targeted on some individual or group and

 is even more likely if people themselves feel unfairly criticised.




 "Unfortunately, when people are in shock they may target people who don't

 deserve their blame and anger, making judgements on rumour and partial

 information."




 His advice is:    "Don't   bottle it up. By   all means share your       anger with

 family and friends, if     they can take it, or seek counselling. But please          stop

 the public accusations     and wait for the public enquiry to establish the facts.




 "People as shocked and     distressed as you are getting hurt."




                    Issued by Sheffield City Council, Press Office.

     For further information contact Press Officer Sue Davis,



                                                                                              R1736
NE Iworn SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                                                   21 April 1989


  PIPER ALPHA WIDOW DONATES TO HILLSBOROUGH VICTIMS-




  Less than a week a f t e r the t r a g i c even ts a t Hillsborough Stadium, over
  £660,000 has c l e a r e d through the accounts in L iv er pool, S h e f f i e l d and
  Nottingham f o r the Hilssborough D i s a s t e r Appeal.                  Over £1 m i l l i o n more has
  been pledged.


  S h e f f i e l d ' s Lord Mayor , C o u nc il lo r P h y l l i s Smith, who has been deeply moved
  by the tr a g e d y and the s i n c e r e e x p r e s s io n s o f sympathy r e c e iv e d with d on at ion s,
  has c a n c e l l e d her planned v i s i t to S h e f f i e l d ' s twin town o f Bochum in West
  Germany nex t week.             I n s t e a d , the Deputy Mayor o f Bochum w i l l be b r i n g i n g a
  cheque f o r £16,000 to p r e s e n t to the Lord Mayor in S h e f f i e l d next Saturday
  (29 A p r i l ) .     He i s expected to accompany a c i v i c p a r t y from S h e f f i e l d to the
  memorial s e r v i c e a t L i v e r p o o l 's Anglican Cathedral a t 11.00 the same day.


  The Appeal co nt in u es to r e c e iv e donations a t t a c h e d to h e a r t - r e n d i n g l e t t e r s
  such as

  "This i s j u s t a token payment towards th e fund, hoping i t w i l l help
  somebody,           (from P ip e r Alpha Widow and c h i l d r e n ) . "


  A- Liverpool fan who>was a t Heysel has s e n t h a l f his dole money                       and     two inmates
  o f H M Pr iso ns have s e n t donations on o f f i c i a l - dockets*-



                                                                     /more overpage




Working for a better City
                                                                                                                     R1736
A spokesperson f o r th e Tr us te e s o f the Hillsbo roug h D i s a s t e r Appeal s a i d t h i s
a f t e r n o o n (Frida y)
"The Appeal w i l l be g r e a t l y a s s i s t e d i f the banks a c c e p t donations and
d i s p l a y the Appeal p o s t e r , as the Building S o c i e t i e s a r e c u r r e n t l y doing, a t
t h e i r branches".


                  Is su e d by S h e f f i e l d City Council Press O ff i ce
For f u r t h e r in f o r m a ti o n c o n t a c t Chief P u b l i c i t y O f f i c e r S h i r l e y Lanstone
                                  te lephone
NEWS
          from SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                             21st April 1989

               HILLSBOROUGH -   SYMPATHY AND DONATIONS FLOOD IN

   Expressions of sympathy and donations to the appeal fund are pouring

   into the Town Hall in Sheffield, following the Hillsborough Disaster.



   The Hillsborough Disaster Appeal, launched by the Civic Leaders

   of Sheffield, Liverpool and Nottingham on Sunday   (16th April), now

   stands at £461,163, with many thousands of pounds worth of cheques

   still clearing and many hundreds of thousands more pledged.




   Over 5.000 people have queued to sign the Book of Remembrance at

   the Town Hall, Sheffield, since it was opened on Monday    (17th April).

    Signatories already include HRH the Duke of Kent; the Mayors of

   Doncaster, Barnsley and Rotherham; both Sheffield United and Sheffield

   Wednesday football teams; Mayor Ma Yanli of Anshan, Sheffield's

   twin town-in China, who is currently visiting the city; the Lord

   Lieutenant and the High Sheriff of South Yorkshire: and Football

   Association Chairman Bert Millichip.




   Mail is also flooding in with cheques and letters* arriving by the

   sackful, many of the messages and donations anonymous.      Contributions

   have been received from "A 84 year old granny",    "A Geordie Man   u

   fan living in Corby",   "A Leeds pensioner" "A shocked Halifax Rugby

   League Fan",   "A Very sad and sincere Tottenham supporter",   "A

   Liverpool supporter from North Wales" and a woman from Glasgow who


Working fora better City
                                                                               R1736
writes:   "I remember Ibrox.   I am enclosing £5 twards the fund, not

much, as I am a widow myself, I know what it's like."




Chief Publicity Officer Shirley Lanstone, co-ordinating the Appeal

from the Sheffield end, said: "The response has been overwhelming.

Staff in my Department and cashiers in the City Treasury have been

working flat out organising publicity, collections and offers of help.




Donations to the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal can be made at any bank

or building society, to account No 50000005, sorting code 08-90-75,

or the Lord Mayor, Town Hall, Sheffield SI 2HH




            Issued by Sheffield City Council Press Office

          Further information from S^ie Davis Press Officer
    t




.   a /e iv s ^ H H H
                 from SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                                    19 April 1989


                                         PRESS RELEASE

                            NICARAGUAN PRESIDENT SENDS CONDOLENCES


        President Ortega has sent a message to the Prime Minister expressing his
        "profound consternation" about the tragedy that took place at Hillsborough
        Stadium last Saturday.

        Nicaragua's Ambassador, Sr Francisco d'Escoto, has informed Sheffield City Council
        that the Nicaraguan leader telephoned him personally at 5.30 pm on Saturday
        to seek further information after hearing initial reports of the disaster.

        Then, on Monday, he sent the sincere condolences of the Nicaraguan people and
        Government and asked her to transmit their sentiments to the families of the
        victims.

        Sheffield is twinned with Esteli in Nicaragua, and the Ambassador is due to
        visit the city on Friday and Saturday for events to mark the first anniversary
        of the signing of a formal twinning agreement.

        During his visit, he will sign the Lord Mayor's   book of      condolences andpresent
        a copy of President Ortega's letter.

        Proceeds from the anniversary events are now to be shaped between the
        Hillsborough Disaster Appeal and the Lord Mayor's Esteli Appeal.

        The Ambassador said today "a friend in need is a friend indeed". He expressed
        his appreciation of the support the people of Sheffield had given to Esteli
        and to the Nicaraguan Hurricane Appeal. And he said that there was      "a deep
        inter-relationship of solidarity" between the people of     both countries.

        THE AMBASSADOR WILL SIGN THE BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE AT MIDDAY ON FRIDAY 21 ST APRIL




        Further details about the visit are available from Steve Howell             Dr
        David Granville




    Working fora better City
                                                                                            R1736
NEWS
            from SHEFFIELD COUNCIL

                                                                             20 APRIL 1989




   PERIMETER FENCES, GATES TO BE REMOVED AT BRAMALL LANE


   Following       a     meeting          yesterday          (Wednesday        19    April)          at    Sheffield

   United's        Bramall          Lane     Ground          between     Club        Officials            and     their
   professional         advisers,          Officers      of    the     South      Yorkshire Fire            Service,

   the     South       Yorkshire          Police       and    the     City        Council,       the       following

   statement has been issued.


   After    discussions            with    the    Club and       inspection          of the Ground              it was

   agreed    by    all       parties       that    the   gates       in the perimeter                fencing would

   be    removed       as    an     interim       measure      forthwith          and,     as   a     consequence,
   additional          policing       will        be   provided.            The     City    Council         will     be

   confirming this in writing to the Club immediately.


   Further detailed discussions will be held with Sheffield United about

   perimeter       fencing          and    related       matters       in    the     near       future,         bearing
   in mind     that         the    Official       Inquiry      into    the     disaster         at    Hillsborough

   may not report for some time.




                       Issued by Sheffield City Council, Press Officer

                                  Further information from Philip Dent,

                              Principal Press Officer,




Working for a better City
                                                                                                                          R1736
NEWS
  from SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                               20th April 1989



   SPECIAL POSTER BOOST FOR HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL


   More than 50,000 posters are going up in banks and building societies all
   over Britain in a bid to raise further funds for the Hillsborough Disaster
   Appeal.  They are expected to be in place by the weekend.

   The poster donated by the local evening newspaper in Sheffield, The Star,
   and Sheffield printers J W Northend Ltd, urges customers to make donations
   at any of the major banks or building societies.  Cheques should be made
   payable to The Hillsborough Disaster Appeal and can be paid into either of
   the two accounts set up for the fund - at the Co-operative Bank in West
   Street, Sheffield, Account Number 50000005, sort code 08-90-75 or to
   Barclays Bank City Office, in Water Street, Liverpool, sort code 20-51-01
   and Account Number 20565555.  Alternatively, donations may be sent by post
   c/o Lord Mayor, Town Hall, Sheffield Si 2HH.

   A special street collection has been organised in Sheffield for this
   Saturday to raise more: cash for the appeal. Funds have been flooding in to
   both the Town Hall and the Co-operative Bank in Sheffield as well as to
   various centres in Liverpool.


   Attached




                  Issued by Sheffield City Council Press Office
       For further information contact Principal Press Officer Philip Dent
                             telephone




Working for a better City
                                                                                 R1736
NEWS
          from SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                               20th April 1989

                       GOVERNMENT OBSTINACY SLAMMED

  News of the Government's intention to continue with the controversial
  Football Supporters Bill was received with Shocked disbelief today by
  Councillor Clive Betts, Leader of Sheffield City Council, who
  immediately condemend the decision.

  "The Government's insistence on continuing with these proposals in the
  light of the recent tragedy at Hillsborough is an unbelievable act
  of stupidity.

  Given the terrible events of last Saturday there must be major doubts
  over whether such a scheme has any contribution to make to improving safety
  at football matches, and it is unimaginable that the Government should
  consider pursuing this before a full Inquiry into the events at Hillsboough
  has taken place.

  Indeed, we believe that, with respect to their legal responsibilities
  under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, local authorities would have
  to consider very seriously whether they could grant a license to any
  Sports Ground if this scheme came into being.

  This act of crass insensitivityis further evidence of the Prime
  M inister's belief that she can trample over anything, including the
  feelings of the injured and the bereaved and we would urge MP's
  from all parties to reject this Bill when it comes before parliament."
  said Councillor Betts.




              Issued by Sheffield City Council Press Office

          For further information Contact Cath Harding,   Press Officer

                             on




Working for a better City
                                                                                 R1736
NEWS
  from i_________ _____
                                              mui




                                                               19th April 1989



   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKERS PRAISED


   Social workers and volunteers who helped the families of the dead and
   injured after the Hillsborough disaster have been praised by-
   Sheffield City Council's Social Services Director Mr Neil Kay.

   "The response was magnificent and the way the helpers responded to the needs
   of the people coming in was most impressive.

   "This was a situation which required improvisation and flexibility on the
   part of staff, who coped well in exceptionally difficult circumstances",
   said Mr Kay.

   And he stressed : "Staff from other authorities also helped magnificently,
   as did volunteers from statutory, voluntary and church groups, and I wish to
   offer my thanks to them all.  I also wish to pay tribute to the police
   officers who have worked closely with us".

   The first social services staff were on the scene within a .hour of the news
   and a full-scale operation was set up shortly afterwards, with the reception
   of relatives based at nearby Hillsborough Boys Club and teams of workers at
   both the Royal Hallamshire and Northern General Hospitals.

   Over 120 Sheffield City Council staff were involved, including drivers,
   administrative staff taking details, even staff from elderly people's homes
   who sent food, as well as social workers.

   Mr Kay added ; "Usually the practical side would be a major part of our
   response, but the main police call was for counselling the families of the
   dead and injured, and we were able to respond".




                  Issued by Sheffield City Council Press Office
            For further information contact Press Officer Susan Davis
                             telephone




Working for a better City
                                                                                  R1736
NEWS
          from SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                             21st April 1989

                  HILLSBOROUGH - SYMPATHY AND DONATIONS FLOOD IN

   Expressions of sympathy and donations to the appeal fund are pouring

    into the Town Hall in Sheffield, following the Hillsborough Disaster.




   The Hillsborough Disaster Appeal, launched by the Civic Leaders

   of Sheffield, Liverpool and Nottingham on Sunday   (16th April), now

   stands at £461,163, with many thousands of pounds worth of cheques

   still clearing and many hundreds of thousands more pledged.




   Over 5.000 people have queued to sign the Book of Remembrance at

   the Town Hall, Sheffield, since it was opened on Monday    (17th April).

    Signatories already include HRH the Duke of Kent; the Mayors of

   Doncaster, Barnsley and Rotherham; both Sheffield United and Sheffield

   Wednesday football teams; Mayor Ma Yanli of Anshan,    Sheffield's

   twin town in China, who is currently visiting the city; the Lord

   Lieutenant and the High Sheriff of South Yorkshire: and Football

   Association Chairman Bert Millichip.




   Mail is also flooding'in with cheques and letters arriving by the

   sackful, many of the messages and donations anonymous.      Contributions

   have been received from "A 84 year old granny",    "A Geordie Man u

   fan living in Corby",    "A Leeds pensioner" "A shocked Halifax Rugby

   League Fan",    "A Very sad and sincere Tottenham supporter",   "A

   Liverpool supporter from North Wales" and a woman from Glasgow who


Working for a better City
                                                                               R1736
writes:   "I remember Ibrox.   I am enclosing £5 twards the funcl, not

much, as I am a widow myself, I know what it's like."




Chief Publicity Officer Shirley Lanstone, co-ordinating the Appeal

from the Sheffield end, said: "The response has been overwhelming.

Staff in my Department and cashiers in the City Treasury'have been       ...

working flat out organising publicity, collections and offers of help."




Donations to the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal can be made at any bank

or building society, to account No 50000005, sorting code 08-90-75,

or the Lord Mayor, Town Hall, Sheffield SI 2HH




            Issued by Sheffield City Council Press Office

          Further information from Spe Davis Press Officer
                                  f   o u l      fu & u ^ -            (E T i^ Q u i^

                                                      LA.           A£rT1? 1989


Lear Sir,

What a pity it takes a tracer1y like Hillsborough for Sheffield to cret in the

Then the coverage is ricidled with mistakes. Can yo u believe the TV channels
both got wrong the names of the hospitals people neeced to contact to
find out about their injured relatives for rays afterwards ?              ..
I had to telephone BBc TV in London on Monday 1 7 th to get.them to realise
there was no ROYAL NORTHERN hospital, only a ROYAL HALIAJBHIRJ!. and
NORTHERN GENERAL.                           o x                   , .avo . „
Yorkshire TV , meanwhile, had reported on Saturday the injured have been
taken to two of the city’s hospitals...Northern... General. , as if the
Northern General was in fact two different Pp106®’          vrmA** Worse
Then on Monray the Calendar Special from                           Atheletics
Swimming complex and said it was the new all seater Don Valley Atheletics
Stsd.lum•                                                                •
And throughout the week all comers fell down on the simple^ task of ^ t i n g
the name LEPPINGS IANE correct. We had lapping Road, Leaping End, Leppm
lane, Lepping Lane, Leppin End, and many more.
SHEFFIELD must have had more celebrities andcameras and reporters
than ever before, yet because none of the TV companies have a proper
S s e here they I k l mistake after mistake. Clearly when it was needed
proper coverage ofone ofEngland's largest cities ^sforelyinissed.
m y I just wish allconcerned thegreatestsuccess      in bringing CHANNEL 5
to live in Sheffield. Then perhaps the next time something goes wrong,
viewers will be given accurate reports.                   y -1 j q+,idpn+ Games
If not I honestly do not see much success for the 1991 WoJld Student Games
in Sheffield, however many millions it might have cost and even if 1
the biggest sporting event this nation has ever seen. London,
Manchester will probably never even hear of it. Like the huge 1 9 8 8 P
Aid Concert. That was seen all round the globe^ but_ in Britain was only
shown in an unscheduled slot in the middle of the night on BBUJ.
Awful as it may sound I am dubious that if it had not been Liverpoo
the disaster if it would ever have reached national TV.
 Sheffield is always left out, ignored, forgotten, “        ?wn. Judies        A
thing will no doubt be Liverpool the goodies and S h i e l d the bad le .
pity Sheffield does not have an accent that appeals to London ears,
aggressive mentality, hordes of football hooligans who rampage like animals
at the slightest provocation, a song a bout the city^s rivers, a famous
Beatle or two, or any other crass sentimentality going           •            *
 someone does not like us.




                  Yours
                                                                                                        THE WEEK


                                                                                                                           A RIBA survey concludes that
                                                                                                                           private architectural practices
                                                                                                                           received nearly £13bn of new
                                                                                                                           commissions in the forth quarter
                                                                                                                           of 1988 - a 27% increase over
                                                                                                                           the previous quarter. All regions
                                                                                                                           except the South West showed
                                                                                                                           an increase in work
                                                                                                                           commissioned.

                                                                                                                           CLOSE to £lbn was spent in
                                                                                                                           1988-1989 through housing
                                                                                                                           associations, reports the
                                                                                                                           Housing Corporation. During the
                                                                                                                           year, the corporation also
                                                                                                                           approved new projects that will
                                                                                                                           produce 28 000 new or improved
                                                                                                                           homes - is an increase of 1500
                                                                                                                           over the previous year.

                                                                                                                           COUNCIL tenants from two
                                                                                                                           estates in Paddington, west
                                                                                                                           London, have submitted a formal
                                                                                                                           application to Westminster City
                                                                                                                           Council to take over the estates
E ngineers already knew that perim eterfences like these a t Sheffield Wednesday's Hillsborough ground m u st come down.   using tenants’ choice powers in
                                                                                                                           the new Housing Act. The

             Engineers’ report on ground                                                                                   tenants have formed their own
                                                                                                                           company to take control of the
                                                                                                                           estates.

             safety comes too late for fans                                                                                    McCarthy & Stone
                                                   By Graham Ridout                                                        RETIREMENT homes
ENGINEERING experts                      would call for the complete              fences at any stadium. ”                 specialist McCarthy & Stone is
investigating football ground            removal of all perimeter fencing.           As long ago as 1974,                  planning to buy between 60 and
safety were already planning to          He said: “There are strong               Bardhan-Roy and colleague Dr             70 sites in the UK this year. The
call for the abolition of perimeter      reservations against the present         Jan Bobrowski had called for an          Bournemouth-based builder
fencing and a redesign qf crush          design strength of crush                 improvement in safety at                 says it is not shutting down its
barriers before last Saturday’s          barriers.”                               stadiums and recommended "the            40-strong land acquisition
Hillsborough soccer tragedy.                The current recommendation            exit route should be smooth and          department as stated in Building
   Months before Saturday’s              is that crush barriers be designed       unimpeded and preferably of a            last week. We should make it
disaster in which 95 football fans       to withstand a load of400 lb/foot        non-slip surface”. In an ISE             clear that this incorrect
were crushed to death, an                run. But this figure is effectively      journal published in February            information did not come
Institution of Structural                increased to 600 lb/ft as all            1974; they also urged that exits         from CIBC Securities as
Engineers committee had                  barriers are load tested when            should be so designed that               implied.
realised that crush barriers             erected,                                 stands can be emptied within
needed to be modified to yield in            “The committee will not be           eight minutes.
crowd stampedes, and                     setting a figure but will urge that
                                         the barriers are designed to yield
                                                                                      Too few exit gates in the
                                                                                  perimeter fencing was a
                                                                                                                             Heseltine urges new
gerimeter fencing was a potential
danger.                                  at a lower strength, ” said              significant factor at Hillsborough         development agency
   The ISE committee has spent           Bardhan-Roy.                             and contributed to the high death
three years preparing its report             The draft report is expected to      toll. The Hillsborough fence also        AN ENGLISH development
in response to the Popplewell            be published in the summer and            goes against recommendations            agency should be set up to
inquiry on the Bradford City             is unlikely to be modified in the        made in the final Popplewell             eradicate the “divided and
football ground fire. Final              light of the Hillsborough                 report.                                 competing bureaucracies” now
approval to the draft is due to be       disaster, says the ISE.                      Injanuary 1986, Mr Justice           governing regional planning, said
granted on 9 May.                           Further endorsement for the            Popplewell recommended “the             Michael Heseltine when opening
   Although the draft has yet to         removal of perimeter fencing has         importance of allowing full access       the new Builder Group
be endorsed by the                       come from an ISE spokesman.               to the pitch where this is likely to    headquarters in London’s
20 000-stronginstitution, a              He said: “If as an institution it         be used as a place of safety in an      docklands last Thursday.
membe r of the report committee          were left to us, we would insist          emergency”.                               (See full report of opening on
Bipul Bardhan-Roy confirmed it           there were no perimeter                      (See pages 8 and 9.)                 page 27.)

Building 21 April 1989                                                                                                                                         7
                                     THE WEEK




                               By Catherine Pepinster
      THERE was growing concern in               Tony Wood, director of the
      Sheffield this week that               city council’s design and building
      construction of sports facilities      services, said: "If the findings of
      for the 1991 World Student             the Taylor inquiry are known to
      Games could face delays because        us by the autumn then we could
      of the Hillsborough disaster.          probably incorporate any
         Questions over the design of        changes to the stadium. If the
    ' sports facilities will remain          report makes fundamental
     unanswered until the public             alterations to the Popplewell
     inquiry team, headed by Mr              inquiry report, or reports later
    Justice Taylor, reports on               than the autumn, then we could
     whether design contributed to           have problems, because we have
     Saturday’s tragedy at Sheffield         a tight deadline for this project.
     Wednesday’s ground.                        “The real problem at the
         Work has already begun on a         moment is that we just don’t
     series of sports complexes for          know what effect this inquiry
     the 1991 Games, and a                   could have. The stage we have
     two-stage £143m deal with              reached at the moment is the
     overseas banks has been                basic structural work rather than
     secured by Sheffield City Council      detailed work on the turnstiles.
     to fund them.                          These may have to be changed.
        But there are fears the             But we will not have pens or
    construction programme could            standing terraces in the
    be put at risk if alterations have      stadium. ”
    to be made to original designs on           The Government’s realisation
    safety grounds.                         that improved sports facilities
        The Taylor report’s                 are now vital could help boost the
    conclusions will be particularly        fortunes of the World Student
    critical for the Don Valley             Games. Sheffield has already
    Athletics Stadium, under                secured £3m of Sports Council
    construction just a couple of          funds, and the man who urged
    miles from Hillsborough. Plans          the Department of the
    had already been made to               Environment to agree to the deal
    convert it to a “Wembley of the        was, ironically, Liverpool FC
    North” soccer stadium after the        chairman John Smith, who is
    games.                                 chairman of the Sports Council.
        The stadium was designed by            Turning the Athletics Stadium
    Sheffield City Council architects      into a 50 000-seater
    and is being built by management       state-of-the-art soccer ground
    contractor R M Douglas.                will need further backing.              Crushed: design o f barrier perim eter fen cing a n d the layout o f Sheffield Wednesday's   Hillsb


                                           last year at Newcastle United         and patch when we should be                  the growing chorus of critics
                                           and Arsenal which have both           building new grounds. ”                      demanding the removal of
                                          crush barriers and perimeter              Clubs like Sheffield                      perimeter fences.
                                          fences as stipulated by existing       Wednesday whose
                                          legislation.                           Hillsborough ground was the
                                             “I have voiced my concern           scene of Saturday’s disaster                              —
                                          about these regulations before,        should move out of cramped                   TALK TO any fan about the
                                          and now I blame myself for not        inner-city sites to                           way soccer grounds are
                                          being more persistent about it.       edge-of-town sports                           designed and he’ll laugh in your
                                          But I will be writing to the          complexes, says Luder.                        face. If he was asked to go to a
                                          president of the Institution of          “Clubs could realise their                 football ground for any other
                                          Structural Engineers urging for       assets bound up in these                      reason than to watch his heroes
                                          changes, ” he said.                   inner-city sites and move out of              play the game he loves, he
                                                                                town where multi-sports                       would refuse, writesJon
                                                                                complexes could be built.                    Desborough.
    Brobowski: condemnation.                                                       “We need stadiums with                       The majority of football clubs
                                           FORMER RIBA president               acres of parking, not cramped                 require a display of dogged
 LEADING structural engineer               Owen Luder has accused              side streets; facilities for a                determination from their fans
Jan Brobowski repeated his                football management for failing      variety of sports; and an                     hours before a ball has been
condemnation this week of the             to use profits to replace            all-seater stadium is an                      kicked. Fans have to parka
standard design of crush barriers         antiquated clubs with modem,         absolute must.                                long way from the ground,
at England’s football grounds.            well designed stadiums.                  “The skills for designing the             queue for a ticket, queue to get
   “These baniers must be                    “Football is a multi-million      new stadiums are there. The                   into the ground and compete to
designed to collapse safely so            pound industry. Instead of '         pity is that they have only been              find a place to watch. Standing
that a crowd can come on to the           hanging on to their assets, they     used to patch up. ”                           on the terraces can be a
pitch,” he said.                          need to provide decent                  Moving clubs out of city                   miserable experience.
   Brobowski was the engineer             facilities, ” said Building’s        centres will take years. In the                  Clubs have inherited
responsible for the stands built          columnist. “These clubs pitch        meantime, Luder has joined                    cramped conditions and antique
8
                                                                                                                                            Building 21 April 1989
                                                                                                                          THE WEEK
                                                                                   ,J» ft




                                                                                                                       By Alastair McLellan
                                                                                                                                   which provides 75% grants for
                                                                                                                                   football clubs forced by local or
                                                                                                                                   police authorities to make
                                                                                                                                   changes to their stadiums, said:
                                                                                                                                    “The Government’s wholesale
                                                                                                                            :      move towards all-seat stadiums
                                                                                                                                    could put the Improvement
                                                                                                                                    Trust in financial trouble. ”
                                                                                                                                        Provision of all-seated
                                                                                                                                    accommodation is likely to cost
                                                                                                                                    up to £15m- three times the
                                                                                                                                    trust’s available grant.
                                                                                                                                         It would cost £504 000 to
                                                                                            A hm : unacceptable.                    convert the Hillsborough ground
                                                                                                                                    to an all-seat stadium and
                                                                                            IMPROVING the safety of                 £378 000 to convert Liverpool’s
                                                                                            Britain’s major football grounds        base Anfield. Both clubs would
                                                                                            will be hampered by a lack of '         lose one-quarter capacity.
                                                             W0M                   SSitmm   money, restricted space at                 ' The other alternative of dry
                                                                                            .grounds and poor choice in             moats have been ruled out by
                             mm                                                                                                     construction industry experts.
                                                                                            materials.
                                                                                                Clubs wanting to replace crush           PavlAhm, chairman of
                                                       isiwsp                               barriers with automatically              consulting engineers Ove Arup
                                                                                            opening fences similar to those at     ■ and Partners, and a former
                                                                                             Continental grounds will be hard      . Danish football international,
                                                                                            put to purchase them.                    said: “The space required to
                                                                                                “That choice is not available in     build moats is not present at
                                                                                             this country, ” says Alan               most British grounds and the
                                                                                             McCartney, senior partner of            capital investment required
                                                                                             quantity surveyors Husband &            would be unacceptable to clubs. ”
                                                                                             Co who were responsible                     Geraint John, head of the
                                                                                             improvements to Swindon                 Sports Council’s technical unit,
                                                                                             County’s ground, where they             said advice to the 1986
                                                                                             had to resort to wire mesh              Popplewell had insisted more
                                                                                            before Christmas.                       work should be done on
                                                                                                Money to pay for                    collapsible fences.
                                                                                             improvements to safety                      “Three years on, little
                                                                                             standards is also scarce. Glenys        research seems to have been
                                                                                             Firth, secretary of The Football        done and our advice has not
Hillsborough Stadium bear part o f the blame fo r the death of9 5 Liverpoolfans.             Grounds Improvement Trust               changed. ”


         stadiums. Stands squat back to
         back with terraced housing.
         Were it not for emotional                   Arsenal: The 57 000 capacity            stadium was converted to              M i ll w a l l: The pitch is
         attachment to the turf on which             stadium does not contain a high         all-seating, the total capacity       surrounded by 8 ft high
         they play, many football                    perimeter fence, but a small            would be reduced to 17 000.           perimeter fencing, in which
         chairmen would have opted for               fence stands in front of the '          The perimeter fence, which            there are 10 gates. The
         demolition long ago.                        stands forming a small dry              was erected in 1982 because of        stadium has a total capaicty of
            For a safer environment, the             moat. “We’ve been in the                the threat of crowd                   26 000, with a seating capaicty
         supporter needs guidance and                business for the past 100 years         disturbances, was pulled down         of 2500.
         help. Clearly displayed signs               and we have not had any                 this week.                            Wimbledon: Built during the
         should point the way in and out             problems within the stadium, ”          Luton Town: The club took             late 1800s, it is the oldest
         of a ground. Entrances and                  said managing director Ken              down its perimeter fence for all      football stadium in London.
         aisles should be broad and                  Friar.                                  league games once it adopted a        One Terrace was purchased
         visible from every part of the              Coventry City: The                      membership scheme. But the            from another club in 1928. The
         terracing. In most cases                    stadium, built in 1910, has a           club's safety certificate             stadium holds 13 000 standing
         severe height restrictions in               total capacity of 29 800 with           demands an area of fencing            fans and 3000 seated fans and
         tunnels leave the spectator                 18 500 seats. An eight foot, six        behind one of the goals during        incorporates perimeter fencing
         feeling cramped.                            inch steel mesh wire fence was          Cup games attended by                 with gates every 10 m. The
            Few grounds make an effort               erected in 1985 around three            visitors. The stadium has a           fencing was erected in 1986 -
         to communicate with the                     sides of the ground on the              capacity for 14 250 supporters.       when the club moved up to the
         public, leaving them lost and               insistence of the Football              M anchester United: Team              first division, and the local
         confused when the unexpected                Association following a pitch           officials this week decided to        authority insisted that fences
         occurs.                                     invasion in 1984.                       keep their perimeter fence that       be erected in the stadium for
            By the time three o’clock on             Derby County: The stadium               contains 29 gates guarded by          security. The club will shortly
         a Saturday comes around,                    was built in 1894, but most of          police during games. The              move within the area to a
         football’s fee-paying public                the building was added in 1934.         stadium has a seating capaicty        £25m, 25 000 capacity
         feels like unwanted intruder,               The total capacity is 27 000,           of26 764 and a standing               all-seater stadium designed by
         making the best of a raw deal.              with seating for 10 500. If the         capacity of 20 699.                   a West German firm.
Sheffield City Libraries, Surrey Street, Sheffield S 1 1XZ                                                       Telephone: (0 7 42 ) 734750




                                se




                    belongings
                   of dead fans
                              By Bob Westerdale and Hugh Lawrence
                A FR ES H storm of controversy over the Hillsborough dis­
                aster broke this afternoon as grieving families were refused
                permission to pick up the belongings of their dead.
                  M e a n w h i le Mrs
                Thatcher insisted the                                    .I.SBOROUGH
                w id ely -d e sp ise d ID
                card scheme must go                                      ? FOOTBALL
                ahead.
                    The developments came a                              I DISASTER
                 day after Home Secretary
                  Douglas Hurd and South
                 Yorkshire's Chief Constable
                 Peter Wright ordered a halt
                 to statements likely to cause
                                                         C ity standstill m ove
                 further distress.                   THE cities of Sheffield, Nottingham and Liverpool arc
               | Two writs alleging police           expccted to come to a standstill at 3pm on Saturday as a
                 m ism anaged S a tu rd a y 's       mark o f respect for the 95 who died at Hillsborough.
                 semi-final in which 95 died            Leading Sheffield politicians are looking at turning
                 have now been served on Mr          traffic lights to red during the minute’s slience.
                 Wright.
                    T h is a fte rn o o n . West     • Sadness of the            • Angry Kenny hits
                 Midlands police issued a            Chief Constable: P3         at critics: P3
                statement explaining why
                 they were refusing to return
                                                     • Bishop speaks out:        • Fundraising events:
                 victims' possessions.               P3                          P13
                    They said the items —                                         Midlands Chief Constable
                and where they were found             •'We appreciate the dis­
                                                   tress relatives are going      Geoffrey Dear, added: "The
                — could be significant in                                         coroner is also aware of the
                identifying exactly where          through and the last thing
                                                   we want to do is to add to     requests and understands
                each ot the dead had fallen.                                      the requirem ents o f the
                   Assistant Chief Constable       th a t" he said. “ However
                                                   those belongings could form    inquiry to retain the
                M ervyn J o n e s ac k n o w ­     an important part of the       possessions.
                ledged requests had been           inquiry."                        "Already belongings are
                  maile fo r’ th e retu rn of                                     being photographed and
                  belongings.                         Mr Jones, who is working
                                                   under the direction of West     TURN T O PAGE 5
                                                    A ppeal tops € 460,000
                                                   THE Lord Mayor o f Sheffield's Hillsborough Disaster
                                                   Fund today topped £460,000. Money continues to pour in
                                                   boosted by a £15,000 contribution from Bradford City
                                                   Council.
                                                        ‘Magnificent’ appeal response, P13.
Sheffield City Libraries, Surrey Street, Sheffield S 1 1XZ                                                                                                    TelepH om : (0742) 734750




        Im m p a g e o n e
                          a                                                                                                                                                          | »m*oH »!■..
                                                                                                                                                                                     P . ■      .




                   ssfiss
                iSflillSSfthe
                   ;B«i :.Know -wnei
       ,«felWIfnfr<ISild oe                                                ' .....                                                                 But. he stressed: "T h is
       Jcept^uhtil the end M the           The matter was raised by                                                                              will not be a discussion
       , mauiry. which is expected to many o f the bereaved fami-                                                                                m eeting as the official
         lake several m o n t h s . l i e s being counselled by                                                                                 'nP , ‘P ' l s "ow >n the hands
        -«         ’ Bereaved                  : f f l S r S * «*                          •**                                                  police'*         S* M i d l a » '3

        reS 4 ' s r g,:;y,°.* 5 a s                                          ffcyg;                                                             ' • More than 500 mourner*
       -fm m ,6             ha-f caJu^ d        * ° ° rder rebellious MPs to                                                                     packed a church today for
       ^immense distress to.fami-               fall into line over ID Cards                                                                     the first funeral of a victiir.
        lies, according to Liverpool            Ministers are beinc urged to                                                                    o f the disaster.     •
       .so cia l se r v ic es d ir e c to r     go out and spread areu-
       .David Mason.               ■       .
                                       ments in favour of idenrity                                                                                 Distraught relatives anc
          He said: -people are find- cards- ’                       Coun Gordon Gallimore                                                       friends wept openly as the'
       ing it very difficult to under-  She argues that i f the    '■ -’ special meeting                                                        paid their last respects to 19
       stand why that course o f present spectator legislation insist delay could mean                                                          y e a r - o l d j o i n e r G a r-
       ___1....:     ..................        :? shelved, then opportune- waiting another 12 months                                            Church.               ■   -
                                               ties for action will be lost — — losing a chance to act
                                               including plans for ali-seater after years o f hooliganism                                                                                   %
                                               accommodation.           _ At today's Cabinet meet-
                                                    Hooliffanistn    - !nS- which lasted about two
                                                       „ ganiSm         hours, top ministers agreed
                                                Officially the G overn- to follow Mrs Thatcher's
                                               ment says Taylor Inquiry tough line.


                                               3     K S = s = s x E IK lK
                                              . , h ® timetable has been                             special meetine of the South
                                            a.n.tu at
                                            aimed                 getting laws on
                                                           M geuing                                   Ysortcs
                                                                                                         orks PoliceFt          _____
                                                                                                                                A  uth ority
                                            identity cards through Par-                      Par.     tomorrow when     urh#»n rh0the ru.-.i*
                                                                                                                                       Chief
                                            liament
                                                  • ” * " by  * . the
                                                                  *“ v >summer
                                                                         > u i i i i i i c i dand
                                                                                               iiu    Constable
                                                                                                      v u i u i a u i t *"
                                                                                                                         rv r ' '
                                                                                                                        Wright      reports
                                           tto
                                             o get
                                                S e t thet h e info
                                                                i n f n operation at                 nonn ththe
                                                                                                             » » ttragedy.
                                                                                                                   r-m
                                           the tail end o
                                                                        »f the 1990                      He says the Chief wili give
                                           “ o 00, ,                                                 an appraisafofwhat'^ap'
                                                But Mrs Thatcher's aides pened at the stadium.
                                           tf l* m if* “t in**— . .
                                                           M e r ^ ^ m o u r a thebr son Gary^the
tfirst
  o t ootF tne  S b o r o u g h uiaaaici
           th e musDorougn      disaster victims to be  buned-yesterday.
                                                    -----------                   ^— *-v -
Fan’s funeral hears priest
criticise insensitive debate                                                                      THREE cities       are b ein g asked to
A PR IEST criticised insensitive                                                                  observe a m in u te ’s silence on S a tu r­
're m ark s o n th e H illsborough soccer
 d is a ste r a s m ore th a n 500 m o urners
                                                    Horrof of Hillsborough - P .8                 day aftern o o n in m em ory of th e
                                                                                                  H illsborough dead.
 p ack ed a ch u rch yesterday for th e              T he m o u rn ers w ere led b y Mr              Civic leaders in Liverpool, Shef­
 firs t fu n e ra l of a victim .                  C h u r c h ’s p a r e n t s , D a v i d &nd   field a n d N o tting ham w ere y ester­
    A 19 -year-old jo in er, M r G ary             M a u r e e n , of D oric S t r e e t ,        day o rg an isin g tn e trib u te.
 C hurch, w as laid to re s t a fte r an           Seaforth.                                         A bout tw o m illion people are
 em o tio n al service a t C h rist C hurch,        • A m ong th e m o u rn ers w ere L iver­     expected to pay hom age by stopping
 W a t e r l o o , n e a r L iv e r p o o l. M r   pool’s m anager, K enny D alglish,             w hat th e y are doing.
 C h urch w as c ru sh ed to d eath on th e        and fo u r of th e team . T he c e n tre          In L iverpool th e observance w ill
 te rra c e s a fte r he sw apped a sta n d        forw ard, Jo h n A ldridge, w as am o n g      be a t 3.06pm — th e tim e w hen th e
 tic k e t to be w ith friends.                    th ose to read a lesson,                       d isaste r began.
    T he R ev Ray H u tch inso n told th e            Mr C h urch w as b u ried a t th e             The id ea w as suggested b y th e
 con greg ation th e m essage “of carin g          G a r d e n of R e s t i n n e a r b y         v ice-chairm an of T ranm ere R overs
 an d w a n tin g to sh a re your b u rd en of                                                    FC, M r F ran k Corfe. T he club is
 g rief h as been sadly m arred by                 T hornton.
                                                      A fter th e sem i-final trag ed y th e      staging a m em orial service a t its
 in sen sitiv e, d istastefu l an d very           fam ily hom e w as bedecked w ith              ground, led by th e B ishop of C hester.
 badly-tim ed rem ark s w hich have                cards a n d m essages of sym path y.               A S heffield C ity C ouncil spokes­
 b een rep o rted com ing from v ario u s                                                          m an said th e council w as org anising
 q u a rte rs.”                              ,        Before th e fu n eral th e fam ily
                                                   listened to Mr C h u rch 's fav o u rite        its observance.
    He added: “B ut o n M erseyside th e                                                              N o ttin g h am w ill be ho lding a
 m essage is loud an d c lear a n d all th e       record, S h in e O n Crazy D iam ond, by
                                                   th e v e tera n rock b and. P ink F loyd.       m in u te’s silence a t 3pm w hen a n
 stro n g e r as o u r c ity again h as to                                                         open-air rem em brance service w ill
 show its resilience to yet m ore p ain            M r C h u rc h was one of fo u r
                                                   children.                                       be h eld in th e city centre.
 a n d su fferin g .”
ff hatcher presses ahead with                                                                      .          -—                —          *LL-     ^ ,‘-f1 (
T H E dPR

         ID cards Bill
'T x r c d IM
            t u tE
                 ; M inister vyesterday
                               ^ c tP rH a v      T T       ^                               ■       ■    'A   “   H      ■             '

insisted on having the football
identity card Bill on the statute
book by the autum n, but her Cab­
inet gave T ory whips at least two
weeks to beat off rebel back­
benchers before the Government                             By Colin Hughes, Political Correspondent
tries to press on with its passage
through Parliament.                            seeks a Commons second read­            the national membership scheme;
   Margaret T hatcher made a                   ing. Ministers hope, over the next      it enabled such a scheme to be in­
lengthy statem ent during Com­                 two weeks, to convince those MPs        troduced, if and when a scheme
mons Q uestion Tim e, justifying               to back off. Only when they are         had been prepared. However, her
the decision to proceed. She ar­               confident o f winning a third read­     Cabinet colleagues made it clear
gued that the Bill would provide               ing in the Lords, and then a sec­       privately that they did not expect
 the best vehicle for implementing             ond reading in the Commons, will        Lord Justice Taylor to advise
 any early recom mendations that               they restart the Bill’s passage         against such a scheme.
 may come from Lord Justice Tay­               through Parliam ent — possibly              The Prime Minister added that
 lor’s report into last Saturday’s             not until late May or early June.       a 12-month delay to the Bill would
 Hillsborough disaster.                           That means, assuming the Bill        m ean no legislation against hooli­
    She said it would be “negli­               wins a second reading, that the re­     ganism being in place before next
 gent” not to pass the Bill this ses­          port stage and third reading may        year’s World Cup — a point min­
 sion, because its suspension                   fall into an autum n overspill of       isters regard as im portant in d e­
 would m ean measures to combat                 the session. Ministers said last       ciding w hether they should rec­
 hooliganism and improve safety                 night that am endments to take ac­      ommend the re-entry of British
 at soccer grounds — including                  count of Lord Justice Taylor’s re­      clubs to Europe in 1990/91.
 legislation on all-seat stadiums —             port could be taken at report              However, M r Kinnock said last           has been sadly m arred by the in­
 having to wait another year.                   stage in the autumn.                    night that re-entry to Europe               sensitive, distasteful and very
    Neil Kinnock, the Labour lead­                 Mr Kinnock said that, by press­      hung on the second part of the              badly-timed remarks which have
 er, accused Mrs Thatcher of “ ut­              ing ahead, Mrs Thatcher was in          Bill, which will enable courts to           been reported coming from vari­
 ter inconsistency, as well as great            effect putting the identity card        prevent convicted hooligans trav­           ous quarters.”
 vanity” , in her refusal to postpone           scheme off limits for the judge’s       elling to matches abroad. Labour               Newsagents in Liverpool re­
 the Bill until the next session.               inquiry. He added at a later W est­     opposed only the membership                 ported a slump in sales of The Sun
    His attack on the Prime Minis­              minster press conference that ev­       scheme in the first part of the Bill.       amid anger at its coverage of po­
 ter’s style angered some Conser­               eryone he had spoken to in his             In Liverpool, the first funeral          lice allegations of drunken behav­
 vative backbenchers. But Tory                  two-day visit to Hillsborough and       of a victim of the tragedy took             iour by fans. Some newsagents re­
 MPs who oppose the Govern­                     Liverpool this week believed that       place. The Rev Ray Hutchinson               fused to sell the p aper and
 m ent’s determ ination to press                an identity card system would           told the service for G ary Church,          customers burned copies.
 ahead rem ained firm last night.               have w orsened the crush.               19, at Christ Church, Seaforth:                         United in grief, page 3
 Many say they will vote against                   Mrs T hatcher emphasised that        “The message of caring and want­                            P arliam ent, page 6
 the G overnm ent whenever it                   the Bill did not itself introduce       ing to share your burden of grief                 Anfteld fences to go, page 32


                              LETTER TO THE EDITOR
 Dear Sir,                                     buffeted by a police horse’s hind       Several times we had to shout at
 I survived at Hillsborough only be­           quarters. There was nothing in the      oblivious policemen to get out of
 cause another spectator collapsed             crowd’s behaviour to differentiate it   our way as the stretcher parties
 and died, giving me space to escape.          from any other football crowd I         moved up and down the ground.
    The secretary of the South York­           have witnessed at similarly impor­      4. At no time did I see any assaults
 shire Police Federation, Paul                 tant games over the past 24 years.      on the police, looting of the dead, or
 Middup, has maintained that Liver­            2. As the tragedy inside the ground     anyone urinating on the police. In
 pool supporters outside the ground            unfolded, a large proportion of the     the worst moments of the crush I
 were very drunk and aggressive to­            attendant police force seemed           was both urinated and vomited on
 wards the police, and, during rescue          shocked and dazed. Many support­        — this was not malevolence, but
 attempts following the carnage, uri­          ers from this point behaved, I          death throes.
 nated on police officers and as­              thought, heroically. From my posi­         I have great sympathy with the
 saulted those attempting to help the          tion, trapped against a crush bar­      police officers on the ground — it
 injured.                                      rier, I witnessed supporters who had    was a shocking experience. I feel re­
    I was in the queue outside the             managed to escape on to the pitch       pugnance for the statements made
 now infamous Gate B before the                begin to rip the wire mesh from the     by Paul Middup in what is a blatant
 game, and was plunged into the                enclosing fence. Two police officers    attempt to deflect justified criticism
 heart of the crush just before the            joined them, dozens of others stood     away from the police. If these state­
 kick-off. I remember:                         and watched. It was through this        ments regarding assault, looting,
 1. A proportion of the crowd had              hole in the fence that I escaped.       etc, are true, then I assume that they
 been drinking, but I noted no exces­          3. On the pitch, some of the police     will be readily highlighted on the
 sive levels of drunkenness or aggres­         officers attempted to help the in­      BBC film of the events. If he has no
 sive behaviour, alcohol intake was            jured; most seemed to mill around,      such evidence, I assume Mr Middup
 much less evident than at the last            appearing confused. I joined in par­    will retract and resign.
 rugby international I attended.               ties using makeshift stretchers to      Yours faithfully,
 There were complaints voiced and               ferry the injured to the medics at     MICHAEL BRADFORD
 catcalls directed at the police, which        the far end of the ground. Very few     Crawley, Winchester
 is nothing unusual; it is difficult to        police joined us; most others con­      Hampshire
 react with equanimity when being               tinued to stand around the pitch.      20 April
                                                                                                                                     D    ,

 Players attend                                                                                 Race code of \
 funeral of first                                        Anfield                               practice urged1
  Hillsborough
 disaster victim
                                                          fences :7 (£. H                       on solicitors^
                                                                                                         By Our Legal
       By Philip Sherwell
,W R E A T H S o f c a rn a tio n s in
                                                         to come                                         Correspondent
                                                                                               A D O PT IO N by t h e so lic ito rs'
                                                                                               p ro fe s s io n of a C o d e of Prac*
 t h e s h a p e of a fo otb a ll a nd the
 FA C u p a d o rn e d t h e coffin of
 t h e first victim of S a t u r d a y ’s
 H ills b o ro u g h d i s a s t e r to be
                                                           down                                tic e t h a t w o u ld m a k e it p r o fe s ­
                                                                                               sional m is c o n d u c t for so lici­
                                                                                               tors'* t o d i s c r i m i n a t e o n
                                                                                               g ro u n d s o f rac e o r sex in a n y
 b u r ie d y e ste rd a y.                                     FOOTBALL
      You’ll N ever W alk Alone, the
                                                                      a               f-       p ro fe ssio n a l d e a lin g s w ith cli*
                                                                                               e n ts , e m p l o y e e s , b a r r i s t e r s
 a n th e m o f L iv e rp o o l’s Kop,                        B y J o e L o v ejo y            a n d o t h e r s o lic ito rs is b e in g
 rang ou t as the coffin of M r Gary                                                           u rg ed by th e R ace R e la tio n s
 C hurch, 19, w as c a rried into and                                                          C o m m itte e o f th e L aw
 o ut of Christ Church, Waterloo,                       L IV E R PO O L and Evcrton yes­
                                                        terday announced that their pe­        Society.
  n e a r Liverpool.
                                                        rim eter fences will be ripped out          In a repo rt published y e ste r­
      A m o n g t h e 500 m o u r n e r s                                                      day, the co m m ittee says it does
  w e re K enny Dalglish, Liverpool                    before their next hom e matches.
                                                        Peter Robinson, the Liverpool          n ot b e lie v e t h a t t h e c u rr e n t
  FC m anager, and fo u r players,                                                             rules of th e profession go far
  J o h n B arn es, Ray H oug h to n,                  chief executive, said after a five-
                                                                                               en ou gh to o u tla w racial d i s ­
  G ary A blett and J o h n Aldridge,                  h ou r meeting with Evcrton offi­       crim ination as they only cover a
  w ho re a d th e lesso n . Jo h n                    cials that the barriers would be re ­   refusal to act for a client on
  B arn es said at least tw o players                  placed with a “safety c orridor’* —     grounds of th e colour, e thnic or
  w ould atte n d every one of th e 95                 dividing fans from the pitches.         national origin, s e x o rc re ed .
  funerals.                                                Liverpool had announced on               They did not deal with the
       M r C h u rc h , a jo in e r , from             W ednesday that the fences would        many form s of racial discrimi*
  Doric S treet, Seaforth, M ersey ­                   stay, but after consulting with the     nation th at could ta k e place in a
   side, h a d exchanged h is stand                    club's supporters, Robinson said        solicitor’s practice.
   tic k e t for a place on th e terraces              that “ it would be insensitive to ask        “ A general sta te m e n t from
   to jo in h is friends.                              o ur fans to stand behind fences        th e Law Society th at all form s of
       Yesterday th o se friends left a                again after the happenings at           racial discrim ination in a solici­
   w reath of red a n d white carna­                   Hillsborough”.                          t o r ’s practice are unacceptable
   tio ns in the shape of a pillow,                        Robinson also unveiled plans        will go som e way to reassuring
   w ith th e m essage: “ We brought                   to make Anficld the first all-          people from the ethnic m inor­
   you back in o u r h e a r t s " .                                                            ities th at th e Law Society will
                                                       scatcr football stadium in Eng­
       T h e 3 5 -m in u te se rv ic e ,               land. T h e Kop and the small visi*      treat a com plaint of racial dls*
   relayed to crow ds o u tsid e by                                                             crim ination seriously,” says th e
                                                       tors’ pen at the opposite end will
   loudspeaker, w as co nducted in                                                              report.
                                                      he seated, even though capacity
   C hrist C hurch’s fo rm e r parish                                                               The C om m ittee is also calling
   h a ll w h e r e M r C h u rc h once               will be reduced to around 32,000.
                                                          Robinson said: “ I know this          for im provem ents in the han>
    a tte n d e d Cub Scout m eetings.                                                          dling of com plaints of racial dis­
    H e was also a fo rm er church                    move may not be popular with
                                                                                                crimination by the Solicitors'
    c h o ir m em ber.                                many o f our fans, but we a rc con­       Complaints Bureau.
        T h e R e v R a y H u t c h in s o n          vinced that seating is the only way            It fo u n d s o m e r e l u c ta n c e
    said: “ The m essag e of caring                    to guarantee safety.”                    among the eth n ic m inorities to
    a n d of w anting to sha re your                      Football shrugged off the Prime       approach the Bureau with com ­
    b u rd en of grief h a s b e e n m arred           Minister's insistence yesterday          plaints and a perception th at it
    by insensitive, distasteful and                   that the Government should press          might not be interested in deal*
    badly-tim ed rem a rk s reported                  ahead with its identity card legisla­     ing with such complaints.
    in som e q u a rte rs, and som e dis­             tion. confident that m ounting                 The Bureau, says the c o m m it­
    tasteful reporting by the media.                  backbcnch opposition would pre­           te e , sh o u ld c o n firm publicly
        “ But on M erseyside th e mes­                vent the Football Spectators Bill         t h a t it will d e a l w ith su c h
     sag e is loud, clear, and all the                from becoming law.                        complaints.
     stro ng er, as o u r city again has to               An appeal to Mrs T hatcher to              It also recom m ends th at, in
     show its resilience to yet more                  reappraise the practicality of            line with th e ru le in tribunals
     p ain and suffering.”                            m em bership cards in the light of        h e a rin g r a c e d i s c r im i n a t i o n
         He urged tho se responsible                  th e Hillsborough disaster felt on        cases, if a prim a facie ca se of
     for th e d isa s te r inquiry " to li.t?         d eaf cars, but the Football League       discrim ination is m ade out by
     te n to th e voice of th e w eak an              believe they have sufficient sup­         the alleged victim and th is is
     not ju st to those w ith a veste-                                                          supported by th e surrounding
                                                      port Hinting rank and file MPs to
     in te r e s t” .                                 prevent their introduction.               facts, the b urden of proof should
        T h e football of red and whit*                                                         switch to the alleged discrimi*
                                                          The League say they have
     c arnations c a rried th e words                                                           nator to show th at th e incident
     " F ro m the d irectors, players                 ccascd to be surprised by the             w as n o t d u e to r a c ia l
     m anag er a nd staff of Liverpoo                 Prime Minister's intransigence.           discrim ination.
     FC” .                                           T heir spokesman. Andy William­                A no th er recom m endation in
         O th er families of th o se killei          son, attaches greater significance         th e repo rt is th at the Race Rela*
     have been d istresse d by a police              to Cabinet uncase at the ground-           t i o n s A c t 1976 s h o u l d b e
     d ecision to reta in clothing and               swell o f opinion against the Bill,        am ended to bring all sectors of
     p ersonal effects.                              and the possibility o f it being d e­      t h e legal profession, including
         M r David M ason, d irector oi              feated at its second reading.              t h e n o n -c o n tra c tu a l relation*
     Liverpool social services, said*                    “ M ore and m ore MPs arc tell*        ship betw een solicitors a n d b a r­
     " T h is h as ca u se d im m en se dis­         ing us that they are against m em ­        risters, within its jurisdiction.
     tre s s to a n u m b e r of families.           bership cards." Williamson said                T h e c o m m i t t e e s a y s it is
        “ People have found it exceed*               yesterday. “ It must be very doubt­        “ seriously co ncerned about the
     ingly difficult to deal with, and               ful whether the Government can             wide gulf of perception betw een
     to tally in co m p rehe nsible th at            push their schcmc through."                black and w hite lawyers regard*
     th eir relatives should he tre a te d               While Jack Dunnctt, the                ing racial problem s within the
     not a s victim s but a s crim inals.”           League president, was appealing           profession.”
         M r M ervyn J o n e s, W est Mid*          yesterday for a rethink, the Prime              T here were no statistics to
     lands A ssista nt Chief Consta­                 Minister was telling the Com ­            show the exten t of discrimina*
     ble, leading th e police inquiry               mons there would be no U-turn.             tion o r how often black solici­
     into t h e tragedy, said: " i t is                  Mrs T hatcher told Parliament:        tors were slighted or tre a te d
     im p o rta n t to th e judicial inquiry                                                   wrongly because of th e ir colour.
                                                    '‘T o refuse to pass the Bill this
     to reta in th e s e belongings, it                                                        But having listened to b l a c k .
                                                    session to deal with problems al­
    could be th at th ey could help us                                                         lawyers speaking of their expe*
                                                    ready identified, and then to leave        rience, it had no doubt th ese
     to identify w here people w ere in             ourselves with no vehicle by which
     th e g r o u n d .”                                                                       were frequent occurrences.
                                                    to respond immediately to the les­
        Civic l e a d e r s in L iverpool,          sons o f Hillsborough, including
     Sheffield and N ottingham have                 an all-seating stadium, would be a
     ag re e d to unite in silent tribu te
                                                    grave decision for this House.”
     to the dead. Up to two million
     people are exp ected to respect a                  T h e League have guaranteed
     m in u te ’s silence in th e three             the Hillsborough Disaster Fund
     cities a t 3.06pm tomorrow.                    £im. An initial payment of
        T h e re will be m em orial ser­            £250,000 will be increased if fund­
     v ice s at T r a n m e r e R overs             raising schemes fail to take the to*
     ground, Birkenhead, at 3pm and                 tal to the seven-figure mark.
     in Sheffield C ath ed ral at 6.30pm                Clubs decided yesterday to
     o n Sunday.                                    press ahead with the weekend
         A m u It i - d e n o m i n a t i o n a l   programme. “All 44 games will go
     m em orial service will b e led by             alicad as planned.” said a League •
     th e Rt Rev David Sheppard,                    spokesman, Two postponem ents
     A nglican Bishop of Liverpool,                 were agreed earlier — by Liver*
     t h e M ost Rev D erek Worlock,                pool, who were to have played A r­
     Rom an Catholic Archbishop of                  senal on Sunday, a nd Tranm crc,
     Liverpool, a nd D r Jo h n Newton,             at hom e to Grimsby.
     F ree Church M o derato r, in Liv*
     e r p o o l s Anglican C athedral a
     w eek tomorrow.
6          PARLIAMENT & POLITICS ★ ★ ★
                             Football Spectators Bill

Thatcher accused
 of putting pride
before fans’ safety
MARGARET THATCHER yes­                                                       scheme. “It sets up a procedure
terday reaffirmed her determ ina­          By Stephen Goodwin                under which others (football’s ad­
tion to get the Football Specta­                                             ministrators) may propose such a
tors Bill through in this session of   through” the ID card scheme as        scheme for the Secretary of
Parliament.                            “an offence against common-           State’s approval which would
   It would be “negligent” to de­      sense and an offence against com­     then have to be laid before the
lay the Bill for another 12 months,    mon decency. How can you, in the      House.
the Prime Minister told the Com­       aftermath of that terrible tragedy        “So it does not pre-empt any
mons, but Tory doubts about the        last Saturday, put the safety of      decisions which may be taken by
identity card scheme remained.         others second to your own             Lord Justice Taylor.”
   John Carlisle, chairman of the      pride?”                                   But Mr Kinnock said the Prime
 Conservative sports committee,           Noting the question had been       Minister could have an enabling
 said many in the party were still     put “very sharply”, Mrs Thatcher      Bill or a “no-holds barred in­
worried about the “largely un­          told MPs she wanted to make one       quiry”, but not both. “Your
 loved Bill” and felt alternative      or two points she thought relevant    course      is    full   of    utter
 measures should be prepared for        to the decision on the Bill.          inconsistences as well as great
 the next session.                         “The decision we are asked to     vanity,” he told her.
    Mrs Thatcher delivered what         take is against a background of          “ It is five days since the
 amounted to a statement of intent     four decades of a problem of           Hillsborough disaster; four days
 on the Bill in response to an un­     crowd control and two decades of       since you went to the Leppings
 usually personal attack by Neil        hooliganism.                          Lane pen; three days since you set
 Kinnock, who accuscd the Prime            “Nearly 300 people have died.      up the Taylor inquiry, and now
 Minister of putting her own pride      We have the worst record in the      you are undermining it already.
 before the safety of football sup­    developed world. To refuse to         . “By pressing ahead with your
 porters.                               pass the Bill this session to deal    legislation you are effectively
    It was the first occasion on       with problems already identified       putting the vital question of iden­
 which Mrs Thatcher has faced the       and then to leave ourselves with      tity cards off-limits to Lord Jus­
 Commons since the Hillsborough         no vehicle by which to respond        tice Taylor," Mr Kinnock said.
 tragedy which has heightened           immediately to the lessons from          Mrs Thatcher accuscd the La­
 anxiety in all parties about the       Hillsborough, including an all­       bour leader of not treating the
 identity card scheme. Yesterday       seat stadium, would be a very          Bill with the seriousness it de­
 morning the Cabinet discussed         grave decision for this House.”       served, and of not listening to
 how to handle the Bill.                   Mrs Thatcher noted that the       what she said.
    Opening the Question Time ex­       World Cup was coming up in 1990          “The timetable easily permits
 changes, the Labour leader said        and then, as MPs began to protest     anything which Lord Justice Tay­
 many MPs on both sides of the          about the length of her statement,    lor may propose to be taken into
 Commons and people throughout          moved on to stress that the Bill      account because the Bill itself
 the country would regard Mrs          was an enabling measure and did        does not provide a national mem­
 Thatcher’s decision to “force          not itself provide a membership       bership scheme.”


                                                                                                   1         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             By I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         North'ern Correspondent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T H E P O L I C E M A N l e a din g th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       inv est ig ati on in t o (he H il ls bo­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r ou gh d is as te r ex p l a in e d yes te r­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       day why officers co u l d n ot re tu rn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t h e pe r s o n a l b el on gi ng s o f t h e 95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       p e o p l e w h o died.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M e r v y n Jo ne s, W e s t M id la nd s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Assi st ant C hi ef C o n s ta b l e , said
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       th at ev er y effort w o u l d b e m ad e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       to r c t ii r n 't h e effec ts to Liv er poo l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       as s o o n as pos sible, b u t for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       m o m e n t they fo r m e d p a r t of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       pol icc inquiry.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Me sai d he ac k n o w l ed g e d that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       m a n y o f th e b e r e a v e d families
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       h a d m a d e a d ire ct re q u e s t for th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       be lo n g i n g s So b e r e t u r n e d .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H e said: “ W e d o a p p r e c ia t e th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d is tre ss        relatives            arc     going
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t h r o u g h an d t h e last thin g we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        w a nt t o d o is t o a d d to th at. H o w ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ever, t h o s e belo ngi ngs co u l d form
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        at? i m p o r t a n t p ar t o f t h e inq uiry,'’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T h e S heff iel d c o r o n e r w a s also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        aw ar e o f th e requests.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             T h e police t e a m n e e d t o know
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pre cis ely w h e re t h e s u p p o r t e r s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        d i e d a n d th e b el on gi ng s cou ld be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o f cr uci al im p o rt an c e,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D a v id M as o n , t h e di re c t o r of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        social ser vic es in Li ve rp oo l, said
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        y es t e rd ay t h a t th e de ci sio n not to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         re le as e t h e b el on gi ng s h a d ca us ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “ i m m e n s e d is tr es s ” . H e add ed :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “ P e o p l e are findi ng it very diffi­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cult t o u n d e r s t a n d w hy that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         co ur s e o f ac tio n has b e e n cm-
         _^                                     s                                                   ....................                                                                                                                                                                                                 b a r k e d u p on."
M ou rn ers a t th e fu n eral o f G ary                     C hurch, 19, a t C h r i s t C hurch, L i v e r p o o l , w hich was a t t e n d e d by abo u t §00 p e o p l e , in clu d in g the t e a m ’s m a n a g e r an d fou r players.                                                                                 M a n y o f th e b e r e a v e d families
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I         . / h a d pers ist en tly ra ise d t h e m a t t e r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       J         ?.-( .                  > " S ^ - w i t h social wo rk ers , h e said.


 Fans and stars united in grief at funeral                                                                                                                                            b ui l d in g , ca n b ar el y b o l d a co uple                   H i s voice h a r d e n e d as h e said:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A re p o rt in th e Daily Express
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cla im i n g th at t h re e fo ot ba ll s u p ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         p o r t e r s ha d di ed o u t s i d e the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         g r o u n d was de s c ri b ed by a seni or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          po li ce officcr in Sh ef fie ld y e s t e r­
D O R R i e S T R E E T , S c a f o r t h , is a                                                                         c r o s s r o a d s in S e a f o r t h a n d m a d e
tiny, b a c k s t r e e t or l -d e -s n c clos e                      By James Dalrymple                                its wa y to C h r i s t C h u r c h in th e                  o f h u n d r e d at best, b ut yes te rda y                  “ T h e message, o f e a r i n g a n d w a n t ­                      d a y as "grossly i n a c c u r a t e 1’.
t o t h e b ig d o c k y a r d c r a n e s of.' Li v­                                                                    n e a r b y s u b u r b o f W a t er l oo,                   it whs a l m o s t at b u r s t i n g pa i nt                 in g to s h a r e y o u r b u r d e n of grief                             It is th ou gh t s o m e o f th e vic­
e r po ol . Y e s te rd ay live M e r c e d e s               ho us e. T h e l a d s we re u n c o m f o r t ­               T h e r o a d to th e left l e a d in g in               m id s o m e o f G a r y 's fr ie n d s stood                 h a s be en sadly m a r r e d by t h e i n ­                          t im s w e r e mo ve d by rescu er s an d
l i m o u s i n e s c ou l d base ly s q u ee ze              abl e in w h i t e s h i r t s j u s t o ut o f            to D w b y H oa d no d u p to Aut ield                       on t h e s t e p s o u t s i d e a ml w a tc hed              s ens it iv e, d i s t a s t e fu l a n d very                        mnv ha ve b ee n ou ts id e th e in ner
in w h e n they c a m e fo r t h e f u n e r a l              t h e i r w r a p p e r s with b l ac k ties               .Sta diu m w a s o n e t h a t G a r y mid                   t h r o u g h t h e o pen d oors .                            bn d l y -t i m e d r e m a r k s wh ic h have                        te r ra c e a r e a w he n th ey died.
o f 19-year-oid G a r y C h u r c h ,                         a m i s u i t s, a n d t h e girl s, i n d a r k           hi s m a t e s h a d t a ke n, re ligiously,                     T h e o r d e r o f ser vic e wa s tried                  b ee n re p o r t e d co m i n g fr om v a r i ­                           T h e tw o Sheff iel d hos pi tal s still
     G a r y wns file firs! of t h e 95 vi c­                 two-p iec es b o r r o w e d f r o m t h e i r             si nce they we re old e n o u g h to be                      n n  d   t r u e ,  h a n d - b u i l t  fo  r tra   gedy;    o u  s  q  u a r t e r s         a n d   t h  e  ta  st el e ss       tre a t i n g survivors y e s t e rd a y r e ­
t i m s of t h e H il l s b o ro u g h tr a g e d y           m u m s , w e re t ry i n g h a r d n ot to                nl lowed o n t h e b u s o n t h e i r own.                  “ Abid e W i t h M e " a n d t h e 23rd                       r e p o r t i n g by s o m e o f t h e m e d i a .”                   lea se d s eve n na m e s , hi all, 16 Liv­
to h e b ur ie d.                                            weep.                                                           O u t s i d e t h e c h u r c h , w a iti ng             P s a l m , t o p p e d off wi th t h e b i t t e r ­              Ik ’for e th e p ri v a te b u r i a l at                        e r p o o l s u p p o r t e r s a r c stili being
     A        q ui ck - w itt e d.    life-loving                  At t h e t o p o f t h e little s t r e e t a         a m o n g a cr ow d o f a b o u t BOO p e o ­                sweet w or ds of “ Yo u'll Never                              T h o r n t n n C em e t e ry t h e r e wa s a                        c a r e d fo r in t h e R oy al ILillam-
Seoji.se l ad , h e willingly gave t ip a                     big. r e d - b r i c k p u b , t h e D o m e ,             ple, w e r e at l ea st five o f t h e m en                  W a l k Al on e1'. It will p r o b a b l y bo                 c h a n c e for th e Li ver pool m a n a g e r                        s hi re a n d th e N o r t h e r n G e n e r a l
.slam! ticke t fo r In s t S a t u r d a y 's                 lo ok s r i g h t a c r o s s at t h e H a l l e l u ­     t h a t p la ye d a h u g e — If d i s t a n t •—            t h e t e m p l a t e for eve ry Li verpool                   n o d h i s pl ay e rs               all five o f th em               h osp itals.
C u p s em i-f in a l to s t a n d o n t h e                 j a h H a ll a n d ab o u t 60 n e i g h ­                  p a r t in G a r y 's life;                         Ke nny   b u r i a l ser vic e t h i s week end .                      t ry in g very b i n d to r e t a i n co ntr ol                            Five a r e said to b e still in a cr i ti ­
t e r r a c e s wi th h i s m a t e s — a n d                 b o u r s , s o m e o f t h e w om en st ill in            D  alg   li sh  ,  t h e    fo r m  e r  s t r i k e r a n d     J o  i n t   Al  dr  id ge     c  a m  e   clos   e    to —      to   s h a  k e   h a  n  d s   a n   d   s p  e a k  to       cal    co nd i t i o n at t h e H a ll a m s hi rc
d i e d in t h e H il l s b o r o u g h ca ges.               c a r p e t s l i p p e r s , w h o h a d kn ow n          iK»w m a n a g e r , with f o u r <»f his                    b r e a k i n g do wn us h e r e a d th e le s ­              G a r y 's fam ily n n d hi s fr ie nd s ,                            a n d Gil lia n E d w a rd s . 18. of B ir ­
     T h r o u g h o u t t h i s — Li ve rp oo l's            G a r y s in ce h e w a s bo rn , s t o o d by             stars,            John             B arnes,            Ray   s o n , h ut th e Rev Ray H u t c h i n s o n ,                    A   cynical        view      m  i g h  t  h av   e  been         k  e n h e a d , re m a i n s in t h e in tensiv e
l o n g e s t a n d d a r k e s t w e ek en d —               t h e d o o rw a y s o f bo th b uil din gs .              H o u g h t o n , G a r y Abl ett a n d J o h n              w!»» kno ws t h e fam ily w ell, gave a                       t h a t it t o o k a c a t a s t r o p h e to b ri n g                c a r e uni t o f t h e N o r t h e r n G e n ­
t h e s i gh ts , s o u n d s a n d e m o t i o n s                T h e i n n o c u o u s s o u n d s o f a pop         A ldridge.                                                   c l a s si c w o r d p o r t r a i t o f a M e r ­            G a n a n d bis m a t e s in t o di re ct                             er  al,  S h e wa s sai d y e s t e rd a y t o be
s ee n y e s t e r d a y will he r e p e a t e d              s on g — s o m e t h i n g with tlie w o r d s                 ’The Li ve rp oo l m e n h a d a r r i v e d             s ey si de l a d — g o o d -h e a rt e d , fun-               p e r s o n a l c o n t a c t wi th t h e i r idols.                  “ slowly i m pr ov in g” .
f r o m o n e e n d o f t h e city to t h e                   “ litt le d i a m o n d 1’ re p e a t e d over             in t h e i r B M W nn d M e r c e d e s e a r s              lov ing a n d p a s s i o n a t e a b o u t his               R u t everybody knew t h a t it w a s n 't                                 T h e ’ o t h e r p a t i e n t s n a m e d are:
o t h e r . F o r t h e la s t few d ay s t h e              a n d o v e r ~~ c a m e front i n s i d e t h e            a n d t h e y w ore very ex pen si ve                        m a t e s , hi s m u m a n d d a d , a n d Liv­               a q u e s t i o n o f farts a n d fo ot ba ll h e ­                   S e a n Lo c ke tt , 20. o f C lav er don .
undertakers, crem atorium s and                               fa m ily ’s h o m e , a n d a fr ie nd ex­                 s ui ts. T h e i r lives a n d G a r y 's h a d              e r po ol fo ot ba ll chib.                                   ro e s ye s te rd ay .                                                W ar wi ck sh ir e; S c a n Con nel ly , 16.
gt oved ig ge rs lism* b ee n w or ki ng                      p l a i n e d t h a t G a r y ’s p a r e n t s , l>ave     b ee n s e p a r a t e d Ity a c h a s m of                       It wa s si m ple , co m f o r t in g an d                     T o p a r a p h r a s e t he w o r d s o f Pe*                   o f I leswa li, Wi rr al, s uf fe rin g fro m
a ll h o u r s .                                              n o d M a u r e e n , a n d his b r o t h e r              w ea lt h a n d fa me, Imt D a lg l i s h                    po we rfu l, w i t h o u t b i t t e r n e s s for            t e r R o b i n so n , L i ver pool's chief                           h e a d injuries; A?)thony Bla nd. 18,
     T h e big li m o u s i n e s a r r i v e d at            a n d two s i s t e r s , h a d dec id ed to               wa s p r o u d to be t h e r e , a n d h e h a s             a n y bo dy In a u t h o r i t y o r an ybody                 executive, it was j u s t d ec en t young                             o f Keighley, W e s t Yo rk sh ir e;
9.4 5a m . G a r y ’s c r ow d, a b o u t 30                  piny it b e c a u s e if was one he                        p  n m  t i s e d   t h a t  hi  s  pl  ay e  rs   will  be  w  ho      co  ul  d   ha  ve    m    a d e    m i s ta k e s m   e n   n n d   b  a c k s t r e e t  k i d s  f r o  m   th e      R o b e r t G r a h a m o f Rk elmers da le;
ho ys a n d gi rls, h a d be en w a it i n g                  p la ye d all t h e time . I t wa s, h e                   at eve ry o n e o f th e f u n e r a l s held                Inst S a t u r d a y a f t e rn o o n , T h e b it ­          s a m e city off eri ng ea c h o t h e r                              a n d G a r y C ur ry arid A n d r e w De -
f o r m o r e t h a n a n l u m r, J u s t                    s a i d , a k i n d o f t r i b u t e to t h e lad.        in t h e d a y s to come.                                    t e r n e s s M r H u t c h i n s o n k ep t for              f r i e n d s h i p a n d c om f or t in days of                      vi  ne, 23, b o t h o f T o w e r Hill, Liv­
s t a n d i n g a r o u n d o u t s i d e th e                    T h e cortege turne d right a t a                           C hrist C hurch, a small, s q u are                     certain others.                                               c h a o s , a n g e r a n d grief.                                    e r po ol ,



  ID cards ‘tioie la?
  calms some critics
A S N I C H O L A S R I D L E Y left 10                      o p p o s e d to t h e s c h e m e an yw ay .”
D o w n i n g S t r e e t ye s t e rd ay m o t tl ­          T h e m a i n g e s t u r e whi ch th e C a b i ­
ing, following t w o m iniste rial                           net m a d e to tt y to bridg e t h e gulf
m e e ti n g s a n d a full C a b i n e t on                 wit h n o r m a ll y loyal b ac k b en c h
t h e foo tba ll i d en ti ty c a r d Hill,                  M P s w a s its dec is io n n o t t o set a
w a iti ng j ou rn a lis ts c a lle d ou t to                d a t e fo r re -s ta rt in g t h e Hill’s
ask him t h e o u t c o m e . C o l in                       p ro g r e s s      through         P a rl i a m e n t.
 H u g h e s writ es,                                        Th:U is n ot a co nc es s io n o n tire
     " I ’m g o in g t o l u n c h ,” b e r e ­              Bill as th e s c h e m e as su ch —
pl ied . "Dir! w ha t a b o u t t h e B ill ?”               m er el y a t im e- lag . d u ri n g which
a n e a g e r ra d i o r e p o r t e r per sis te d.         G o v e r n m e n t wh ip s h o p e to cal m
“ Dills d o n ’t h av e lu n ch ,” th e drily                p ot en t i ai r e b e K <tnd p e r s u a d e
la c on ic S e c r e t a r y o f S ta l e fo r (he           t h e m ag a in st ro ck in g t h e P ri m e
 E n v i r o n m e n t said.                                 M i n i st e r' s boat.
     Oti c o f t h e p riv a te p a r l i a m e n ­               But t h e slory is l it fr om over,
 ts ry s e c r e t a r i e s w h o was I h r e a l e fl ­    however determ ined M argaret
i n g ft! res ign o v e r th e G o v e r n ­                 T h a t c h e r 's t o n e d uri ng qu e s t i o n
 m e n t ’s re fusal to de la y (he I Jill                   t im e ye s te rd ay . If in two o r t h r e e
wa s d el ig ht ed with t h e P ri m e                       w e ek s t h e r e r e m a i n 1; a su bs ta nti al
 M i n i s t e r’s d e c l a r a t i o n t h a t t h e r e   b od y o f b a c k b e n c h T ori e s willing
 was no lo n g e r any p re s s u re to                      t o vo te ag a i n s t th e G o v e r n m e n t ,
 h av e t h e Hill on t h e s t a t u t e b o o k            site m ay still b e forced to bac k off.
 by th e e n d o f July. 1 le said: “ C o l ­                    T h e l i fe t i m e o f th e Bill iu this
 le a g u e s tike m e w h o we re p re v i ­                p a r l i a m e n t a r y sess io n ho ngs on
o u s l y in f a v o u r o f t h e s c h e m e will          w h e t h e r m i n is t e r s an d wh ip s c a n
 p ro b a b l y feel t h a t t he y ha ve got                p e r s u a d e t h e i r b a c k b e n c h tr o o p s
 s o m e t h i n g o ut o f this w ee k's p r e s ­          agai ns t m ut in y. T h e r e r e m a i n e d
 su re , a n d will b e r e as on ab ly                      m u c h m u t in o u s fe eling a r o u n d
 ha pp y. T h o s e w h o r e m a i n u n ­                  the C o m m o n s c or rid or s 'l as t night.
 h ap p y a r e m os tly (h os e w h o w e re                                         P arliam e n t, page 6
                     HORROROFHILLSBOROUGH
          lMere§x©S rivals plan safety corridors at grounds

          JSAFETY fences are to be pulled
          {down by Liverpool and Everton
                                                                                            .anda similar
                                                                      -------------------- .th e Gladwys
                                                          Street end of Goodison Park.
                                                                                                                                             axe
                                                                                                              Mr Robinson said the corridor would be
                                                                                                                                                         fences; *1 think that Is the right thing to
                                                                                                                                                         da'*
                                                                                                                                                           The Football Supporters Association
                                                                                                                                                                                                       w aited to "provide entertainment in a
                                                                                                                                                                                                       safe, modern stadium, with adequate
                                                                                                                                                                                                       faculties for all fens regardless of sex, age
          ibefore their next home fixtures.                                                                                                              last night welcomed the corridor idea and     or scarf colour11.
          , Liverpool's chief executive, Mr Peter           The first time the new safety arrange­          an area about two yards wide at the front
                                                          ments are likely to be on show Is toe             of the terracing, separated from the fans    pralsea Liverpool and Everton for think-         In a two-page article entitled Playing
          •Robinson, emerged from a five-hour             scheduled derby match between Everton             by a long crush barrier. Steps would be                                                    Safe at SheiSeW, Mr Douglas Lock wrote
          {meeting between the soccer ctnbe last          and Liverpool at Goodison Park cmMay 3,           installed at the pitch side.                                                               of the Improvements made at the mound
          n ight and said both would replace the          which has not so far been postponed.                                                                                                          in the light of the 1966 Sp o rttolven ts
          tbamers with a "safety corridor” dividing                                                           He said that the barrier would be                                                         {Control of Alcohol) Act and The Pop-
          •tans from the pitches.                            In a joint statement issued by the two         enough to keep fans back from the front        ____________________ lave agreed i -
                                                          clubs, they said that new safety measures         wall, and would also mean that they                                                         plewell Report on the Bradford soccer
          | He said; "We thought It would be              had beat worked out at talks with the                                                          remove fence gates at their BramaB Lane        stadium fire.
          •insensitive to ask our fens to stand behind    local authority and police. .                     would haw a better view of the pitch.        ground after talks with police and council
          •fences again after the happenings at                                                               "But in an emergency the fans could        safety experts.                                  He referred to improved methods of
          IHillsborough."                                   "For the remainderof this season safety         easily duck under the crush barriers and       The alterations will be completed in        segregating rival f e u at the Leppings
          « All the fens the club had spoken to          -will be ensured by increased policing of          COup the steps on to the pitch in a matter   time for the club's home Division Three       Lane end — the scene of Saturday's
          twanted the fences to come down.                the grounds and the expectation that the          of seconds."                                 league match with Brentford tomorrow,         disaster.
          , The dubs had decided after talks on           fans will continue to act responsibly and           Earlier Mr Robinson said the club's        when extra police will beon duty. Further
          •Wednesday to modify the fences, extend-        to do all they can to ensure safety and not       architect had been called in to study the    talks will be held about the payability of
          ting the gaps in them and removing the          encroach on the pitch.                            Kop with a view to turning Anfield Into an   removing all fences before the Wart of
          .spikes.                             ,,           “For next season the Kop enclosure at           all-seater stadium.                          n e x t —
          • But Mr Robinson said last night:              Anfield and both the Park End and                   "In view of all the developments, we
          ‘"Today we have had a further meeting           Gladwys Street enclosures at Goodison             thought It was time to seek that
          .and I am glad that we have finally found a     Park will be provided with a safety               Information as a matter o f urgency. We
          ; way to remove those fences, w e had a         corridor which will be stewarded and              would look at providing seating In that                                                      Training of stewards bad become a
          *daty to find a way to get them down and I      policed and w ill be available for first-aid      area at a mice the ordinary average fen                                                    priority and a high-technology system
          «am pleased to say that they are coming         purposes,                                         can afford. That U what the club must                                                      using video cameras and computers to
          • down."                                           "Plans are presently being produced for        da”                                          was then Sheffield Wednesday's safety         monitor crowd movements inside and
          • Mr Robinson said that a safety corridor       the conversion of Bverton's Bulens Road                                                        and security consultant said the b o w l of   o u t s id e th e sta d iu m b ad b e e n
            would be built between the Spton Kop end      paddock to a seated area and Everton are                                                       directors, management and personnel           introduced.




                                                                                                                          £3 SS"S«e8 & fi
                                                                                                                        [liiglMigfil!
                II                                                                                                      r.SlS
SMrjfg.                                                                            -■ssifl; t m kk ,..S!
                                       * *V11                                      iilrti tiliM g!
                                    •g*
                                    ■* *-B
                                      S8 9S*.Z^L
                                               8
                                  ipl                                                          n
                                  III!
                                                                                                                                                      *sr*
Ir fji!                                                                                                                                            i-’re?
                                                                                                                                                                       Ilili in the face o f Intense p


                                                                                                                                                                          At' t'he sam e tim e th e Government
                                                                                                                                                                       moved to head off the Shreat of an
                                                                                                                                                                      embarrassing defeat in the Commons by
                                                                                                                                                                      indicating the bill could be delayed
                                                                                                                                                                      longer than originally planned.
                                                                                                                                                                          Last night there w ere signs that
                                                                                                                                                                      backbenchers would be prejwrecfto listen
                                                                                                                                                                       to the Government's case for battling on
                                                                                                                                                                      w ith th e b ill a lth o u g h a n x ie tie s
                                                                                                                                                                       remained.
                                                                                                                                                                          Sir Marcus Fox, the Shipley Tory MP,
                                                                                                                                                                      who Is vic<M;haims;«i of Hie influential
Liverpool’s manager, Kentty Dalglish, second left, and players pay their respects at yesterday’s Funeral backbench 1322 Committee, told the                                                                                             ’ SIR MARCUS FOX
for Mr Gary Church, IS, the first of the Hillsborough victims to he buried. From left: Gary Ablett, Yorkshire                                                                         Past: “A lot c f doubt still
                                                                                                                                                                      remains among m y colleagues" But ha                    r ec o m m e n d a tio n s~ b y L ord j u s t i c e
Dalglish, John Aldridge and John Barnes.                                                                                                                              ia id he woulii be “keeping an open
                                                                                                                                                                      mind".                                                    ‘*Not to proceed with the bill this
                                                                                                                                                                       . The chairnum of the Tory backbench                   session would delay by VI months any

 Funds appeal.for,soccer safety
 FOOTBALL le a g u e chiefs appealed '               are treated, very much more stringently
                                                                                                                                                                      ip orts committee, Mr John Carlisle, who
                                                                                                                                                                       - —.ted a long-term p
                                                                                                                                                                              bill introducbd
                                                                                                                                                                       mentary session, wek
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ............1 - - J -   rTS2iS,£SSlri.»w-‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              enabling legislation under which any ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              reeonane?uiattom tarn. Use Taylor in - ;
                                                                                                                 the ball r o llw j by matching the fr’oot ball of the "rigid" tim etable for the                             ouiry could be acted upoaby tlwFixMball i
 the Government yesterday for more funds than racecourse betting — the tax Is 42.5 . Association's £250,000 donation. '                                             , cards.                                                  Membership Authority which would be
 towards ground Mflsty-'swasures;                 ; ■per cetrt against eight per cent.                - ■           Donations may be raAiie at any bank or ■j " B u t m a n y d o r e m a in s o m e w h a t                  reapoasible for jetting up the i<ieniits
   The League h a s launched itsow n study             ‘"The Government gets m o m a year                        building society for credit to the Kills-, * Worried about that largely unloved bill
 into                                                from betting tax. Much o f the money                        through Disaster Appeal fu n d at Bar­ arid feel alternative measures should
 Witty o f encouraging aD-seater staaiums received from racing is ploughed back                                  clays Bank. City Oiflce, Water Street. have been btoirchl forward in the new
 in t h e w a k e o f u i e H il ls b o r o u g h    into their sport, but there is no such Liverpool l* y 2E \ , account number 20C«j session," h e said.
 disaster.                                           provision with football.”                                   55S5, sorting code 2iKsH)l, >a At the                    Mr John Greenway, the Tory MP for
   Its vice-president, Mr Gordon McKeag,                                                                         Co-Operative Bank,- 8 - 1 West Street. . Ryedafe and president of York City
 the Newcastle chairman, led the appeal                                                                        . S h e f f ie ld S i 3 E X , a c c o u n t nu m ber football ckib, said there still remained
 for financial a id He said: "Football Pools                                                                     5C000005, si>rt»Ri? code                             a "strong risk" shat the bOi weald be                   conceded its final stages should be held,
                                                                                                                                                                      defeated-                                               over until ih s spillover session in

              | G A R A G E S- SHEDS                                       Club chaplain tells                                                                            Announclng the decision in the Com­
                                                                                                                                                                      mons yester£*y, Mrs Thatcher said it
                                                                                                                                                                      would he negligent to delay the biU for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              October.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                lAicd Justice' Taylor has already indi­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cated an interim report is likely before t he
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              start of the next soccer season givinfcrtinie
                -SUMMERHOUSES                                              of hero ball boys
                                                                                                                                                                      another 12 months.
                                                                                                                                                                          Many Tory backbenchers have been
                                                                                                                                                                      calling tar the Government xo postpone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              for key recommendations to be incor­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              porated in the bill.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    'M agnificent’ social
               GREENHOUSES                                                                                                                                            tne bill until the Hillsborough inqiurv                   But hi spite o f the concession, doubts             workers praised
                                                                    THE Sheffield Wednesday chap­                                                                     h e a d e d by L ord J u a t ic e T a y lo r
             <CONSERVATORIES                                        lain vestsrday revealed the lutl                                                                  reported.
                                                                                                                                                                          But the Prime Minister said a bill                  enough to say we will ha-»e one diiy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SOCIAL workers whose words of comfort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    helped su m vor s a ’ ' ’ ------------
                                                                    impact the Hillsborough tniyedy                                                                                                                                                                                 o f the disaster war*
                                                                    has had on. the cSufc.                                                                            comtileted in the current Pdiiiameniary                 locking at the bill again which b w h at the
                                                                                                                                                                      sc ssb n could still take account of an                 efTect of the spifi-over period would                 Sheffield's social <
                                                                       Teenage raf-ruben of Wednes-                                                                                                                                                                                 Neil Kay                            .    .
                                                                     ' .v's junior teams, who acted                                                                   interim resort by Ix>rd Juslii'e Taylor.
                                                                    ba!.11b->v«nl
                                                                    match, fem es! bodies when disj>
                                                                                                      ’ ’'        up                                                      "hi the face of the record of the
                                                                                                                                                                      h.«iU^.sni:>:sit of the reputiuioix of this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               °He added: “i liunk It is unfortunate that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w c are not [wing iw<re flexible in our
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       More than 120 staff from his depart-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    men!, with do-ieiis of volunteers troni
                                                                    tar stsuck.                                                                                       umniry, doe.-, this House uosiltvely wish               r e s p o n s e to w h a t h a p p e n e d at         churches and other bodies, used a boys'
                                                                       Many of the club's young foot                                                                  to delay for W inonihs ana do nothing in                HilfciWough."                                         club near the stadium as a counselling
                                                                    bailers have received expert cutra                                                                foceof dsatiis we have recently s e e n ” she              Sir Marcos, who as vice-chairman of tije           centre for friends and relatives of the feaa
                                                                    sctlbw tu help them recover feoir
                                                                    the shock of witnessing stic'r
                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                              .also ch.jp.JU: TO asked.   She said the decision was being taken
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1S22 Committee is ratfardedas a weatiier-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              vane for the mood of colleagues, said
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and injured, working round the clock.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mr Kay said: "The response was
                                                                    trauinnlie scenes at elosi.' hand.                                                                ai'.-iins? a background of four decades of              back^nchers would ne«d to be assured
                                                                                                                                                                      probiiiin.i with crowd safety and two                   that "a lot of options are going to be left
                                                                      letdon Wit,on, Is planning u                                                                    decadei of hooliganism.                                          i make changes.
                                                                          ................
                                                                    provide      siiii       support for s',,...si                                                        "Nearly 300 people have died.” she tolo
                                                                                                                                                                      AsPs. '% ‘e h a te tfie worst record in the             discussions and a tot o f reassurance fi
                                                                       Senior players have been i etuc-                                                               developed world.                                        number of us to support the measure." he
                                                                    tan! to discuss the- tvacedv « inch                                                                   "To refuse to puss the bill this session            added.
                                                                    they watrhcu unfold horn their                                                                    tu deal with pr;(l>lfcnii already identified               ...e L iteitf Leader, Mr Neil KlnnoiA.
                      conwou> auitpiNGS hswed ,                                                                                                                       nnd then to leave cn.rsetves with no                    claim ed Use djeiriitti to proceed with the
    .    < «         fe.-r,ea!a Nyrseiy & Gaiaw €a>tre                *Mr ir iW n 7 V ii< o m lV r “ rf tin-                                                          vehicle by which w reswmd iHsaicdlately                 bill iva.i effectively -’puHing the vital
  A m                  Cm! As»r.. Drof'i.e.'d Sr.eKieia             .M ethodist C hu rch’s in du stria l                                                              in the lessons, ftvin VllilsbOrouKh Ir.cltnl-           question of identity cacds oft-hrmts to
             \           Tdeprsns: Drcrt.flW 4US52                  mission in the city, has tiw;;                                                                    irijj .m all s-jatin^ stadnnrs would be a very          f» r d Justice Taylor'’ and undermining-
                xpia'lrs Garfe-i Cer.irt, BjiOdgnsrifl^e Re ’       co-ordinating aid by providing :i                                                                                                                         the ititjuiry,
                                                                           >.          ... n.~ ..1. • I-. .-..Ti t-                                                     ' "A bill completed in this session would                lie said it, was an offence ayaiast
                                                                                                                                                                      still bey We to take account of any interim             ci!!!!mon sense and common decency.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B ereav ed to tra v e l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AT least 50 of the bereaved will travel
                                                                                                               F a n s s a y th a n k y o u w ith flo w e rs                                                                                                                        to a memorial service for the tlius-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    boiotii-h victims in Sneffieid Cathedral on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Stiuday evening.The Arehbishopof York,
    S S f m M r e M insulations                                                                                                                                                                                               could
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        eii. I just did what i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Puiio: who have workedfjvectimesiiice
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dr John Habgood, will preac!*.

                                                                                                                                                                                i n v i t e d h im in a n d k e y ! a
                                                                                                                                                                               : for Mr firice, whose car was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the disa^tKr are donating their overtime
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              p;.y to the miisborcHgh appeal.                       V olunteers needed
                                                                                                                                                                                outside. Uotii plumed home tu tell              Sheiiicici's O^-hsrton S p lits Stadnun is          VOI.IJNTEERS are needed' for a street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to s t a g e a g r e y h o u n d m e e ti n g on      collection in Sheffield tomorrow ui aiii of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Wednesttay, May 3 for the appeal. ■                   She HHIsiiorwuk'h ihsaoter aopcai Anyone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ali       and raue card receipts wiii b«*          w ls h m n t o f ie lp is a s k e d t o r in g
Sheffield City Libraries, Surrey Street, Sheffield S 1 1 X Z                                                                                Telephone: (0 7 4 2 ) 734750

                                                                                                                      ■ Local Government Information Service




       Nine seek damages
        from Dolice
                                                                                                                               iim             s      ll
                B y Terence Shaw, Legal Correspondent
    A HIGH COURT writ claiming damages for pereonal                                                                                Elffl
  1 injury on behalf of nine people injured m last Satur-
  i dav’s Hillsborough disaster was issued in Liverpool
  1 vMterday against Mr Peter Wright, the Chief ^Consta*
  I ble of South Yorkshire, and Sheffield Wednesday Fo
  i ball Club.
   I     The w nt begins the first J ) i g C r e t l O n a r y                                                         Writs                Mth Yorkshire
     legal action to be launched fol
     lowing the disaster in which
     95 people died.
         It claims “damages for per­
                                                             fund w ill give                                          ^Football Ctobwere lodged yester-

     sonal injuries, loss and dam­
      age” arising out of alleged neg­
      ligence and/or breach of duty by
                                                             faster payouts
   , the two defendants or their ser-
   • vants or agents.                , .     RELIEF payments to survi­                                                 ;or8 bothTTand
          The nine plaintiffs claiming vors and victims’ relatives are                                                  dants as Peter
   I damages are named in the writ expected to be-made Quickly                                                         L.-Li--A#*CAwfh iY o f tlM f C iP
       as John Sullivan, Thomas Ston- after a decision yesterday to
       ehouse, Paul Anthony Clarke, opt for a discretionary fund.
  •1 George Whitcombe, Andrew                    The four trustees of the Hills­
       Jones, Steven McGinty, Kevin borough Disaster Appeal will
       McGinty, Michael Parsons and have more flexibility ,n,IJia^ inf                                                 *ing Liverpool solicito^wW^*®,, ^ ^
       Alan Parkinson.                        awards than if a charitable fund                                         ;;kin, who                          ,
          Mr Rex Makin, the Liverpool had been chosen.                                                                  shut.has;now^^a^f*0'
                                                                                                                                           ,,
                                                                                                                                            w ®?are
       solicitor representing the nine,                                                                                  taking action in.the cml c o U r b . ;
                                                                                                                        fS d u ec o u rse lsh aU b e issu in g -
        plaintiffs who issued the writ; inThe             trustees are the councils
                                                                                                                        ■^tsonbehaM ;ofclientsw ho.w             .
        said the "time for talking has tingham, and Sheffield
                                                  Liverpool,
                                                                         Liverpool football
                                                                                            and Not­
                                                                                                                         reiadvw of(th<« who ,lost Aeir ^ .
        now ceased so we are^ taking club. They were                            advised by Mr
      ‘ action in the civil courts".           Roger Studdards, the solicitor
          He was starting the action behind th e B radford F ire
        after being “ inundated with Appeal Fund.                                                                               the ira n t of admtaattation
        people in grief and agony”.               He said a charitable fund                                             ’Vof their e s t a          t e     s «%
           Mr Makin said he would also could only distribute money to                                                     , The nine people                     v
        be issuing writs on behalf of those in need.                                                                    ' ages a r e named o ^ e d o p u m o rt ^
        other clients who were relatives                                                                                ^asJ6hn:SuUivan,Thon»a^t<»^ ;
        of some of the 95 victims.              • D o n a tio n s c a n lie m a d e t o th e
                                                                                                                          ’house,
           But he was unable to do that aa np yp e ab la, nwk h oi crh bhuaisld it nwgo saocccieo ut yn. t sT, haet        Georee     Whitcombe* ^Andrew ^ - .
         until he had received the grant d e t a i l s a r e : a c c o u n t n u m b e r
         of a d m in istra tio n of th e ir 2 0 5 6 5 5 5 5 , s o r t c o d e 2 0 - 5 1 - 0 1 ; o r                        McGintya Wiraael ;Pats°™
         estates                               a cco u n t n u m b er 50000005, s o rt code                                Alan P a r k i n s o n .                   V
           Mr NIakin said th e nine 0 8 -9 0 .7 5 .                                                                      $:>• Mr Makin said he ^ s wking
         named in the writ had been
         physically injured.             . . I                                                                           >1 the actionaftertemg
           But he expected others to join >                                                                                 with p e o p lc .in ^ c fa n ^ g o i^ -
         the action along with those who (                                                                                    Further
         were "psychologically scarred” j                                                                                   other victims take le£al;advice.
         including eye-witnesses a n d .
         rescuers.                            I
           “ I am completely satisfied ;
         that the South Yorkshire Police
         are liable morally though they
         may well try to escape their
         legal responsibility,” said Mr
         Makin.
                         THE Hillsborough Disaster Pand has
                         passed film with contributions continu­
                                                                                                                Vp /$ -Q
                                                                                               A charity fock concert 'planned for
                                                                                                                                            soars to over     tom orrow when they re-record his 60s hit.
                                                                                            Sheffield’s Crucible Theatre has been                             They include Paul McCartney, Holly
                         ing to pour in from all over the                                   switched to the larger City Hall on April                         Johnson an d The Christians.
                         country.                                                          27, The line-up is to be announced
                            Sheffield donations are known to have                           later.                                                              T he aim is to sell at least 500,000 copies.
                         already topped £100,000, mostly in small                             A sim ilar event is being arranged in                           The producer, Mr P eter Waterman, said:
                         am ounts from individual passers-by who                           Liverpool for early May. Possible partici­                         “We a re doing this because we desper­
                         filled collecting bins a t the Town H a l six                     pants include Gerry Marsden, Cilia Black                           ately need to comfort th e relatives, and
                         tim es over yesterday.                                            and the ex-Beatles, George Harrison and                            because w e can never, ever show them
                            Gifts range from children’s pocket                             Ringo Starr.                                                       enough how we feel about w hat has
                         money and pension contributions to four                              A Sheffield council spokesman said last                         happened,’’*
                                                                                           night: “The money has been coming in                                  G erry Marsden, w ith th e Pacemakers,
                                           I f MATT    YQUDALE                             bucketfuls all day. The response h as been                         also sang the Liverpool FG anthem . You'd
                                                                                           marvellous and there is absolutely no                              Never Walk Alone, an d rem ade th a t for
                                                                                           sign of it letting up."                                            th e B radford disaster fund.
                        a n d f iv e - f ig u r e a m o u n ts f r o m                        Players from bot£ Sheffield United and
                        companies. ..                                                      Sheffield Wednesday will visit th e Town                             Contributions to th e fund can be made
                           Ford, yverpool’s biggest private em-                            Hall today to sign th e book of remem­                             through ail m ajor banks and building •*
                                                                                           brance which already contains thousands                            societies.-
                        fiafoGQ Et f*aleW 00(i' k a s d o n a te d                         of names.
                           Four Liverpool firms have contributed                              The C«M>p Bank in West Street.                                 FRENCH ace Michel P latini is being
                        £100,000 between them, while a Sheffield                           Sheffield, has set up a special appeal                            asked to come out of retirem ent to play in
                        store has given £6,000. The Government                             account, num ber 50000005.                                        a special m atch a t Hillsborough in aid of
                        has already pledged £500,000, Liverpool                               It is hoped to raise more than £3m from                        th e fund.
                        football duS £100,000 and Sheffield,                               a revival of th e pop song. Ferry Across                             Bordeaux w ant the French national
                        L iv e n ^ o o ra n d N o ttin g h am co u n c ils                 The Mersey. Gerry Marsden will lead a                             team m anager to play In th eir side against
                                                                                           c h o ir o f fa m o u s M ersey sid e v o ic e s                  Sheffield Wednesday o n May 2.                                          . GERRY MABSOIM: C h a rity u n c a r t .




  SOUTH YORKSHIRE police insisted that ail
                                                                                                                                    X (3-4                not helping them. ‘They                              about 300 coaches had carried a iotaiofH.OOO
                                                                                                                                                                                                               supporters fo Sheffield from around the coua-      left the coaches. After that, we have
. coaches carrying Liverpool fens arrived at the                                                                                                                contempt.”
                                                                                                                                                             But the debate grew over why the coaches                                                             local policing,” Mr Hoye said.
  ground three hours before the kick-off for Sat­                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .At. the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          . Owl ,pub, >,io
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in Neepsend Lane, s m
  urday's semi-final, giving supporters time to      turnstiles, had been drinking heavily. H ie Po­   was comforting them several hours after the        carrying fans, not all o f them from Liverpool,        The coache* had been told to arove oe-
                                                                                                                                                          were told ihev bad lo be in Sheffield by nooo.       Ween 12.00 and 12JO, and because ihe weatls-       from the sou n d , the beer ran out. A bam
  drink in tocai pubs before turning up st the       lice Federation alleged that some fans spat       disaster happened..                                                                                                                                        there, Keftb Oiierershtw, said st the height
  ground s i the last minute.                        and verbally abused emergency worker* who           "I have no doubt at all that what they said      Akohoi or fans under (he influence o f drink         erwas good and there were no hotd-ups, most
                                                                                                                                                          are forbidden by taw in football pounds,             arrived 20 to 25 minuses early.                    there had be e s 300 feus drinking in the main
     The plan to make coaches arrive at midday       were frantically trying to save lives o a the     was true. Why would they make it up?" he said                                                                                                              bar, 100 mors in the lap room, and 150 to 200
  emerged as a possWe factor leading to the          pitch.                                            yesterday. Witnesses o f the incident would        Cbachcs a/e normally told to arrive between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  on the (lreel outside.
  late surge of 3,003 fans into the area outside        Paul Middtip, secretary o f the South York­    give evidence to the inquiry if neccssary.         s » hour and an hour and s half before a match
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      “T i e pub was packed. We to d an extremely
  the ground that earned the police to open a        shire Police Federation, said police officers        But Liverpool fans who were at the match        kicks off.                                                                                              busy day. They weren’t buying halves, and
  gate to ca*e the crush.                            had told biro that a policewoman who was sw ­     and witnessed the carnage angrily denied the          Denis Howell, Labour’s sports spokesman,
                                                                                                                                                          said the information should be passed straight                                                          pirns, they were buying crates and taking them
     An acrimonious debate developed in Shef­        ing mouth-to-mouth resuscitation to a victim
                                                                                                                                                          to Lord Justice Taylor’s disaster inquiry,           which had been used jwceestfuUy the previous       outside.”
  field and Liverpool over whether die police or     was urinated o n by a fan.                          tarty Booth said there was a o hooliganism
                                                        Mr Middap, who is publicly defending po­       or dmnScencss, and he accused the police of           Several local pubs were filled with Liver­        y e n , and told the coaches to arrive early to
  the fans should take the blame for the Hills­
                                                     lice action at Hillsborough in the face of        trying to lay She blame on others,                 pool fans drinking heavily unlit at least            avoid traffic congestion on the motorway.
  borough disaster, which led to the deaths o f 95                                                                                                                                                                                                                fans until about 2-30ooi.
                                                     mounting criticism, said he was prepared to         Tom Ketfy said: “Alcohol had nothing to do       2.30pm, half an hour before the game, in one            The police stopped and checked all coaches
                                                                                                                                                                                                               thresmilcs out o f the city to make sure no fans     Eddie Leyden, Labour MP tor Speke, said:
   Some police who witnessed the tragedy are         sign a statement to the inquiry detailing the     with it. They are determined to blame it on the    m jc dircctly in front o f a mobile police conSrol
                                                                                                                                                                                                               were either drenk or drinking. The checks          “It moM have been counterproductive to or­
 now insisting that the majority o f the Liver­      fans' unruly behaviour.                           fans, but (he fans were great." He said he saw     point.                                                                                                  der fans to get there at that time. They are go­
                                                                                                                                                             Barry Hoye, director o f public affairs for the   were repeated when the coaches arrived at
 pool h n s who arrived late at Hillsborough,           He said a group of about eight policemen                                                                                                                                                                  ing to go for a drink.”
                                                     had described the incidents to him while he       the fence in ait effort to escape the crush, and   Bus and Coach Council, said yesterday that           coach park* close to the ground.
 cresting a potentially deadly crush outside She
a w e t o .O e n H y                                                           ubs                                •.■   •’■. 5 /S 2" «           « i“a «d M
                                                                                                                                                          n s d»wi sb. /
S c S u ! ^                      *   “ * ‘with a 6uSMcoUmingrj.
..............................        i'.'.«| w
                                              •m cwaws h


                                           Hj“ i*
                                                       « asmjm
                                                           a d ao
                                                               u u ie
                                                                   w sa , which


                                                                    .
                                                                          tvuKaj
                                           t a a d e d i a a t S i tt f f i d d T mS s s S S iE s S s ? ? ”
                                                                                   ng    fiw tm *
                                                                                         S a ? 0f several c o lle c tin g
                                                                                                   in th
                                                                                         b o x e s ui i e np nu hb lt ic
                                                                                                                      ir iti ty
                                                                                                                              Z
                                                                                                                                     _,
                                                                                                                                     The
                                                                                                                                     ^   advice
                                                                                                                                         « f*«* » to raise i
                                                                                                                                                     a i * the
                                                                                                    —                              money thamcl»ra(«ltl>ougb

                                                          •* * » * * « ,
                                                                                         T T&L£ ,* £ i»s,* L»
                                                                                         b&                 » •
                                                                                                                 -KOTKHsr
                                          a g n j f i a been p u t itp.
                                              Sheffield ~
                                                                                              *^L.U™f*X       U,sr=«
                                                                                                           .JOT.           ....,
                                                                                                                                   *,ismi
                                          v o u ry . w ho
                                          S stm jh /s g                            ale
                                                                                                              «. - - h " - c s g e S c l d ' T ow n
                                                                                             w w ujwwgm® as® a r c -jpaid    s r in t o a special                                   PA
                                                                                                                                                                                    m TnIE
                                                                                                                                                                                     Ce    NiH
                                                                                                                                                                                         era To
                                                                                                                                                                                              Ss'a tS
                                                                                                                                                                                                 pita hae
                                                                                                                                                                                                     lH veffie lde'sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                            rais                                                    • something
                                          taN* <'                                  to                            ® * « n ls                                                                                                 o rO n sn le g . ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     whohtaa
                                          tola)
                                                                                                                          Sha        H e sort code 0 M M 5
                                                                                                                                            number is                        M argaret Thompson, o f Bum s
                                                                                                                          SKiusXKJS. Mossy can also                        Rotherham, and NtU Harrison, ofC resw elf
                                                                                            _                    ________ be paid into it though any                       m ar W orksop, are driven fro m their beds
                                                                                         a tk a s ta £ lm .             oSb.er b a n k o r b u ild in g
                                                                                            M eanw hile, th e p h o n e w*®***




                                             Three Sheffield n m m s w ho plaa t© run is nest
                                                   ? £ ? * > ■ M trtth o n have already promised m
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ......
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          & b-diuh tsM sg p a n (Vom ail m t So-Qtis



                                                                                                                                                                                                         u,l®Ls ? P o f                          t ie H u e and » „ L ^ .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c itia h il

                                         on _
                                         they             -                                                                       » w eE H e c a a 1* c o n lic ttd on               751231.
                                         w ortiR ead»


                                         k83?
                                         2 S » W d C S S S f e S f f i r S t f t o = 5 * the 120
                                                                                                                —
                                                                                                                 Smith o f
                                                                                                                          «
                                                                                                                                                in B eaoao nt Road,
                                                                                                                                  £352 is half «**
                                                                                                                                                aa hour!
                                                                                                                                                                            i s a s i t j^ w ^ s a p a -
                                                                                                                                                                                                 v i u o Q sdse am
                                                                                                                                                                    rftaritv concert
                                                                                                                                    T he d o b now plans to hold a charity   contort on
                                                                                                                                                                                     on M a » 8s fern
                                                                                                                                                                                        M ay     fw ® May
                                                                                                                                                                                                       May 99 to 2n.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              to 2ft                     “ s te f f if tC m o f f ilto te




                                                                       Appeal tops £1 million mark
                                                                 THE W b b o n m & D m ^ f fm d has r a r r f                             Johssoa and the Christians are comWamg to pro­
                                                                 east £1 nsflikaa with srtenybody Cron Sheffield                          duce a charity venkm of Ferry Acrocs Use Mer­
                                                                 idbookhiM rai and pzm sam rs to pop ssapm tar                            sey. The record is in the shops next Thursday.
                                                                 Pawl M cCartney gearing op to help the victims*.                                                                                    A N Y O N E w ishing to m ake donations to
                                                                                                                                             And Gerry is also planning to get ex-B eatks
                                                                                                                                          George Harrison and Ringo Starr, comic Freddie             Sheffield's appeal shodd seodmcoey, dxq*x%
                                                                 families.                           ^ / & <£                                                                                        postal orders to: H ilbhorw ^h D saster Appeal
                                                                   Officials say they ossfiot keep pace wifh the                          S tarr, TV host Cilia Black and other Uverpool             c/o the Lord M avor, Sheffield Town Hall,
                                                                 volume o f money flowipg is hot already It is dear                       stars togethe rfo ra charity concert in early M ay.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Surrey Street, Sheffield.
                                                                 toed people have eoatribaited a t kas? £102,000.                        • In Sheffield, a concert will he held at the City
                                                                                                                                          Hall on April 27, replacing 8 planned rock con­              A special account has been set up at the Co­
                                                                   A t ShefHdd Town Hall, pensioners seem to be                                                                                      operative Bank In West Street. Sheffield. The
                                                                 giving the snost — one mars handed over £100 in                          cert at the Crucible Theatre. The Jine-cp will be
                                                                                                                                          confirmed later this week.                                 bank sort code is 08-90-75 and the account
                                                                 tenners today — while children are coming itt                                                                                       number fa 50000005.
                                                                 after school and handing over their dinner money.                           To avoid confuson, the Liverpool appeal has
                                                                                                                                          now been merged with Hillsborough’s. The                     S tar readers can use our York Street front
                                                                    Liverpool’s most famous pop stare are banding                                                                                    counter and branch offices in Duke Stre«t, Don­
                                                                 together for a musical tribute expccted to top the                       Nottingham appeal has been disbanded and its               caster, Corporation Street, Rotherham, and
                                                                 charts.                                                                  money transfered to Sheffield.
                                                                                                                                          O Appeal money rolls in, P3.                               Albert Street, Barnsley.
                                                                    F aai M cC artney, Gerry M arsden, Holly




                                                                TuSul%\Trm4 f m c S t
                                                                prom ised th a t fe n s w o o l d ; ^ j l c r i ei11’ c l a i r e
                                                                                                                                                 t               f
                                                                                                                                                          a nd N igel M o m s
                                                                                                                                                                                e          t , , »“««*<>.Dacha*
                                                                                                                                                                                        P o m i.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ■M M ** and tte O u ts and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              o f Mem were A * to
                                                                tuvetlwirniyintbebnis/^ '                                                                                                A irftlKbo i
                                                                                                                                                                                                    rto fSlK flfcM  ,! » « a arrW o rs a t R oyal
                                                                                                                                                                                        United were meellng to d>s- Hatlam shlre Hospital and
                                                                                                                                                                                        ™ > tile poKibility of r m m -    t te ( M m G a a n l Hospi­
                                                                o f Lepplngs                                a n y S o ttk Varik- " % m * r e m o M i! »                                 iOE p e rim ete r fea rin g a t   tal this afternoon.
                                                                 ' All A m and b a n a l com- »•»'« ° ® > » and O a t ft > a S . w i i h ln t a o to S '^                               B ra m a ll A a n e a s D erby
                                                                m eno from U tm o o l s n ^ too « r iy to jay whetbc, , 0,            «•“ » two days,                                   £ « “ ty — where ShefficM       - P resanre was «w oating
                                                                p o rte rs a t th e M m i.flnal o tn « r had bctn I» (n d s n t.          In q a e s ts                                 Wednesday play m Sanmtay       today to r if UBer pninKter
                                                                                                                                                                                        — iKgi# to dtaMMle their       fencing from S h e ffie W s
                                                                                                                                                                                        fencing.                       aoccer troonds, and other
                                                                                                                                                                                           The Archbishop of York d a b * lu te re * k x iw n a rtlo t* '
                                                                                                                                                   K5 S t S I                           ifaitKl <1* tragidy scene this



                                                                                                           .rr.rs's.m
                                                                   •                                       C h ie f £ S L b ° " ¥ e S                , » , « , » f n a * \k tlm


                                                                               " " " J a m n d •o o llw tm ce to tm m fa." . Sonth YortuMfe m t t w Dr
                                                              m ttw at tickets.                  •‘Sortk YotfcsMre, Um»- Stefan fopaer.                '
                                                                 W*M Midland. CWrfCoo- fore, Hke mo part in the                S a f tl y e x p e r t i tV ( m
                                                              • ta b le G e o ffre y D e a r,                 , . . ...   .               £ c ro i* S S
                                                                                                               : -              :
     ;     : ;           ; |                                                  ■




                         _




                                                           _   *
                                                               i w oa
                            to
                        never hap-           He had come to the inquiry
                                          with a completely open mind and             they are central to the issue and
    H e wanted to start the inquiry       it was far too soon to draw any             there are doubts as yet unre­
 as quickly as possible and hoped         conclusions whatsoever.        H is '       solved, Mr Wright, quite prop­
 to produce an interim report in          terms, of reference were very wide          erly, stood back from that and
 time for the next football season.       and he would make recommenda­               asked for another force to come
 This would enable clubs o r the au­      tions about the needs and crowd             i n . . . South Yorkshire will there­
 thorities to act on any recommen­        control at sports grounds. He               fore take no p art in the inquiry.
 dations he might make. It would          would, if necessary, make recom­            T he evidence I shall gather with
 be a big mistake to say what were        mendations into the proposals to            my team will go direct to the in­
 the most important issues in­            introduce identity cards at                 quiry the judge is holding.”          1
volved, and he would wait until           grounds.                                       He said that if there had been
evidence had been gathered.                  Evidence for the inquiry will            breaches of the law or of disci­
   Lord Justice Taylor said he           now be gathered by the West                 plinary regulations then the Di­
had been struck by the horror of         Midlands police team which has              rector of Public Prosecutions
the tragedy. His object was simply       been called in to Sheffield.                would have an interest and so
to “listen and look”, and it was far         Geoffrey Dear, the Chief Con­           would the Police Complaints Au­
too prem ature to say anything           stable of the West Midlands, said           thority. The inquiry was, he said,
about what recommendations he            he hoped that investigations                seeking the truth to cut away a
might make.                              would begin within the next cou­            “certain amount of mythology”
   “ I would respectfully say to all     ple of days. H e also said he               that was beginning to grow. “ It is
those who are disposed to com­           wished to clarify the role o f the          the truth that we are seeking and
m ent upon this terrible disaster        West Midlands force in the inves­           it is the truth that will come out of
that it would be better we wait to       tigation. There was, he said, only          the inquiry.”




                                                                                                                        '■Si-




             By John Spencer ' *

         -U R G E N T s te p s ra re '
         being taken to repair the                                       " "•Though Hillsborough wflf'i
         damage to S h e ffield ’s                                       - .£,c ,soceef games, it is •
           n e w -fo u n d s p o r tin g                                 . unlikely to see a crowd as' l
                     follow in g th e                                      large as Saturday’s,   ■ ; ■.(,
          Hillsborough disaster. ,                                            David Foggin, sales' and —
             With the World Student                                       marketing director o f the"
          Games just two years away,                                      C a in e s x o m .p a n y :
         civic leaders fear that sports                                  :Umversiade, jaid: "T h e '
         in the city will now be linked                                    D o n V a lie v A th le tic s
                                                 Coun Peter Price         stadium, the first to be built
         ,T t u-Ii?ledy’ Pa.rt,'cuIarIyas                                ;«n 70 years, will be all-*
         the Hillsborough stadium is         And Coun Peter Price,       .seating., .      * . '
         to be used for soccer touma- chairman o f the leisure com-
                                          mittee, has warned: “It will       “ It will have a 20,000:
        .“      cST 2                     take time jto exchange the      c a p a c ity w hich can be
           ‘ Much of the city’s regeh- old image for the new.”           extended to 40.000 at the
                  has been built upon                                    opening and closing ceremo­
                                           - C i<y recreation chiefs     nies, there will be no bar-
       the 1991 event but there is yesterday afternoon began a
       concern th a t the image se['? s              m eetings with      " e7 : ” s« open      parking
       created has been wrecked.          public relations companies     exit facilities.
   mS IN DRUNKEN
Sheffield City Libraries, Surrey Street, Sheffield S 1 1 X Z                                                                                      Telephone: 10742)
                                                                                                                                                             (0 7 4 2 ) 734750




                                                                                                                                                                               HfrilsV
                                                                                                                                                                                »*•**.liOvT.'T’
                                                                                                                                                                            issued      t* ^       '--j

    } EMERGENCY workers were attacked gy Mark Calvert,Dominic Cheetham,
        and even unnated OB^by drunken fare John Highfield and Jane Tadman
        daring'the mayhemofHillsborougb, it-.- *;---- — — —
    S - W n B V l a i n i « l t h i . ,. f t » r n < w .n
                                                                    .-----—-
                                                                              ' w « <>oo a t t t o lout -           to £60 a t i n t
                                                                                                                                                                          against
                          . • •T        >n i               .                ,      One Hillsborough galeman, who does not wish to be
           T h a t IS t h e s ic k e n in g s to r y p o lic e a r e p ie c in g identified, said: “ I was offered money to let people through
        t o g e t h e r a s th e y l o o k f o r w n a t w e n t w r o n g o n on Saturday. Bui I wouldn't lake it.
    i   S a t u r d a y , w h e n 95 p e o p le .lo s t th e i r liv e s a n d     “ I have heard that fans do go to grounds without tickets,
    5 m o r e t h a n 1 7 0 w e r e i n tu i e d o n t h c X e p p i n g s ?m ve al kick-off tim eand start a wg push to force police

     «Lane.tetnee,’Xu< . ?X t '
         ‘ T h e claims come am id atw ntcrnationai row afte.-     -tf*'1";-     ^ ‘A N IM A L S ’
         U EFA President Jacques G eorges com mented that         Horrific reports or the sickening behaviour or a rowdy
    S, -.some people from Liverpool were 'beasts.' •            minority of fans is cywgencyworkers balded to save and
          "There has been w k te p * « d condemnation, o f .his S ^ p r S S ^ ' S K ^ * “■* to« K l“ d
                                                                                                                                                                       By Bob W e s te rd a le ’
           But it is becoming d e a r th at as some f a n turned life-     ^                    policewoman and an Inspector who were
        saven. a group o f yobs in the crowd ignored fellow sup-                    ^               fan were urinatedon. Another Pc was
        p o rte n a n d turned on emergency workers. ‘                 attacked as he tried to give m outh to mouth resuadtaUon.                                    gasas
        MtThey attack ed an ambulancem an, threatened firemen, - p ^ *«,* p i ij n g coin, o ff the floor as victims lay
        and punched and urinated o n policemen u they gave the ocediosbdp.**
        kits o f life to strickenvictims.------------             '
                                                                                                         ...............
                                                                           A n o i L L i o f officer said: -Nobody dare say anything
                                                                                                                                                                    Brasses#
                           THE STAB g
                              . - ,. . , .
                                           8 8        E l
                                                    r _
                                                                         about the behaviour o f some supporters, 'but some o f my
                                                                     . officer* went through a double oell — a disaster, and the
        ■                whlch                                          f“ y o f drunken b u impeding rescue auem pis."
        a U n T i o S ^ ^ S T *                              * f>“ '°      0 « am butancenan »                attacked a , be tri« l to help an                   I . * * - ! * .* * * l e g a l    j
        get in to grounds witflout paying.                 ,__ , .       injured supporter, said the countyV chief amublance                                      I          •        “ hal f of
           It was alteged today by several people ,„vo|ved in the oiticer Don Psge. “ He had to be u k e n to hospital for
        disaster that some fw tb all Eras around the country delib- neatm ent.” -A nSilancem en also had to tend to injuries                                     I S S ^ T VI'
        erately arrive a t the last nauw le.''                          elsewhere in the ground— the results o f some lighting.
           They force a c n u h knowing th at gates m ay be opened to                 ........
        allow them into the ground without paying o r — in                                     ♦SMALL ELEMENT
        Saturday's case — w ithout tickets to a sell-out game.              Pe Paul M iddup, South Yorkshire representative o f the
           Football's black m arket m ay also have helped cause the Police Federation, said: ~! am sick o f nearinf
        crush.
                                                                                                                                mg how good                      te S S B
                                                                        the crowd were. Some arrived tanked up and the situation
           Hillsborough Supporters C lub secretary R ita Nettleship la  Taced
                                                                           c e a by
                                                                                 o y oofficers trying to control.them was quite simply
        said Tans m ay have been encouraged to travel to the all* terrifying.
        ticket game without tickets knowing they could buy their           “ Poepte were diving under the bellies o f the horses and
                                                                        between their legs and the only people who d o that are
                                                                        either mental or nave been drinking heavily.**                                           ■ssfsw&if
                                                                           He said: “ 1beard all these terrible accounts o fth e behav­
                                                                        iour o r a number o r Tans, but it must be stressed that it was
                                                                                                                                                                         Crusade               I
                                                                        a small element who behaved so terribly.**
                                                                           Reports from throughout the city today spell out a story
                                                                        o f a good-natured drinks spell before the game causing                                             1
                                                                        concern for local people.                                                               lkd!SFX&1* •
                                                                                                                                                                /ft,      Ihe p o lic e .™
                                                                           Residents in Wadsley Lane told how their normally                                    JjaW f m orailv. tfcoBih
                                                                        peaceful street was turned into a seething tide o f Liverpool                           •hey n a y w e ll? ,” "? *
                                                                        supporters — many drunk and boisterous.                                               ■ caeape t tc ir | / . t ,
                                                                           Pensioner M aijorie Baker described how some Liver*                                InspongMy, ..;« « «
                                                                        pool fans started to arrive in the area as early as 10 am.
                                                                        m any with alcohol.
                                                                           “ It was tike a gentlemen's toilet by the side o f our
                                                                        house.” she said.
                                                                                                                                                              gti&vz:r:
                                                                           But a barmaid at the Horse and Jockey said most o f the                        l*E33bSi£
                                                                        fans were well-behaved and polite, and caused no trouble.
                                                                               A neighbour commented: “The problem was that the
                                                                            majority didn't start goiog down to the ground until 2.30.                    i     “T b ed u b failed totak e I
                                                                            and there wasn't enough time. My thought was that if three
                                                                            o f four other pubs round h e n had got a similar situation
                                                                                                                                                                             « e f*    t.f
                                                                            on their hands then things could have been serious.**
                                                                               A Middlewood Road couple said they saw fans arriving
                                                                            at the ground as late as five minutes before kick-oft
                                                                               The part played by alcohol in the disaster will be a major
                                                                            factor in the judicial inquiry which got under way today.
                                                                            T he m an in charge. Lord Justice IPeter Tayfor said he

                                                                               At the Owl in Neepsend Lane, up to 500 supporters were
         P rompa^ T W T                                                     being servied alcohol until after 2.30pm, and a mobile
             would consider whether alcohol played any role in events police control room stationed directly outside, the pub
             leading up to the tragedy.                    $ / f ' f        allegedly took no action even as fans bought crate-loads o f
                The inquiry will also examine a police order bringing beer.           ■
             thousands o f Liverpool fans into Sheffield by noon, leav­        Trade at the Thresher off-licence in Middlewood Road,
             ing them three hours before the game.                          Hillsborough was heavy the morning o f the match. The
                The Star has now established that hundreds o f sup­ store was closed down by police at 2pm.
             porters were still packing pubs as far away as Stocksbridge       SHYC u r, landlady o f Coach and Horses, Manchester
             oy 2.15pm.                                                     Road, Stocksbridge. said: “ Beforehand the atmospshere
                Then they made a last-minute dash to the match, swell­ was great. We had about 25 Liverpool fans in and there
             ing the seething 4,000-strong throng outside the Leppings was no trouble. They left around 2pm.
             Lane end. That was when tne crush o f spectators threat­          Tony Bows, o f Leppings Lane, said: “There was a huge
             ened to bring down a' brick wall on other fans, and led
                                                                            crowd, about 5,000 people. It was far too many. There
             police to open a gate allowing people to stream into the
                                                                            were empty cans o f beer everywhere."
             ground.
                A staggering.96 barrels o f lager.and a similar quantity ol    •       Violence did not end with the disaster. One Liverpool
             bitter were downed at the Fox Inn in Fox Hill. But land­ Tan was pinned to the ground and savagely kicked in the
             lord Peter Buck said there was no trouble.                     face  by-a  rival gang . . . minutes after the fans left
                                               ‘Heavy drinking’
                   I>T
           Continued from PI
                            d-
    drunkenness, M r A lan Dean,
                                               among fans who
    deputy leader of Liverpool city
    council, said: “ I t ’s disgraceful
    that allegations like this should
    be made while people are still in
    th e ir h o u r of g rie f. P eo p le
                                                besieged ground
    m aking as yet unsubstantiated                                                                                 i)'f <’ - V
    allegations should wait until the
    c o m p le t io n of th e p u b lic
    inquiry.”
       M r Bob G ill, s e c r e ta ry of
                                              Police tell MP of attacks on
    L iv erp o o l S u p p o rte rs C lub,
   said: “ Everybody is trying to
   cover up for the deaths of 95
                                              them as they helped injured
   people. They are looking for                     . V.                  By Jenny Shields
   scapegoats but they ’ve picked
   on the wrong people this time.             M ANY of th e 3,000 Liverpool fans w hose p resen ce o utside H ills­
       “Somebody has got to take              borough football ground on S aturday caused a police su p erin te n d en t
   the blame for the deaths of
  .these people and it’s not going            to order th e fateful opening of gates had been drinking heavily in
   to be Liverpool supporters."               public houses u ntil m inutes earlier, according to a Police F ed eratio n
       He said the supporters club            offical yesterday.
   operated a no-drink rule on its              “ T here w as m a ss d run ken ness am ong m any of th e 3,000 su p p o rters
   coaches, with a representative             who turned u p at the tu rn stiles ju st before kick-off,” said M r Paul
   on each vehicle ensuring that it           M iddup, ch airm an of th e South Y orkshire Police F ed eratio n . “ Some
   was adhered to.                            of them w ere uncontrollable. A great n u m b e r of th e m had obviously
       L a st S a tu rd a y , he ad d e d ,                               b een drinking heavily.”
   c o a c h e s w e re s to p p e d fo u r                                 One public house near the ground was drunk
   miles outside Sheffield to be                                          dry. And in scenes that followed the crush inside
   searched for drink. “ Police offi­                                     the ground which killed 95 people, ambulancemen
   cers would have been better                                            as well as police were attacked by Liverpool
   em p lo y ed on cro w d co n tro l                                     supporters, it was claimed.
   around the ground.’’                                                      M r Don Page, South Yorkshire’s chief ambu­
      A Liverpool MP said constitu­                                        lance officer, said one of his men needed hospital
   e n ts had te le p h o n ed him in                                      treatm ent after being attacked as he treated an
   tears to complain about allega­                                         injured fan.
                                                                             O th e r a m b u la n c e m e n b a d
   tions th a t the club’s supporters                                                                                     A sh e s to b e s c a tte re d a t
                                                                         to t e n d to in ju r ie s in o th e r
                                                                                                                                       A n fie ld -P 3 ;
  had stolen from victims.                                               p a r t s o f t h e g ro u n d c a u s e d b y
                                                                                                                                F u tu re o f C u p — P40;
                                                                         s u p p o r te r s fig h tin g , h e s a id .
      M r Terry Fields, Labour MP                                          ' T h e .n u m b e r , k ille d in th e
                                                                                                                            E d i t o r i a l C o m m e n t — PX 8
   for Broadgreen, said: “ These                                         d is a s te r a t inth e rA
                                                                                                   FA v.up
                                                                                                         C up semsemi* i                      (
                                                                         fin a l b e tw e e n L iv e rp o o b ^ n d seeme<j to have b a d tic k e ts for
   claims are scandalous. I can                                          N o ttingham F o rest ro se to 95 th e stand,
   only link them to being p art and                                     y e ste rd a y w ith the d e a th in bos*           A s he s u rv e y e d h is b o ttle
                                                                         p ita l o f 14*year*old L ee NichoU sh e d w h ere he k e e p s s to c k — all
   parcel of a police cover-up. I                                        o f S m o llett S tre e t, B ootle.              th a t w as left w as a c ra te of b itte r
  have no faith in official inquiries                                        L ord J u s tic e T aylor, w ho has lem o n — M r O llerensbaw said:
  and it's obvious th at the propa­                                      b e e n ap p o in ted by th e Govern* " T h e y d ran k m e dry.**
                                                                         m e n t to ccoo n da u c it a n in q u iry ,.       A mobUe police      Hce ccoo nn tro
                                                                                                                                                             tro lj room
  ganda w ar has started .”                                              a rriv! e dI S_    CL.OS.IJ y esterd ay b aAd mb obile
                                                                                       in Sheffield                                  e e n p o sitio n e d d ire c tly
      R eactin g to th e c la im s of                                    a n d s a id t h a t , am o n g o th e r o p posite th e p u b b u t th e police
                                                                          asp e c ts, he w ould be investigate h a d n ft| tr ie d t 0 m o ve fan s
  heavy drinking, he said: “ I do                                         ing w h e th e r drink an d th e la te to w a rd s th e sta d iu m . he added,
  not know how these people can                                           a rriv a l of fa n s had played any *«jb e y only get involved if th ere
  crawl out from under stones to                                          p a rt in events.                              is a n y tro u b le a n d , a p a rt from a
                                                                             M r Irv in e P atnick . Conserva* few bro k en glasses, it w as very
  make these allegations.”                                                tiv e M P for Sheffield H allam , peaceful in here-'*
      M rs P a t M arshall, wife of                                       w h o s p o k e to a n u m b e r o f               A                  at T h e G ate. 500
                                                                          p o licem en said: T h e y to ld m e                      from th e U p p in g s Lane
  S u p t R o g e r M a r s h a ll, w ho                                  th e y w pre ham pered, n a rra ssed . e n tta n c e to th e ground , sa id the
  ordered the gates to be opened                                          pu n ch ed , k ick ed an d u n n a te d              b b ad been fu l| 0f Liverpool
  because he feared an outside                                            o n b y L iverpool fans.                       s u p p o rte rs un til a fte r 2.30.
                                                                              “ I have k e p t q u iet abou t th is           ..T h         w e re c e r ta in ! y a ll
 w all w as w ith in se c o n d s of                                      b e c a u s e 1 d id n o t w a n t to g u y i n g th em se lv e s a n d m ost
 collapse and that many lives                                             inflam e a d e lic a te situ atio n . B ut ^ QOt se em to be in an y h urry
                                                                          it is a fact th a t th e s e a r e t h e t                t t 0 tb e ga m e . h u t they
 would be lost, said yesterday:                                           s to n e s th ey to ld m e, an d they w c r e a n w ell b e h a v e d /’
  “ He had no other choice. ’’                                            h a d no reason to he.                              M r B a n y Hoy, sp o k esm an for
                                                                                I saw th e bruising on th e ir th e Bus an d Coach C ouncil, con*                          :
     Despite her distress over the                                         b o d ies an d th e s ta te they^w ere f j rm e<j t h a t f ir m s c a r r y in g               :
 torm ent of h er husband, Mrs                                            in an d th e re is no d o ubt in m y s u p porte rs to th e groun d had                          i
 Marshall said: “ My h eart goes                                           m ind th a t it is tru e .                      b e e n to ld by S outh Y orkshire
                                                                              “ A il th is h appened to th em p olice to get th em to de sig n a ted                       :
 out to the bereaved and to those                                         a n d y e t th ey e a rn e d on doing w n ^ s in Sheffield betw een
 who have died.”                                                           th e ir jo b , trying to save liv es. n o o n a n d 12.30
                                                                           a n d n o w th e y a r e b e in g ■                              som e coachesarrived
     With h er 46-year-old husband                                         b lam ed .                                      jn th e city a t 11.30, 90 m inutes
 sitting by h er side a t the ir home                                         T b e m an a g e r of a p u b sev en before th e ground op en ed and
 in Stocksbridge, n ear Sheffield,                                         m in u te s’ w alk from th e ground 3 ^ ho u rs before kick*off tim e,
                                                                           sa id y e ste rd a y th at L iverpool               M r Hoy said: " T h e p olice told
she stoutly defended him , say­                                            fa n s, som e of whom h a d b e e n ^ a c h d riv e rs th a t th e y w ere                      '
ing: “ We have nothing to hide                                             w aitin g fo r him to open sin c e AXp ^ j n g th e ro u te from Liver*
but my husband is obliged to say                                           1 0 am , had d ru n k tw o m o n th s                    to be very heavily con*
                                                                           sto c k in u n d e r four h o a rs .            g e ste d . In th e ev en t th e re w ere
nothing about his decision until                                              M r K eith O llerenshaw . man* no hold*ups a t a ll. th e w e a th e r
the inquiry.                                                               a g e r o f T h e Owl in N eep send w as e xcellen t an d som e o f the
     “ T here is a great deal of pres­                                     L ane, s a id :’’S u p p o rters s ta rte d c o a c h e s g o t to S h e f fie ld at
                                                                           d rin k in g a t 11 w hen 1 opened 11.30.”
sure but we are not the only                                               a n d m ost o f them did n ’t leave                T h e C ontrol o f S p o rts E vents
ones involved in this. Of course                                           u n til 2.50pm .”                               A ct se ts dow n s tric t ru le s for
we are d istre sse d and u p set                                               M r OH erenshaw said th a t th e o p e ra to rs tak in g s u p p o rte rs to
                                                                          supporters had consum ed 70 fam res, includmg hanning alco-
about the innocent people who                                             b a rre ls of b eer — ab ou t 700 hoi on board and forbidding
lost the ir lives.”                                                       p in ts— as well as 69 crates of coaches to sto p a t licensed
                                                                          la g e r a n d b itte r, w h ic h th e y prem ises,
                                                                          c a rrie d ou tsid e to d rin k in th e    M r Hoy sa id th a t although
                                                                          su n sh in e                             m an y of th e o p e ra to rs thought
                                                                             ••T h ev w e re a ll v e ry good *be P °,ice ret»u? s t " e rre d on the
                                                                           h ^ b u ^ o s T o f tb em had°drunk 5 ^ n e ° t h o u g h f it u n ^ » u b l e
                                                                           blei . (                  t h e v ^ e n b e c a u se th e sa m e ru lin g had


                                                                                               .      .... • .               R esponding to th e claim s of
                                                                              M r O llerenshaw said th a t the-
                                                                           s u p p o rte rs, m en and w om en, all              C o n tin u e d o n B a c k P ag e
FOOTBALL GROUNDS OP ENGLAND AND WALES




    « M ic k d a g g e r - S t J a m e s ’ P a r k h                          all.     cannot prevent a stand like this ©verpowmsjh
                                                                                       tfW  n<T
                                                                                          h in  g in tjtrht. ''"f             le a s t c a r e v...     *.  .-
                                                                                                                                                I « oeen-fcaj                                                                                           ♦
G ro u n d D e s c rip tio n                                      .
S t J a m e s ’ P a r k s it s o n a r is e above t h e c ity , p e r h a p s
                                                                                       p r e s e rv e s a m e o: th e s tr e e t le v el's q u a litie s.
                                                                                            T h e E a s t s t a n d i t s e l f is a te l l , e x posed '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8*
n o t a s s p le n d id a s t h e P a r th e n o n , b a t m N e w c a s tle a t       w ith o u t s c r e e n w a lls a n d th e re to :
le a s t a s r e v e r e d . ] t is e v e n v is i b le f ro m t h e opp o site        s il h o u e tt e o f a n g le d c o n c r e te s ta n d in g g u £
b a n k o f tlie T y n e , f ro m G a t e s h e a d , w h e r e L e a g u e            t h e sk y . N o w h e r e e lse is t h e w o n d e r o f e a '
f o o tb a ll i s n o w o n ly a m e m o ry .                                          t e c h n o lo g y m o r e s t u n n i n g th a n h e re . T h e r a r f i ^
     F r o m t h e c ity c e n tr e w e d i m b u p to S t r a w b e r r y             r i g h t to d e fy g r a v i t y a n d s t a y u p , b u t U 4 n £ l
P la c e , w h e r e a n e w M e tr o s t a tio n is b u ilt , a n d S t                c o m posed o f c o r r u g a t e d a lu m in iu m b a r r e l -Tigi
J a m e s ’ P a r k s u d d e n ly t a k e s o n a g a r g a n t u a n scale;          t i e d a l o n g tli e f r o n t to s e e m fla t. A s o n t h e W a r t Sti
t h e W e s t S t a n d fac ad e lik e t h e s id e o f a b a ttle s h ip .             t h e r e a r e flo o d lig h t g a n t r i e s a lo n g th e ro c rf-'H w rtl
A lo n g i t s d a r k g r e v c o r r u g a t e d w a l ls w r i t t e n 50 f e e t    p r.d d o ck in f ro n t , no w c o v ered w ith s im p lth g ji
h ig h is, ‘N E W C A S T L E U N IT E D ’, fillin g t h e sp a ce                      s e ats . T h e p e o p le 's d e s ir e to s ta n d h a s g iv e n
f ro m e n d to e n d - a m a s te r l y s tr o k e a n d th e id e a o f               t h e c lu b ’s d e s ir e f o r p e ac e.                           '
H a m - F a u l k n e r B ro w n , a r c h i t e c t of t h e E a s t S t a n d .           T o t h e r i g h t f ro m t h e W e s t S t a n d is th e G a i t . _                                                                                                      T h e m o s t b iz a r r e m a tc h a t O liv e G ro v e w a s in I h e
A n d to a d d to t h e s ta n d ’s b a ttle s h ip c h a r a c te r , tn e r e
 a r e ste e l s ta ir w a v s u p a n d d o w n. T o c o n tin u e th e
                                                                                        E n d , n a m e d a f te r t h e m a in th o ro u g h fa re behux},'
                                                                                         le a d i n g t o t h e c ity c e n tr e . A s th e n a m e su g g e sts.its*
                                                                                                                                                                                             'SiifflEli*                                                            1 8 9 s - 8 9 se a s o n . W e d n e sd a j-’s N o v e m b e r h o m e g a m e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    v. A sto n V illa h a d b e e n a b a n d o n e d a f t e r 7 9 m in u t e s
m e ta p h o r w e c lim b a b o a r d a n d f ro m in sid e , th e sta n d              a d o u r te n -a c e in d e ed - b o rd e re d by t h ic k » n e re i# :                                                                                                 b ecause, o f h u d lig h t , w ith t h e sc o re a t 5-1. T h e i n ­
 is n o lo n g e r a w a r s h ip , b u t a p a d d le - s te a m e r . T h e            w a lls lik e a h u g e o p e n b u n k e r , o v e rlo o k in g th e to w n J
                                                                                         P r o m t h e to p . th e c ity I n ......................
                                                                                                                                                                                             wiiiisiif                                                             f a m o u s r e m a i n i n g 31 m i n u t e s w e r e p la y e d a t O liv e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G ro v e in M a rc h , W e d n e s d a y a a d in g o n e m o r e gnal.
c u rv e d g a b le , w ith p r e s s box w in d o w ? in t h e c e n tr e ,
 m a k e s a n e le g a n t sw ee p a lo n g t h e g r e y d e ck s, u n ­               u u w n t h e v a lle y in to th e T y n e . D irec tly b e h in d t l » v r                                                                                              T h e g ro u n d t h e r e b y s ta g e d t h e s h o r te s t e n c o u n te r in
 r i v a l l e d sin c e L iv e rp o o l d e m o lish e d a s im ila r sh a p ed         te r r a c in g is a n e a tl y la id o u t slo p e covered m sh n a J* ;-!                                                                                               L e a g u e h is to ry .
                                                                                         a n d tre e s .                                                                      S fo g v io u s G r o u n d s                                                            T h e e n d o f t h a t s e a so n sa w W e d n e s d a y r e le g a t e d
 s ta n d , a l th o u g h M id d le s b r o u g h h a v e s o m e th in g
                                                                                             A t t h e to p o f t h e G a 'io w g a te E n d is a n e w a n d f<              Mt=5>-.uf:'-, '-Vednesday a r e t h e fifth o ld e s t d u b in th e                 a n d a lso t h e l a s t m a tc h a t O liv e Grove." w h ic h h a d
 s i m i l a r o n a le s s e r sc ale . B u t s u r e l y t h e r e a r e n o
                                                                                         d o m in a n t e le c tr ic s c o re b o a r d D irectly N-hm d a a                  S i p a e , L av in g fo rm ed i n 1 8 8 7 , a W e d n e s d a y c ric k e t         b e e n b o u g h t For d e v e lo p m e n t b y t h e M id la n d R a il­
 s ta n d s so d a r k , so g rey , so b r o o d in g a s t h e W est
                                                                                         W eiib n rfrb H o u se , h o m e o f th e N ew c astle Wrath**                    IgjNb b a a e x iste d s in c e 1816. I t w a s so-called' be c a u se                  w a y C o m p a n y , o w n e r s of t h e a d jo in in g lin e . T h e
 S ta n d . A n d n o w t h e r e is a n o m in o u s lin e of flo o d lig h t
                                                                                         C e n tr e . T h e b u ild i n g to t h e n g h t of th is block is i h t        " ^ f c ^ m e ra b e r s p la y e d o n t h e i r h a lf~ d a \ h o Jid e y .            g r o u n d w a s th e n i n n s o r ry s ta te , o n ly 400C a tte n d e d ,
 g a n t r i e s f la n k i n g t h e g a b le . s t a n d i n g on th e c a r r e l                                                                                         ”AV. i— ■           1       f Hh i. 1              -i     t     ' i r v i
 ro o f lik e c row s on a te le g r a p h w ire. O n to p o f th e                      h e a d q u a r t e r s o f N e w c a s tle B re w e rie s a te m p le to ®
                                                                                         m a n y - b u t a lso a so u rce o f so m e fa ir ly acrid oibysn.                  S n e s on a h e ld no w o c cu p ie d b y H ig h f ie ld s L ib r a r y ,                O livi; G ro v e h a d b e e n , in I lic h a r d S p a r lin g ’s w o rd s,
 gah^e is a flag-pole. a m a s t u p o n a g r e a t p a d d le-
                                                                                         T b e g r o u n d ’s o th e r flo o d lig h t p y lo n sta n d s o r n*                       tn e y m o v e d to M y r tie R o ad , Hee.;ey, a n d w en t                ’a m o s t co m fo rt a b le lit tle g r o u n d . It w a s a p la c e to
     A t a l l p y lo n to w e r s o v e r f ro m b e h in d , c a r r y i n g y e t
                                                                                                                  i t h e W est Sid e o f th e G allo w g aw End.                             -- - - ...... ^ H u n t e r 's B a r a n d E n d cliffe              f o s te r f r i e n d s h ip s a n d i t a p p e a re d to e n c o u r a g e t h a t
                                                                                         so le i                    th e                               n 195?                g ih l 1887. w h et: th e y m o v e d to t l i e i r f i r s t s u b s ta n tia l     m e im g in t h e s p e c ta to r s “T h e W e d n e s d a y a r e p e r! o f
m o re flo o d lig h ts, b a t o n e w o n d e r ? w h a t i t ill u m in a te s                                                                             o solve                             e Grc           Evc-i
                                                                                             N e w c a s tlee havs
                                                                                                                h a v e c o n so iem                                                                                                           m port
t h a t t h e o th e r l ig h t s c a n n o t r e a c h . T h e p y lo n s ta n d s
in a la r g e f o re c o u r t, w h e r e t h e offices a r e s i t u a t e d in a     p r o b le m o f h o o lig a n isr ;                 w5 park- « »                                                 if B r a m a h L a n e u n t i l lS 9 o .                    I t w a - s u g g e s te d t h a t W e d n e s d a y s h a r e B r a m n ll
                                                                                       h o p ed t h a t s h r u b g a r d e n s m ig h t <<X'tr.z ms.ny aa                                                s it u a te d o ff Q u e e n 's E n au                   L a n e w ith U n ite d a n d u s e S h e a f I-iou.se for r e s e rv e
d e ta c h e d b lock, lik e th e c u s to m s office on a q u a v sid e
                                                                                       a n g e r e d b r o w a n d p r o m o te so m e p tid e m m e !>!«*■'                    w «She;T ie]d a n d H ee le y r a il w a y s ta tio n s , a n d                   g a m e s , b u t. ta lk s b r o k e do w n - a p ity in l ig h t u f r e c e n t
     Ii; f r o n t o f t h e s ta n d , a n o th e r d a r k g re y w a l l d iv ­
                                                                                       a n d h a v e g o n e s o m e w a y to sa tis f y in g u » o « m w * « *                           ■ane w a s o w n ed b y th e D u k e o f N o r                          d e v e lo p m e n ts, w h ic h s u g g e s t t h a t h a d or.o c ity d e ­
ide s t h e s e a t s from t h e o p e n pad d o ck . N o f rills, n o
                                                                                       lo cal c o n s e r v a t io n is t., b u t i h c y h a r e not b w m a U M *                       y s e c u r e d a s e v e n - w a r l e a s e b u t h*                  cided o n g ro u n d s h a r i n g o th e r s m i g h t h a v e fo llo w ed ,
e x e c u tiv e boxe s; c o n c re te c r u s h b a r r i e r s l i k e ta n k -                                                                                               jm l io ra e £ 5 0 0 0 to p r e n a r e 't h e h e ld , a c ro ss w
                                                                                       so lv e t h a t slope w h e r e u p o n lie s th e 'e a ta g e a nd few-                                                                                                   b u t a b le s s in g fo r th e t h o u s a n d s w ho, lik e m y se lf,
tr a n s ,                                                                                                                                                                    f a brook. O liv e G rove w a s p r o u d lv o p e n e d o
     f r o m h e r e , t o the- le ft is t h e now o p e n L e a s e s P a r k         b a g c . E v e n w h e n t h e E a s t S t a n d w as                                                                                                                     c o n s id e r a v is i t to H ills b o ro u g h a s o n e o f th e io v t o f
                                                                                       h a d to slo p e w ith t h e la n d , o th e rw is e ell '                                        ' 1s a ? w ith a 4-4 d r a w v, m irrh ty B l a c k b u r                - p o rt.
E n d . a n o t h e r c o n c r e te m a s s o f b a r r ie r s . N e w c a s tle
                                                                                       lin e s o f t h e W est S t a n d w o u l d a a v e ace"- d'->- P * *                             rep o rt o f t b e o c ca sio n w a x e d ly r ic a lly :                    T h e s u p p o r te r s w e r e a s k e d to v o te o n t h e i r p r e f e r ­
w a s tlu : f ir s t c lu b tc s tu d y s e g r e g a t io n o f r iv a l fa n s,
                                                                                       A s t h e s ta n d s ’ f a c in g s sh o w , t r . t a rc p i?               .                                                                                            r e d n e w -site: 4 7 6 7 d p to d f o r o n e a t C a r b r o o k , 4 l 2 5 f o r
a f te r t h e 1 9 7 4 in c id e n ts , so th e y kn o w a l l a b o u t
                                                                                       f ro m n o r th to s o u th . B u t t h a t is p e t r a p ^ - V                                     e n t e r i n g th e g r o u n d w e w e r e s tr u c k              a n o t h e r av O w le r to n . 124 w e r e n e u t r a l in t h e m a tte r ,
fenc es a n d b a r r i e r s h e re . T h e y u s e n o t a t a l l s e c u r ity                                                                                        “^ « t h th e b e a u ty an d ju d ic io u s d isp o sa l o f th e
                                                                                       th e p r o b le m s fa c in g U n ite d . T n e r e a rc fo aa o - * ^                                                                                                    a n d o n ly 1 8 fa n c ie d a r e t u r n to S h e a f H o u se . M e a n ­
fen c e a t th e p e r im e te r w a l l, h u t a c o u p le o f low w a lls                                                                                                K e a c l o s t i r e , a n im p r e s s io n w h ic h w Ss con-
                                                                                       h e b u i l t o n , s ta n d s to b e c om pleter,. Tne m u ..u «                                                                                                         w h ile s o m e o n e e ls e b o u g h t th e G a r b r o o k la n d , a n d
d iv id e d b y a s h a llo w m o a t - a s y s te m b o rro w e d b y
                                                                                       t h e h ill is f a r f ro m fin ish e d .                                            § t « d e M b ; y ^ Ug „ !onleci b y t h e a u d ib le g r a ti-                     th e O w le r to n s i t e p ro v e d to b e i m p r a c tic a b le , s o w ith
C r y s ta l P a la c e a n d o n e w h ic h in h ib i ts n o -o n e ’s v iew                                                                                               & f e a tio n ot th o s e a s se m b le d . T h e d im e n s io n s
of t h e p itc h . B e h in d t h e te r r a c e yo u c a n se e th e b la c k ,                                                                                                                                                                                 o n ly a f ew w e e k s b e fo re t h e n e x t se a s o n , a n o t h e r site
                                                                                                                                                                            j M a m e ^ i t h i n th e m in i m u m m l e s o f t h e E n g -                    w a s f o u n d a t O w le r to n . P e r h a p s o n ly A r s e n a l’s c ro ss­
t a l l w a ll w h ic h o nce fo rm e d t h e r e a r o f th e o r ig in a l                                                                                                § ' f sh * * e d « k * viz. 1 1 0 y a n k x 7 0 , a n d
t e r r a c e . I t is p l a in to see h o w t h e E a s t S t a n d w ill                                                                                                                                                                                       in g o f t h e T h a m e s 14 y e a r s l a t e r w a s to h e s u c h a
                                                                                                                                                                            g ,,« t n a t i v e ir o n r a il in g h a s c e r t a i n l y th e                  d a r i n g a n d s p e c u la tiv e m ove.
e v e n tu a lly c u r l r o u n d t h e c o rn e r a n d fill t h i s sp ace.                                                                                              I * a p p e,:r„ nee o f k e e p in g t h e m o s t e x c ite d or,
     B e tw ee n , h e r e a n d t h e E a s t S t a n d t h e row o f h o u se s
                                                                                                                                                                                                 u n r u b ' a u d ie n c e from e n c r o a c h in g             H ills b o ro u g h
ca lle d L e a s e s T e r r a c e is v isib le . T h e E a s t S t a n d h a s
                                                                                                                                                                            » . " * * ■ « » » 8 r » m . T h e r e i . a lso . sta n d
h a d to f it in a s m u c h a s p o ssib le w ith i t s ne ig h b o u rs .                                                                                                                                                                                       O w le r io n in 1 8 9 9 w a s n o t e v e n in S h e f f i c l d . h u t i n t h o
                                                                                                                                                                            f e J ^ 5                       side to a c c o m m o d a te 1.0 00                  u n s p o il t h ill s o n t h e o th e r sid e o f t b e c ity to O liv e
A c c o rd in g ly , t h e e x te r n a l fa c in g s h a v e b e e n t exx u red
                                                                                                                                                                                                 * " » « o n t o p a th , s i , f e e t « *                      G ro v e T h e 10 a c r e s W e d n e s d a y h a d b o u g h t w e r e
a n d c o lo u re d to h a r m o n i z e w ith t h e a g o in g sto n e o f                                                                                                 g en.trcim g- to e r a il in '- , w h ic h wH] -De n o r £-
th e t e r r a c e . S t J a m e s ’ T e r r a c e , a ls o b e h in d t h e E a s t                                                                                                                                                                             m e a d o w la n d in n e e d o f atJeast,£5{S00 w o r t h o f n r e p s -
                                                                                                                                                                            ! J . m i 9rta b I e th a n tin - < * £ v w i a l t v
S t a n d , h a s h a d to c h a n g e a s w ell. O ld h o u s e s h a v e                                                                                                  6 * " » P w e a th e r’                    '        -P ^ u am m                      r a ti o n . "With o n ly £ 2 0 0 0 in t h e b a n k t h e c l u r d e cid e d
com e d o w n a n d a p e d e s tr ia n c o u rty a r d c r e a te d . You                                                                                                                                                                                       to f o rm it s e l f in to a lim ite d l ia b ili ty c o m p a n y .
      FOOTBALL SROUNDS OF EN3LAND AND WALES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE AND HUMBERSIDE



                                                                                                                                                                                SlSBOGO a n d w a s th e t h ir d c a n ti le v e r s ta n d ir« B ri-
                                                                                                                                                                                   f t a f te r S c u n th o r p e a n d D u n d e e U n ite d , h u t th e
                                                                                                                                                                                   s t o n e t o r u n t h e f a ll l e n g th o f a p itc h . T h e ro o f is
                                                                                                                                                                                               u a r e fe e t, w e ig h s 1 ? to n s a n d w a s m a d e
                                                                                                                                                                                               v d ie a - c h ite c t's (.H u s b an d a n d C o m p a n y o f
                                                                                                                                                                                      ffieldVuse o f a lu m i n i u m s h e e ts h u n g u n d e r a ste e l -
                                                                                                                                                                                           s u p p o r te d a t th e b a c k b y t h r e e m ile s o f p re-
                                                                                                                                                                                              p r e c a s t c o n c re te u n its . T h e a l u m in iu m ■
                                                                                                                                                                              gfeenirse l ig h t e r t h a n t h e c o m m o n ly u se d a s h e s
                                                                                                                                                                              I S t u g a f e d iro n s h e e tin g . A ll 9 8 8 2                              w ell
                                                                                                                                                                                          -ed fro; i t h e w
                                                                                                                                                                                 sf h e N o rth S t a n d a it:               ' m o r e a r c h i t e c t u r a l in-
                                                                                                                                                                                          th a n a n y o th e r footba 11 s t a n d sin c e W em b icy
                                                                                                                                                                             | S | I ever, m e r i ts in c lu sio n
                                                                                                                                                                             ifferk on t h e B u ild i n g s o f E n g la n d . N o O ther L e a g u e
                                                                                                                                                                                       - : -------.tior.ed.                                                             Present-day Hillsborough (Aerofiirns)
                                                                                                                                                                             ^ ________ - a to t h e in e v ita b le c o n se q u e n c e o f th e
                                                                                                                                                                            jffarth S ta n d 's c o n s tr u c tio n , th e d e c is io n to s ta g e fo u r                T o tlie r i g h t i s t h e h u g e S p io n K o p , h o ld in g 16t>50
                                                                                                                                                                             S p b r ld C u p g a m e s a t H ill? b o r o u g h m 196 S. F o r th e                    in a w h o lly i r r e g u l a r s h a p e t h a t d e fie s a n y o n e to
                                                                                                                                                                                  a s io n , t h e n e w W e s t S t a n d w a s b u i l t in 1 9 6 5 a t a            c o v er it. It is o n e o f H ills b o ro u g h 's s tr o n g e s t v is u a l
                                                                                                                                                                                  it o f £ 1 1 0 0 0 0 , a n d e x tr a s e a ti n g p u t in t h e S o u th           s t r e n g th s , t h e j u x ta p o s it io n o f th r e e , n e a t o r d e r ly
                                                                                                                                                                                   ends p ad d o ck , lo w e rin g t h e g r o u n d r a p a c it y to                 s ta n d s w ith t h i s w ild h ill,
                                                                                                                                                                            ygSfOOO. b u t g iv in g H ills b o ro u g h m o r e s e a ts t h a n a n y                     T c t h e l e f t is t h e W e s t S t a n d , w ith 4 4 6 5 s e a t s in an.
                                                                                                                                                                            j jt iM r g ro u n d a t t h e tim e. A n e w t a v e r n w a s a lso b u ilt
                                                                                                                                                                            r t o l u d th e S o u th S ta n d , o n s ti lts , a n d a l a rg e s n o r ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       u p p e r tie r , a n d o p e n te r r a c e s    isi    Front. N e x t to th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       o th e r tw o s ta n d s i t lo o k s r a t h e r o r d in a r y , h u f th e
                                                                                                                                                                            ’ Kail ere cte d b e h in d th e N o r t h S t a n d , fo r u s e d u r in g               v ie w it p r o v id e s is e x c e lle n t, a s a r e i ts fa c ilitie s , a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                    W orld C u e a s a p r e s s c e n tr e . T h r e e G rc u p Tw o                  i t d o es clo se o ff th e g r o u n d e ffe c tiv e ly w i t h o u t c ru m p ­
                                                                                                                                                                            ’ HMJcIies w e r e p la y e d h e re , p h i* a q u a r te r - f in a l be-                i n g th e s ty le o f c it h e r o f i ts n e ig h b o u rs T im p itc h
                                                                                                                                                                            -fw eei; W est G e r m a n y a n d U r u g u a y W ith a g r a n t                         slo p e s fro m t h i s e n d dow i: to t h e K o p b y 2 V i feet.
                                                                                                                                                                                        th e G o v e r n m e n t, W e d n e s d a y h a d sp e n t                       ^ B u t ( h e fo cu s is a ll o n !h e N o r t h S t a n d a h e a d .
                                                                                                                                                                            # 0 0 0 0 on p r e p a r i n g H ills b o ro u g h f o r th e e v en t.                   T h e r e is n o t a m is p la c e d lin e i n th is r e m a r k a b le
   H illsborough in th e 1930s {Aerofilms)                                                                                                                                       A p a r t f ro m f o o tb all, t h e g r o u n d h a s a lso s ta g e d              s ta n d T h e r o o f is a c le a n sw ee p , f ro m t h e c o n c re te
                                                                                                                                                                            ^world-class te n n is , in 1938, b o x in g in th e 1 9 5 0 ? a                          b a c k to t h e r ib b e d b lu e r o o f f a s c ia h a n g in g 16 fe e t in
       So b e g a n t h e ta s k o f fcu u d in g . o u t in t h e w ild s ’. T h e                                                                                         i f f » « d isp lay for t h e Q u e e n m 1 9 5 4 a n d a H a r le m                      f ro n t o f th e f ir s t ro w . A c lo ck i n t h e c e n tr e is ffa n k ed
                                                                                          1934. A t t h a t ti m e t h e r e w a s , o p p o site th e South                .YWOetrcttei’s b a s k e tb a ll d is p la y i n t h e i9 S 0 s . T h e
   o .d s ta n d a t O liv e G ro v e w a s r e - e r e c te d a t O w lerto n ,                                                                                                                                                                                      a lo n g th e r o o fto p b y a lin e o f flag p o les, p u t u p f o r th e
   r u b b is h w a s tip p e d a t e i t h e r e n d to form b a n k in g . B u t
  e v e n th e n , w h y s h o u ld th e f e n s ccrae a ll t h a t w a y to
                                                                                          S ta n d , a d o u b le -ro o fed s t a n d w ith 2 0 0 0 s e a ls -which
                                                                                         s u r v iv e d a b o m b b l a s t a n d w a s o n ly rep la ce d :n 1^61 >.                                                       17
                                                                                                                                                                             p rese n t c a p a c ity o f H ills b o ro u g h is 5 0 17*. in c lu d in g
                                                                                                                                                                            ■MiWi                                                              -              =•      W o rld C u p b u t n o w a s m u c h p a r t o f t h e s t a n d a s th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     c e n tr a l f lo o d lig h t u y lo n p r o tr u d in g from t h e roof.
                                                                                         n e x t to w h ic h sto o d a f u n n y lit tle s h o r t c o v er o v e rt he
  s e e S e c o n d D iv isio n W e d n e s d a y w h e n F i r s t D iv isio n          t e r r a c i n g i n t h e n o r th w e s t c o m e r . T h e W est End                                                                                                    G la s s sc re e n e n d s, lik e th o se o f t h e S o u th S t a n d , ti e
  U n ite d w ere so close a t h a n d '1 T h e W e d n e s d a y d ir e c ­
                                                                                                                                                                                ■round D e s c r i p t i o n                                                         t h e flo w in g r o o f l in e s to t h e e n d w a lls, l in k e d b y a
                                                                                         te r r a c e w a s h a lf c o v e r e d b y a iow r o o f a t th e ja c k . 7 »       jjls b o re u p h is a s ta d iu m , w ith a l l t h e g r a n d con-
  to r s h a d m a d e a s h r e w d p r e d ic tio n T h e n e w e le c iric                                                                                                                                                                                        •162-foot lo n g w h ite p e r i m e t e r w all.
                                                                                        K o p w a s m u c h t h e s a m e a s to d a y .                                   jjljO tatums tise t e n n im p lies .
 t r a m s f e r ri e d s u p p o r t from to w n a t I d a rid e , a n d                    H ills b o ro u g h ’s f ir s t flo o d lit g a m e w as piayed K -                                                                                                          F r o m a n y a n g le t h e N o r t h S t a n d is q u i t e b r e a t h ­
                                                                                                                                                                                     a u n u s u a lly s q u a r e s e t o f s i s flo o d lig h t p y lo n s
 O w ie r to n w a s s o o n a b so rb e d h v S h e ffield ’s e x p a n d in g
 su b u rb s
                                                                                        t w e e n a S h e ffield X I a n d   Bn      In te r n a tio n a ! XI .rt m cut              '2 ab o v e t r e e s a n d f a c to r y ro o fs s ig n a l v o u r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     t a k in g . I t is l i k e a n a r c h ite c ts ' m o d el o f t h e d r e a m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     s ta n d o f t h e f u tu r e , a s p a c e a g e s ta n d Y e t i t s till
                                                                                        D e r e k D o o le y 's t r u s t fu n d o n 9 M a rc h 1955 D>,-oi<w
      T h e g r o u n d w a s o p e n e d for W e d n e s d a y ’s f ir s t g a m e                                                                                          ~                to t h s s ta d iu m . E n t e r i f y o u c a n a t th e             r e t a i n s its f re s h a n d m o d e m a p p e a r a n c e a s if i t h a d
                                                                                        h a d tr a g i c a lly lo s t a le g a f t e r a p la y in g ace:d<-nt_ A            f e t t * W est E n d , a c r o s s a b r id g e o v e r th e tr e e - lin e d
 i n D iv isio n Tw o, v. C h e s te rf ie ld or. 2 S e p te m b e r 1899.              cro w d o f 5 5 0 0 0 c a m e to p a y tr ib u te to th e m e n .a n d »                                                                                                    r is e n a b o v e t h e r a v a g e s o f b u ild i n g fa sh io n .
 b y tn e L ord M a y o r, A ld e rm a n W . E . C leg g , one o f tw o                                                                                                                Won, w h ic h flow s b e h in d t h e S o o t h S t a n d fro m                    T h is b r i g h t s p e c ta c u l a r s ta n d , t h e v e r n a c u l a r
                                                                                        sec t h e n e w lig h t s ; t h e b e s t i n B r ita in .                           Si.                        t h e H u m b e r, v ia (o f c o u rse . D o n cas-
 C le g g b r o th e r s w h o h a d d o m in a te d S h e ffield football                  T h e n e x t d e v e lo p m e n t a t H ilk b o r o u e b r o -J y de­                                                                                                 c h a r m o f t h e S o u th S t a n d a n d t h e r u g g e d lin e s c f th e
i n i t s e a r ly d a y s.                                                                                                                                                         J h e t \ c s t s t a n d p r o c la im s S h e ffield W e d n e sd a y         K o p m a k e H ills b o ro u g h m o r e t h a n j u s t a g r o u n d .
                                                                                       s e rv e s a c h a p te r o f its o w n , b u t sin c e sp a ce is                          ‘g sts hack.
     I n 3914 O w le r to n b e c a m e p a r t o f t h e n e w p a r ­                su ffice to sa y h e r e t h a t t h e n e w N o rth S t a r s » ^ -                                                                                                         T h e y le n d d ig n it y to a n y g a m e p la y e d t h e r e , g iv e
li a m e n t a r y c o n s titu e n c y o f H ills b o ro u g h , a n d t h e                                                                                                    fi«a ?                  th e S o u t h S t a n d is s u r p ri s in g ly           h e a r t to W e d n e s d a y ’s f o llo w ers w h o m a y j u s t feel
                                                                                       a t t h e tim e o f i t s O p en in g b y S ir S ta n le y ft"'-1-1 l’"
g r o u n d c h a n g e d its n a m e a cc o rd in g ly , a lth o u g h                                                                                                            y . Leitch o b v io u sly e n jo y ed t h e la c k o f r e s t n c -             t h a t ‘t h e W e d n e s d a y fello w s a r e p a r t o f '\ i s ’. H ills ­
                                                                                       22 A u g u s t 1961, t h e m o s t a d v a n c e d football cra.->i-
W e d n e s d a y a r e s till n ic k n a m e d t h e O w ls.                                                                                                                      ’ °J..m sid e t h e r e is a se n s e o f s p a c io u s e le a n li-           b o r o u g h h a s p ro v ed t h a t a c lu b c a n p ro v id e a ll th e
                                                                                       a ta n d e v e r b u ilt a t a B r iti s h fo o tb all g ro u n d I ' a0 -                ■ ana lig h t, a s is t h e c a se a t Leitch’s M a in S t a n d a t
     T n e e x is tin g S o u th S t a n d w a s oo u n e d i n J a n u a r v o f      o n ly r a is e d s p e c ta to r s ' e x p e c ta tio n s , b u t prfvc-cij-'                                                                                              f a c ilit ie s a s u p p o r te r w a n t s , w i th o u t r o b b in g th e
1 9 1 4 m p la c e o f th e old O iiv e G ro v e S t a n d , f o r a c ost
oi  £jOOOO.         A r c h ib a ld L e itc h w a s r e s p o n s ib le , a n d i t
                                                                                       a r c h ite c ts a n d d ir e c to r s a lik e t h a t feorba'i
                                                                                      'te c t u m n e e d no< h e d u ll o r n ie re lv u tilita ria n - a
                                                                                                                                                                            m                                        h0'TO“”b*“ from                               s u r r o u n d i n g s o f t h e i r in tr in s i c c h a r a c te r . I t is s u r e l y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n o c o in cid en c e t h a t W e d n e s d a y m e n a r e a lw a y s
m ay    do    c o n sid e re d a m o n g h is b e s t d o w g n s, a s I s h a ll     L e itc h a n d F e r r i e r ( a t H ig h b u r y : h a d t r : « t c j w ' f        " S I S ' ™pi;d a ! , >' * ' l e i * * I r a d c - ir u r k , th e                     r e a d y tc t a l k a b o u t t h e d a b a n d H ills b o ro u g h , a n d
G escribe below .                                                                                                                                                           6 i‘» ?e n ‘r “ i               w ith a c lo ck a n d a c o p p er b a ll              a b o u t t h e c ity o f S h e f fie ld t h a t e v e r y o n e s e e m s 10
                                                                                       be fo re t h e W a r. ( F o r a d e ta i le d a p p ra is a l o;
     T h e r e c o r d c ro w d a t the- g r o u n d w a s 7 2 8 4 1 for              S t a n d , s e e T h e S tr u c tu r a l E n g in e e r, * < > * « * .                r« s t % ^ j aCi<7, r e r a i n is c e c t o f W h ite H a r t L a n e ’s             love. T h is is a p ia c e to B u y b o ile d s w e e ts a t t h e c o rn e r
M a n c h e s te r C ity ’s v is i t-i n th e F A C u p in F e b r u a r y            1962.) I t ro o k 11 m o n th s to b u ild th e s ta n d ,       wbic.-:?1             m t o f . d S f n o m o r s -A te le v is io n g a n t r y o n t h e
                                                                                                                                                                                     ^ >oof d o e s i t s u s u a l s p o ilin g jo b .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sh o p , w e a r a r o s e t te w ith p r id e b u t t h e n g o a n d s it in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   c o m fo rt.
      FOOTBALL GROUNDS OF ENGLAND AND WALES




                                                                                          cent a f
                                                                                            M a rc h - S f » l a ' e t k K m              * * e" b" 1 l!>*                               I' 1SS9 to r t h e c ric k e t c lu b t o f o rm
                                                                                                                                                                                                football te a m . T h e d e c isio n w a s m a o e
                                                                                                                                                                                            th e y h o ste d a n F A G u p se m i- fin a l b e tw e e n
    B ra m all L an e                                                                                                                                                                          a n d W est B r o m w ic h o n 1 6 M a rc h . G a te
    S h e ffield U n ite d s h a r e w ith C h e ls e a a n d P Iv m o u th                                                                                                                  err.o u n ted t c a h a n d s o m e £ 5 7 4 , m o t
                                                                                                 t» r s , W hi 1 s t tire sid e n m t 10 t h e k „ , 5 f t
    A rg y le th e d is t in c t io n o f h a v i n g b e e n fo rm ed in o rd e r
                              USL Cl m e x is lin g gP ° r t s g r o u n d . A
                                                                                                 Ac ft,fto6djit/K«y^                                                                        h to p e rs u a d e t h e d u b t h a t fo o tb a l
                                                                                                                                                                                                  So in 1 8 8 0 Sh e ffield U n i t e d c am e
    b h e iiie ld C r ic k e t C lu b w a s fo rm ed in 1854 a n d si                                               id m a d e m a su ccessio n o f t j .
                                                                                                                                                                                        g , a n d t h r e e y e a r s l a t e r g a m e d a d m issio n
    c u re d a 9 8 - y e a r le a s e f o r th e B r a m a ll L a n e ’g ro tm d                                     n g e v e ry b o d y a n o p p o rtu n ity o f
                                                                                                         ?            is g o in g o n . . . th e p r o p r i e to r                     Jy fo rm ed T.-eague D iv isio n T w o (W ed n
               t h e D u k e o f N orfo lk , w ho s t i p u l a t e d th a t                                                                                                              elec te d to D iv is io n O n e in t h e s a m e year'). ’I
    m a tc h e s h e c o n d u c te d in a re s p e c ta b le m a n n e r ' ar                            b e e n r e c e n tl y le v e llin g o n e e n d ofth®
                                                                                                g r o u n d , a n d I d o n ’t k n o w how
                                                                                                                                                                      •>iSO#              p ro m o te d w i t h i n a y e a r , a n d i c 1 8 9 8 w o n th e
    th a t , t h e r e s h o u ld be no 'pigeon s h o o tin g , r a b b                                                                                                                  a n d c n iy L e a g u e C h a m p ion sh ip . A s a
                                                                                                t n o u s a n d c a r tlo a d s o f e a r t h hav«> been o u t
   c o u rs in g n o r a n y r a c e - r u n n i n g fo r m o n e y ’. T h e first                                                                                                 f e c k 1«99 th e y f o rm e d a lim ite d l ia b ili ty co m p an y
                                                                                                d o w n to r e m o v e a d ip w h ic h occu rred qi- rh*
    i o r k s lu r e CC m a tc h w a s in A u g u s t 1855, bu t                                                                                                                   tfirfHeld U n ite d C r ic k e t a n d F o o t b a li Ch.ib.
                                                                                                o o tto in e n d o f it.'                                       m
      m tb a ll to o k p la c e u n t i l D e c e m b e r 1862, w h e n                                                                                                          l & g h t B ra m a ll                         t h e D u k e o f N o rfo lk £
   S h e ffield F C ( th e o ld e st c lu b i n t h e w o rld , f a n n e d                                                                                                                                                                     d a n c in g a
                                                                                             O n 14 O c to b e r 1 8 7 8 B r a m a l l L an e won a a m
   1 8 5 7; p la y e d H a l la m T h e W e d n e s d a y s u b s e q u e n t h
                                                                                              m e m p la c e m t h e a n n a is o f fo o tb all w hen                                                                                                                     Bramall L ane ’s Sistinctiveg ab leS aterd estro yed in a n air
   c la y e d a fe-.v g a m e s a t B r a m a il L a n e a f te r 1867                                                                                                                SAit co u rsin g , n o r a n y r a c e - r u n n i n g fo r m uncn                  raid (BBC Kulton Pictu re Library}
                                                                                         t h e f ir s t r e c o rd e d flo o d lit m a tc h e v e r p la v ed ifm ’l
   T e a m s h a d to g iv e th e B r a m a ll L a n e G ro u n d C oir                                                                                                                   I e x ac tly th e s a m e tim e W ed n e sd ay
            2r> p e r c e n t o f t h e i r p r e s s m a tc h r e c a n t s , ,33 per                ,      .        lO u d n g h ts). T h e f ir s t f ootball intns.
                                                                                         nation.-.! «1 C m « v ,u n [j Wf!a, r M a rc h 1883, bun it t o *                                    to le a v e O liv o G ro v e , h a v i n g be-                                                                               B r a m a ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                   U n ite d w e r e F A C u p w i n n e r s a n d fu ll o f                      a tly th is t                            1 9 5 5 , a w e e * heto
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hic h                                       h fiils b o r o u d v s . T h e or
                                                                                                                                                                                  Rented n e g o tia tio n s to sh a re B r a m a l l i.a n e w .th
                                                                                                                                                                                           o e sd ay from su c c e e d in g                                                  A lth o u g h c ric k e t w a s s ti ll p la y er, r e e u la r lv
                                                                                                                                                                                      Before 1899 U iiite d 's f o o tb a lle r s h a d ch                                    p la y e r s c e r ta i n ly e n jo y e d th e
                                                                                                                                                                                  fiftf cric k et p a v ilio n , b u t n o w t h e J o h n S tr e e t Sid                                  L a n e , e sp e c ia lly th
                                                                                                                                                                                                          d evelopt                                                                :h e v h e a r d f ro m ih e so -called
                                                                                                                                                                                      farters. T h e M a in S t a n d                                                                       a ll L a n e Sid e
                                                                                                                                                                                  Century
                                                                                                                                                                                          sa m e sr a , h u t c o n sid e r a b ly d is ti                                   a id o in k : o n m a t o p e n sid
                                                                                                                                                                                  i#II, m ock -T u d o r g a b le in th e c e n tr e o f tn e roof. I t h a d                                     le d 'H o m e s
                                                                                                                                                                                    f a ll e r y w ith five o p e n in g s, lik e                                               a n d <J. M . K i l h u m w ro te in W;y'J m a t iir a m a l
                                                                                                                                                                                            b ecam e th e p r e s s box, bu                                                                      c:ket lo v e r ’s p o in t o f v ie w , h*
                                                                                                                                                                                     _ oubtedly a b o u se d b y th e                                                                           c o m m e n d ±t\ T h e!
                                                                                                                                                                                 f tic k e t s p e cta to rs. A s w ell a s h o s ti n g t;ie o ccasio n                                      g h t o f t h e b o a s t o f t h e D u k e o f N orfolk's
                                                                                                                                                                                       Lba,l in te r n a ti o n a l, B r a m a l l L a n e w a s a lso                                                  ................ a ‘t h e ad
                                                                                                                                                                                             fo r T e s t m a tc h e s . T h e r e                                                    \ w noke’
                                                                                                                                                                                          d th e p e rim e te r . B y t h e 1 9 3 0 s, t h e f o o tb a ll p itc h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 th r e e sid e s. T h e J o h n S t r e e t S ta n d                                                                        Doth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    End, w h                                             i refle ct e n c ir c lin g
                                                                                                                                                                                              up w ith a lo w e r r o o f c o v e r in g t h e B r a m a ll                    T h e c l a t t e r o f tr a m c a r s a n d t h e s c re a m o f
                                                                                                                                                                                    p e im d te rr a c e s a s f a r a s th e                                                                         f a c to r y h o o te r s m a k e
                                                                                                                                                                                f e i n t ro u n d t e tb e P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ;o to th e c ric k e t, a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                                         o f t h e K o p o ppus                                                           . p e rio d ic a lly s o u r s sm o k e a n d n
                                                                                                                                                                                      ft,_Ihe K o p hiid a r o o f a t t h e b a c k . U n im u s r e t 'o r a                 i n t o !’
                                                                                                                                                                                         iiofes                          F e b ru ary ] 936 f o r ;
                                                                                                                                                                                   h Round                                        m a n y o f t h e f a n s w ould          I h e v a d d t h e s u g g e s tio n t h a t th e b r e w e r y w o u ld
                                                                                                                                                                                        , w atch_e d                                     - - - ..... distan c e                      at.ely e m it its foul f u m e s o n ly w h e n Y o rk
                                                                                                                                                                                          ■ r o r .h e 6 th R o u n d m a tc h v. T o tte n h a m                       b h iro ’s o p p o n e n ts w e r e a t t h e c re a s e l T h e c ric k e t a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                        a u ilt H w m p o ra r y w ooden s t a n d a lo n g t h e m                                                                 c lap p e d o n ly b y l ib o u t 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                a c tu a lly c m ,, t h . s a c a d c r . i n                                                     u g h o u tfie ld , a w k w a r d
                                                                                                                                                                                                     h appened o n h                                                    f ie ld e r s a n d slo w fo r b a ts m e n e x p e c tin g h o x m d a ries
                                                                                                                                                                                   « • » « r f c r . i , * ! d e v a s ta lm n to B                                              h e r m o r e , t h e v ie w w a s n e v e r q u ite r i g h t
                                                                                                                                                                               B O Y i-.               , — g ro u n d in D e c e m b e r 1 9 4 0 , des                  P a v ili o n w a s to o f a r from t h e so c ce r p itc h , t h e J o h n
                                                                                                                                                                                                     * c J o h n S tre e t S tan d                                            e e l S t a n d to e f a r f ro m d ie w ic k e t. S in c e th e p e ri-
                                                                                                                                                                                         g a b le ., th e K o p r o o f a n d b a d iy c r a i e r i n g t h
                                                                                                                                                                               jBtteb. B y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       o f th e M a m S t a n d h a d                     eider?.- n s d to r e tr ie v e            bounce
                                                                                                                                                                                                a lth o u g h t h e n e w g a b le w a s b u t a s h a d o w of                             d s th e y
d ram s II L an efoo tb allan d c ric k etg ro u n d sh o rtiy afterth e Second WorldWar(AerofNms)
                                                                                                                                                                                    predecesso                          d o u b le -ro o f w a s e re c te d            s p e c ta to r s . T h e N p eeiaio rs th e m s e lv e s h a d u ; m a n y
                                                                                                                                                                                   'WstortrdK                                                                                                                        t h e c o n cretu t
                                                                 iSSt*




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE 4.ND HUMBERSIDE
 FOCTBALS. GROUNDS OF ENGLAND AND WALES



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                f ir s t v , n e ig h b o u r s S h e ffield W e d n e s d a y i n J a n u a r y ,
a m id t h e c r u s h b a r r ie r s , a n d i t w ag a p p a r e n t l y q u ite    in the country, helped because there is space to A                                                                                                        t h e n v . S h e ffield U n ite d t h e fo llo w in g D ec e m b e r,
c o w m e n to se e h u n d r e d s o f p e o p le r i s e e a c h tim e a            back and .dmire the red. b tek awl ,vtiB (* * * ,                                                                                                         h a t h m D iv is io n Tw o.
w ic k e t fell, W s tr e tc h t h e i r Hirshs a n d r u b t h e i r a c h in g         It seats i / 14 and was opened for a First Dm*.                                                                                                            I n 1 9 5 7 t h e R a ilw a y E n d t e r r a c i n g w a s c o v ered ,
                                                                                      JM teh Oil 16 A ugust 19m          Atoiyj ik e I m !
b u tto c k s ! A s c r ic k e t a u d ie n c e s d e c lin e d , t h e fo o tb all
s id e de v e lo p e d f u r t h e r w h e n a n e w 3GOO n e a te r s ta n d ,
w i t h r o a m f o r 7 0 0 0 s t a n d i n g b e lo w , w a s o p e n e d in
                                                                                      nag-poles, and suspended beneath it is a la™ t "
                                                                                      vision gantry with an electric winch to hm,i « . i ..
                                                                                                                                                                                'UNITED*                                                        a n d i n N o v e m b e r I 9 6 0 t h e flo o d lig h ts w e r e 'f i r s i u se d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                f o r a L e a g u e C a p ti e v B r is t o l R o v e r s. I n t h e m id -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1 9 6 0 s a n e x te n d e d r o o f w a s e re c te d o v e r t h e M a in
196” on. t h e B r a m a l l L a n e E n d .                                          heavy cameras (most grounds need tb                                                                                                                       S t a n d , a n d a g y m n a s iu m b u i l t a d ja c e n t t o t h e s ta n d .
    B u t t h e s a d f i n s n r i a l t r u t h h a d a l r e a d y b eco m e       by hand).                                                                                                                                                 I n 1 9 6 8 a r o o f o v e r t h e T iv o li E n d te r r a c e w a s co n ­
a p p a r e n t . T h e c lu b 's 2062 a c c o u n ts sh o w e d t h a t r e v ­          The near touchline is some yards from the 6i l l                   g j S w S ^ r h a m T o w n p la y e d From I8 6 0 a t
                                                                                                                                                                    x L an e c ric k c t g ro u n d iw iu c n s ti ll e x is ts ) a n d         s tr u c te d .
e n u e fro m f o o tb a ll a m o u n te d to £ 1 2 7 8 0 2 . b u t f ro m            row, to allow ream should the club ever aSa^-ift'                                                                                                              S in ce th e n s e a t i n g h a s b e e n a d d e d to t h e M illm o o r
c ric k e t a m e r e £ 2 9 2 ? In. t h e c lu b 's ow n w o rd s , i t w a s         redevelop the opposite side. You can see Ih*                               ,_»n 1 8 9 5 - 9 6 w a s a m e m b e r o f th e L e a g u e ,
                                                                                                                                                                            i n 1884 a n o t h e r t e a m c a lle d T h o r n h ill            L a n e S id e, f ir s tly u n d e r t h e old ro o f, th e n a t th e
'a b s u r d ' t h a t th e y s h o u ld 'h a v e t o su f fe r s u c h a f re a k    gothic pinnacles of St Mary’s church tower, boUtf#!                                                                                                        s o u th e r n e n d o v e r w h ic h a n e w r o o f w a s b u i l t in 1 982.
a s a t h r e e sid e d g r o u n d '. T h at. N o r t h a m p t o n h a d            1650, clearly above the John Street Stani wwf                          I t e d f orm ed a n d play ed a t t h e R ed H o u s e G ro u n d ,
                                                                                                                                                              fcritch w a s so s m a ll a n d u n e v e n t h a t U n ite d w e r e              n e x t to t h e old.
m a n a g e d , a n d e v e n m a d e a b r ie f s o r tie i n t o t h e F i r s t    straight ahead.                                              ...                                                                                               T h is b r o u g h t t h e t o ta l s e a t i n g ic 34 0 0 , o u t o f a
D iv isio n , m a t t e r e d n o t o n e jet,. H a v i n g v isite d                     Tire John Street. Stand is still well-used, although                S l e d f ro m e n te r in g th e F A C u p , so in 1907,
                                                                                                                                                              i-i'se c h an g e d t h e n a m e to R o t h e r h a m C o u n t y m               c a p a c it y o f 2 1 0 0 0 .
B r a in a lJ L a n e o n ly a few tim e s w h e n i t w a s th r e e -               th e dressing rooms and offices underneath ar» new."
sid e d , I c a n o n ly sa y t h a t t h e s e n s a tio n w a s n o t so            redundant, i t holds 4262 seats, with room for 5000'                    05 t h 0 clo b m o v e d to M illm o o r. In 1 9 1 9 t h e y jo m e d
m u c h fr e a k i s h a s d iffe re n t, l i k e w a t c h in g a d r iv e-in        standing in front. In contrast with the hard metallic'-                 ig u e D iv isio n Tw o, a n d i n ] 925-amaIgamated w ith                        G ro u n d D e sc rip tio n
                                                                                                                                                              th e rh a m T o w n to f o rm 'R o t h e r h a m U n ite d .                      H o w e v e r id y llic the, n a m e m a y s o u n d , the. r e a l i t y a t
m o v ie or a n o p e n a i r c o n c e rt O n e soon b e c a m e acc u s­            lines of the. South Stand, its weathered slomag rmt,                                                                                                      R o t h e r h a m is qvdte d ifferen t.. M illm o o r s ta n d s in t h e
to m e d to t h e v a s t e x p a n s e o f g r e e n b e y o n d th e o p p o ­      convolutedstoelw ork and cramped schoolboys’p*Ra t'                                                                                                       t h r e e - s id e d g r ip o f a c o lle ctio n o f s c ra p y a rd s , w h o se
s i t e to u c h lin e , B u t no o n e c a n c riticize U n ite d for                the Kop End look quite archaic. R ut it is not as dark               Millmoor                                                                             w a l ls o n tw o sid e s f o rm t h e b a c k o f t h e sta n d s . T h e r e
w a n t i n g to b e .like t h e r e s t I n d e e d i t is lik e ly t h a t h a d    and dingy as some stands of equal vintage.                          S a i l d e al q u ite c o n cisely w i t h t h e d e v e lo p m e n ts a t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                is li t e r a l l y n o ro o m to m a n o e u v r e , a s c r a n e s sw in g
th e y m a d e t h e i r de cision t e n y e a r s e a r lie r , t h e s u b s e ­        To the right is the covered Kop, which used to hoM              I fi llm a n r, b e c a u s e a d e sc r ip tio n o f t h e g r o u n d te lls
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                b a c k a n d f o rw a rd a lm o s t o v e r t h e g r o u n d its elf.
q u e n t fina& cial b u r d e n w ould' h a v e b e e n c o n sid e r a b ly         22000 standing. Behind is open ground along                                  th a n d a te s c a n . T h e f ir s t o c c u rre d n o t ;o n g a f te r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B u t w e s t a r t o n M a s b o ro u g h S t r e e t , t h e m a i n a c ­
lig h t e r .                                                                         Shoreham Street, where once were the cricketers'                      S a r k a n d C o u n ty jo in e d fo rc es, w i t h t h e b u ild i n g o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c ess p o in t to t h e g r o u n d . E n t r a n c e to t h e m a in s ta n d
     T h e in e v ita b le a x e fell in 1D ;1. U n ite d w e r e p u n c h           practice pitches.                                                          M ain S ta n d , no w c o n s id e r a b ly m o d ifie d A b o u t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                is u n d e r th e r a i s e d o ffices, a lo n g t h e sid e o l a w a ll a t
d r u n k w ith t h e su c ce ss o f th e i r f ir s t s e a s o n b a c k in             To the left is the Bramall Lane Stand, a ratlwr                         sam e tim e a s m a ll c o v e r w a s p u t u p o v e r th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a n a n g le to t h e p i t c h , a n d f ro m t h e r e in to a c a v e rn o u s
D iv is io n O n e sin c e 196S a n d p lu c k e d u p sufficie n t                   drab, tall construction m grey, browr. concrete. The                  p e rm in g o p p o site a lo n g M iu m o o r L an e .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                u n d e r g r o u n d c o rrid o r. E v e n t h e p la y e r s m u s t ta k e
c o u ra g e t:: g iv e t h e c r ic k e t c lu b tw o y e a r s ’ n o tic e to       seats offer an excellent view, but the terraces im­                   “ I t w as d u r in g a r u n o f su c ce ss t h a t M ilh n o o r e x p e r i­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t h i s r o u te to r e a c h t h e c h a n g in g ro o m s, a n d m u s t
q u it B r s m a ll L a n e                                                           mediately below are dark ar.d er&mpec. Or, she rwf                    enced its h ig h e s t e v e r g a te o f 2 5 0 0 0 , tw ic e in 19od:
     S o m e f e lt t h a t t h i s w a s a k i n to a son e v ic t in g h is         fascia is e clock, donated by the supporters' club to
m o th e r , to w h o m h e ow ed b o th life a n d h o m e , a n d                   replace the once familiar Pavilion clock - a aiea
t h a t w h ile U n i t e d m ig h t g a in a s m a r t n e w g r a n d ­             gesture, but an unimposing clock.
s ta n d , t h e c ity o f Sh e ffield w o u ld lo se for e v e r its                     The old clock had looked across a ground that was
a b ility to s ta g e f irst-c la ss c ric k e t.                                     SVz acres of grass, the size ana shape <r two football
     T h e f in al C u u n t y m a tc h w a s o n 7 A u g u s t 1973 , th e           pitches side bv side, with room for some 61)000 spec­
e n d o f ISO y e a r s o f c ric k e t a tB r a m a 'i l L a n e                     tators. The capacity now is a still healthy 49030,
     I w ill le a v e t h e f m a l j u d g e m e n t to t h e p e o p le of          mostly under cover, with 15000 seats.
S he ffield, e x c e p t to a d d t h a t no so o n e r h a d th e                        In 1982 United escaped from the trauma of Fourth
£ 7 5 0 M O n e w c a n ti le v e r s t a n d g o n e u p o v e r t h e aid           Division football, where they had certainly the hes^
p itc h t h a n U n ite d b e g a n a six - y e a r slid e w h ic h ev e n ­          ground and facilities ever seen but found themselves
t u a l l y d u m p e d th e m u n c e r e m o n i o u s ly in to th e                in serious financial difficulty. This was matalv owwf
F o u r th D iv is io n for t h e f ir s t ti m e in t h e i r 9 0 y e a r s '        to falling gates, butthe cost of the Soutn Stana «ra*a
m e m b e r s h i p o f t h e L e a g u e . W a s th is a ju d g e m e n t on         factor. Only time will tell whetherthe decision toJP
t b e u n g r a te f u l child'?                                                      up the cricket pitchwiii actually determine trie ciuO
                                                                                      future but I have absolutely no doubt ihat an «
G r o u n d D e s c rip tio n                                                                          there are old cricketing stalwarts ja-
T h e n e w m a i n e n tr a n c e to t h e g r o u n d is i n C h e r ry             w a i tin g a n d w a t c h in g , i: anticipation ofbeinr ao.f ^
S t r e e t , w h e r e y o u se e a la r g e c a r - p a r k in f r o n t o f th e   s a y 'W h a t d id I t e ll y u . . .' If Dame Fortune «
im p o s in g c a n t i l e v e r s ta n d , w i t h its s t r i k i n g facade.      forgiving towards a trier, they will not gs: t a
B y t h e g a te s sto o d t h e P a v ili o n , fin a lly d e m o lis h e d in       chance, hut if the Almighty wears white Harmed . • •
1982. T h e c a r - p a r k c o v ers w h a t u se d to he t h e c ric k e t
p itc h . H ow q u ic k ly , h o w c o m p re h e n s iv e ly , t h e new
o b l it e r a t e s a l l t r a c e o f t h e old. T h e n e w S o u t h S t a n d
i s a fu ll l e n g th c a n ti le v e r, d e s ig n e d b y t h e sa m e
a r c h ite c ts a s W e d n e s d a y 's N o r t h S t a n d , a lth o u g h
in f la te d b u ild i n g c o sts a n d t h e n e e d for e x t r a fa c ili­
ti e s h a v e d i c ta te d t h a t t h i s o n e is l e ss p le a s i n g to th e
                                                                                                                                                                   ” ■ looking towards the Main Stand, with the inevitable crane in the background The ofdTivois cinema is Jus!
e y e f ro m in s i d e t h e g r o u n d . B u t th e f r o n t a g e is u n ­
                                                                                                                                                                 * atjove        root (rlgni) (Sporting Pictures)
d o u b te d ly t h e m o s t im pre ssive , o f a n y p o s t- w a r sta n d

04
                                 rliament                                    third reading stages in an autumn overspill         Water Bill
                        11                                                   rather than in July, which should allow time
                                                                             for at least Lord Taylor's interim report           Former Conservative Ministers are leading a
                                                                             findings to be considered.                          Lords revolt aimed at forcing changes to the
 1                           ■                                                                                                   Water Bill.
Journal 28 April 1989




                                                                                                                                 In particular, they are arguing that the
                                                                             Local Government Bill                               Chancellor of the Exchequeur should be
                                                                             The Government have replaced Clause 65 of

                         Stadium
                                                                                                                                 prepared to forego at least part of the
                                                                             the Local Government Bill - the clause              proceeds of privatisation of the water
                                                                             dealing with the duty of local authorities to       authorities and plough the money back into
                                                                              prevent a debit balance on their Housing           necessary investment to clean up the rivers,
                                                                              Revenue Account - with a substitute clause         bring water quality up to EEC standards and

                         safety                                              which Minister for Local Government, John
                                                                              Gummer, said would make clearer what the
                                                                              Government wanted.
                                                                             The purpose of the new clause was to
                                                                                                                                 to replace crumbling sewers.
                                                                                                                                 Backing up the claim, Lord Nugent of
                                                                                                                                 Guildford, who held junior Government jobs
                                                                                                                                 in the 1950s and has since been chairman of


                         to be law                                            require a local housing authority to make a
                                                                              budget each year in a manner that would
                                                                              ensure that there was no deficit on the
                                                                              housing account. Having drawn up the initial
                                                                                                                                 the Thames Conservancy and the National
                                                                                                                                 Water Council drew attention to the legal
                                                                                                                                 challenge mounted by a group of local
                                                                                                                                 authorities over the ownership of the assets
                                                                              budget before the start of the year, the local     being sold off by the Government.
                             Our Parliamentary                                housing authority would be required to keep        He said that local authorities claimed that the
                                                                              the account under review and to review the
                             correspondent picks out the                      budget, if a deficit seemed likely to arise. The
                                                                                                                                 basis on which they handed over the assets
                                                                                                                                 of the industry, following the 1973 Act,
                             local government high-spots                      original clause was less clear and might lead      without compensation was that they got a
                             in the past week.                                to an authority to make mid-term changes,          majority of local authority members on each
                                                                              irrespective of whether such changes were          regional water authority board. But the
                          Amendments to the Football Spectators Bill          possible or realistic. As that was not the         Government broke that agreement with the
                          to allow local authorities when licensing           intention, the new clause set out that only        Water Act 1983. The Act removed all local
                           football grounds to make licences conditional      mid term changes that could be carried out         authority members from the regional water
                           on providing all seater stadiums have been         realistically would be made. If it appeared        authorities.
                           foreshadowed by the Home Secretary,                likely, mid-term, that the housing account
                           Douglas Hurd in the wake of the Hillsborough       would go into deficit, such changes as could
                           tragedy.                                           reasonably be made would have to be made,           Housing
                           He told MPs: ‘We must go forward, to see           and if there was a deficit at the end of the         By a majority of 206 votes to 136, the
                           whether the Bill’s licensing provisions need       year, that deficit would have to be carried          Government obtained Commons approval
                           to be strengthened, to make possible the           forward and taken into acocunt in the next          for the Housing (Change of Landlord)
                           move to all seated accommodation in big            year's budget. It would still be essential to        regulations which bear on tennants’ choice
                           stadiums. There will be consultations about        make whathever steps were reasonable                over whether to opt for a change of landlord.
                           the possibility. Mr Hurd not only asked for        during the course of the year.                      The vote took place on a prayer for the
                           factual reports from the police and other          Opposition spokesman, Clive Solely, asked            rejection of the regulations.
                           services, but from the local authprity as well.    for an assurance that decisions on subsidy           David Trippier, Under Secretary reminded
                           He is also concerned about the provision of        would be made earlier and the information            MPs that a council house tenant would retain
                           better access gates where local authorities        given to local authorities.                         the right to veto his council house being sold
                           make perimeter fences a condition of               Mr Gummer said he could give the                    over his head. The council house tenant, by
                           licenses.                                          assurance that by the end of December each          registering that veto, could remain with the
                          The present football safety law does not            year, local authorities could be aware of the       registering landlord, which would be the local
                           make such fences or crowd barriers                 subsidies. They would normally know                 authority.
                          obligatory but gives discretion to local            before Christmas.                                   Clive Soley, for the Opposition, was angry
                          authorities to attach them as condition? when      Answering questions about the detail of the          about the failure of the Minister to answer
                          granting a safety certificate.                      housing subsidy arrangements, he admitted           questions about the regulations keeping
                          Mr Hurd told MPs that in removing one              that there was less in the Bill about the            properties empty during a takeover by a new
                          hazard - that is the threat of hooligan            formula of subsidy than there was in the             landlord because councils would not be able
                          violence - authorities had to find a                1985 Act but he said the Department were            to let them because they would not be able to
                          satisfactory means of ensuring they did not        consulting local authorities about the various       confer secure tenancies on properties that
                          create another. The Home Secretary said the        components and wanted their advice on                became vacant during an application for
                          perimeter bariers and the gates within them        providing flexibility. Ministers wanted to           change of landlord.
                         were designed as an emergency exit but had          ensure that targeting of subsidy worked              Mr Soley said that under the regulations,
                         obviously failed to provide that at                 better than it had in the past. He said he           local authorities would have to keep
                          Hillsborough.                                      hoped that the form of the subsidy would be          additional numbers of houses and flats
                          Lord Justice Taylor, who is heading the            announced by mid summer and its figure by            empty because they could not let them
                          inquiry into the FA Cup semi final would be        Christmas.                                           during the period of the takeover - which
                         able to look at the existing system of safety       Under Secretary of State for the                     could last for six months - unless they did so
                         certificates and the responsibility of local        Environment, David Trippier said later that          on a temporary basis. The properties could
                         authorities, Mr Hurd confirmed.                     the heart of the formula wqs the allowances          not be let on a secure tenancy. He asked
                         One thing on which all could agree, Mr Hurd         made for rent increases and for increases in        how the Minister could justify that in terms of
                         said, was the absolute necessity of                 the cost of management and maintenance.             housing management. Mr Soley conceded
                         emergency exits through perimeter fences. If        These would be subject to detailed formulae         that the regulations made some changes for
                         the guidance was implemented it was                 to be devised each year following                   the better but he still believed that it was a
                         adequate. He said there must bq an                  consultation. Movements in the cost of              system for landlords picking tenants rather
                         investigation into why the exit gate at             financing capital expenditure, such as              than tenants choosing a landlord.
                         Hillsborough was not an effective way in            changes in interest rates, or in the rules          The regulations were a one-way ticket
                         which desperate people could get onto the           governing the repayment of debt, would              because there was no possibility of tenants
                         pitch.                                              certainly be fully reflected in subsidy             changing their minds if they got a bad
                         The Government have come uncjer all party           entitlement. Local charges on new borrowing         landlord. He said the object of the legislation
                         pressure to suspend the Football Spectators         would also be fully reflected so long as the        was to squeeze the public housing system
                         Bill pending the full report of the Taylor          rules on admissible costs were complied             further and to push people out into the private
                         inquiry. However the Cabinet last Thursday          with. A notional assessment of management           sector. The majority of tenants were voting
                         took a decision to press ahead with the Bill,       and maintenance costs would be part of              down a change in many cases because
                         after a short delay, but to have the report and     each year's subsidy calculation.                    tenants had been terrified.                   ■
                .H        Ui oio-oioU-
                         Cci>cxvoVv^ Ci'—|
                 T~rm




               By S te p h e n W ard                            Turnstile*                 Railings acting is
                                                                             v>mSSSS5#W^   radial barriers                                     ]
        THE E N G IN E E R S responsible                                                                                    r*%-nfc            1\
        fo r the H illsborough football
        ground h as, claim ed that'South
        Yorkshire police insisted, against                                     TUNNEL
                                                                                                                                                                \
         Ms advice, cm the installation o f
         fences running from top to b o t­                                                                                                          J   A» *M   *
                                                                                                                                                                     -     ■
         tom o f the terracing. Combined
        'with the perimeter fence already
         in place around the pitch, they
         m eant the fans were penned in o n                                                                                Access
         three sides, unable to escape a                                                                                                            2 2         .4 . ^ 3
         crush from behind               -■
            In an interview in Hew CivilE tt-
         gineer magazine, published yester­                                                                        #3 ♦ < +„ / ~S*^ ~ *
                                                                                                                                      'v*4<5
         day, Bill Eastw ood, consulting en­                          %                                           y V- V                  #
         gineer to Sheffield W ednesday,
        owners of Hillsborough, said th e
        lateral fencing o n the Leppings                  Safety                                                High perimeter
        Lane end terracing w here 94 fans                 Barriers                                              fence
        died, and 125 m ore w ere injured,
        had been erected a t the request o f
        th e police in th e mid-1980s.
           T he 3m-high p erim eter fence a t
        Hillsborough w as put u p in th e
        late 19708 to sto p pitch invasions.          ing a recom m endation from th e              able to move outw ards because of
        T h e purpose o f the dividing                police.”    ......                            the lateral fencing.       :" .... >
        fences was to allow fans from o p ­              T he 2m-high steel railings th a t            Soccer clubs have to be li­
        posing sides to stand at th e sam e           run up the 15m deep terracing di­             cenced each year by the local au­
         end, but this never happened. A              vide tt into two central enclosed             thority, w hich takes advice from
         double fence o n the right-hand              pens, each 20m wide, and two side             the police. If clubs refuse to agree
         side gives police a corridor to              enclosures.                                   to conditions, they do not get a li­
         reach the back of the area.                     Last S aturday the central areas           cence.
            D r Eastwood, formerly a p ro ­           immediately behind the goal w ere                 D r Eastw ood said the guide­
         fessor at Sheffield University,              already nearly full at th e kick-off,         lines accom panying the Safety of
         said: “I have long objected in gen­          while the side areas w ere less               S ports G rou nd s A ct 1975 are not
         eral to the need for such radial             crowded. A surge o f extra fans               specific enough. “T he codes dis­
         barriers, which in an emergency              was allowed into the ground just              cuss both p erim eter and radial
         prevent spectators moving away               after the kick-off w hen police               fencing only in general term s and
         from a source o f d anger or tro u ­         opened a large gate to relieve                should give much better guid­
         ble, and I was unhappy about                 crowding outside.                              ance. All fencing, especially high
         their installation at Hillsborough.             They were intended to go into               pe rim ete r barriers, may b e bene­
         But they w ere asked for by the               the side areas, but alm ost all               ficial in deterring hooligans in­
         then licencing authority, South               flooded into the central areas.               vading the pitch, but is very unde­
         Yorkshire County Council follow-              T he fans already there w ere u n ­           sirable in th e event of a disaster.”



           Report urges pitch escape exits
         NEW guidelines on the design o f     B rian Stickley, a Home Office                            T h e com m ittee visited a n um ­
         sports grounds, which could have     structural engineer, psychologist                      b e r of football grounds, including
         helped prevent the H illsborough     Professor D avid C anter; a n d L es­                  B olton a n d Preston, which Mr
         disaster, have taken two years to    lie T urner, a D epartm ent of th e                    G reen said w ere “the same as a
         prepare because a team of engi­      Environm ent a rc h ite c t                            lot in the country. If you apply
         neers and governm ent officials         I t was intended th a t the guide­                  m odern sta n d a rd s to these
\                                             lines should expand on th e Gov­
         a re w riting it in th e ir spare tim e ..                                                  grounds, th e clubs wouldn’t have
    \       H e report. Appraisal o f Spam , e rn m e n ts G reen G uide — w hich                    grounds l e f t ” He said the aim of
         Grounds, whose proposals ln-~ , one com m ittee mem ber said is                             th e guidelines was not to force
         elude ' constructing perim eter • .' “fall of grey are as” — a s th e s ta n ­              clubs to close, b ut “to present the
         fencing escape exits, will be pu b­  d a rd safety docum ent.                               variou s o ptions in a n engineering
         lished this summer,       ; •; -'     . Michael Green, a n engineer                         sense”.
         . The In stitu tio n of S tru ctural with the B u ro H appold P a rtn e r­                   . T he guidelines cover m anage­
         Engineers set u p a 13-strong com­   ship, said th e Green Guide “w as                      m e n t m ethods, crowd control and
         mittee to produce the guidelines     no t tight enough”. Although tb e                      ticketing arrangem ents, crowd
         immediately a fter the Popplewell    Green G uide was am ended a fte r                       flow p a tte rn , floods, fire design
         R eport on the B radford fire d i­    the Popplewell' inquiry, it aim s                      an d capacity of stands — Includ­
          saster. -                            only at upgrading existing stadl-                      ing the p ush and load figures of
            Committee m embers include         ums, not new designs.                                  crash b a rrie rs.
          O ' -   t —> C > - 0 *        \ L-




'/
                                                                                                                    crowd control fencing should be used.
                                                                                                                    There was also a danger that the
                                                                                                                    guidelines concentrated too much on
                                                                                                                    the prevention of hooliganism at the
                                                                                                                    expense of spectator safety.
                                                                                                                     • ‘The codes discuss both perimeter
                                                                                                                    and radial fencing only in general
                                                                                                                    terms and should give much better
                                                                                                                    guidance’ he said. 'All fencing, espe­
                                                                                                                    cially high perimeter barriers, may be
     Saturday’s disaster at Sheffield                                                                               beneficial in detering hooligans invad­
                                                          Turnstiles                           Railings acting as
     Wednesday’s Hillsborough ground when                                                                           ing the pitch but is very undesirable in
                                                                                               radial barrier*
     98 people were crushed to death has                                                                            tbe event of a disaster.
     highlighted the direct conflict between                                                                            ‘There is nothing in the codes which
     safety and police perception of the best                                                                       says you must have radial barriers and
     •ay to contain hooligans in football            Open gate                                                      there should now be a major rethink
     crowds, it was claimed this week.'
                                                                                        /
                                                                                                                    on the desirability of all fences’.
     The consulting engineer responsible                                                                                Eastwood, senior partner with
     for safety at Hillsborough was worried                                                                         Eastwood & Partners and consultant
     by crowd control fences there long                                                                             to stadium owner Sheffield Wednes­
     before the incident. The fences were                                                                           day Football Club for the last 10
     asked for by the ground's licensing                                                                            years, said the ground 'complied fully*
     authority following a direct request by                                                                        with the 1975 Safety of Sports
     the police.                                                                                                    Grounds Art and its accompanying
         Police influence on 'traffic paths’                                                                        Green Guide setting oat specific
     taken by football fans has been consi­                                                                          standards. His claim was backed
     dered by at least one member of an                                                                              earlier this week by current licencing
     Institution of Structural Engineers'                                                                            authority Sheffield City Council.
     committee appraising sports ground                                                                                  ‘Our preliminary conclusions indi­
     safety. A request for funds to speed                                                                             cate that the arrangement of barriers
     its work was turned down by the                                                                                  and fences met the Act’s require­
     Department of the Environment.                                                                                   ments' said the council's director of
         The controversial fencing that con­                                                 High penmeter fence      health and consumer services David
      tributed to the severity of the disaster                                                                        Purchon. 'Barriers tested so far with­
      was erected specifically at the request                                                                         stood 2 5 Q more than the required
      of the police, claimed safety engineer                                     Safety barriers                      load and we have no reason to believe
      Dr Bill Eastwood. There was no legal                                                                            any of them in the central pen were
                                                 ABOVE: Layout of the Leppings Lane stand.                            inadequate.'
                                                 BELOW: Radialbarriers and the perimeter fencepenned in fans.            The Structural' committee looking
                                                                                                                      in to sports ground safety was estab­
                                                                                                                      lished after the Popplewell review
                                                                                                                      following the Bradford fire disaster
                                                                                                                      four years ago. ‘it was considered by
                                                                                                                      Structural* members that the Green
                                                                                                                      Guide did not take things very far, so
                                                                                                                      we decided to get all the facts of
                                                                                                                      previous disasters together, analyse
                                                                                                                      them and come up with conclusions’
                                                                                                                      said a member.
                                                                                                                         It is understood that a part of the
                                                                                                                      report is on the subject of ‘traffic
                                                                                                                      control’. A request to the DoE for
                                                                                                                      funding to speed up the process of
                                                                                                                      collation and analysis was refused.
                                                                                                                     N C E has been told. The department
     The destroyed crush barrier.
                                                                                                                     has provi3ed resources in the form of
     requirement for the side railings that                                                                          a committee member, however.
     ensured fans were trapped in a small                                                                                As well as the 95 killed another 125
     central pen on the terraces and                                                                                 people were injured, many seriously,
     neither the engineer nor the club that                                                                          when spectators surged into a 40m
     owned the stadium had requested                                                                                 wide by 15m deep enclosed terrace
     their installation.
        1 have long objected in general to
     the need for such radial barriers,
                                                                                   w%                                area shortly after the start of last
                                                                                                                     Saturday's FA Cup semi final between
                                                                                                                     Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
     which in an emergency prevent spec­                                                                             This section of central terracing im­
     tators moving away from a source of                                                                             mediately behind the goal at the
     danger or trouble, and I was unhappy                                                                            ground's Leppings Lane end was
     about their installation at Hillsbor­                                                                           already close to its '22W capacity
     ough' said Eastwood, who is a Fellow                                                                            when police opened ar. external gate
     of ICE. 'But they were asked for by                                                                              near the turnstiles, •
                                                                                                                         The intention was to aliuw the late
     the then licencing authority South
     Yorkshire County Council following a                                                                             arriving fans into side terracing where
                                                                                                                      there was still space available, but
     recommendation from the police.'
                                                                                                                    ' most rushed through a 3m wide tunnel
        In calling tor an urgent review of
                                                                                                                      beneath the mam covered western
     sports ground safety codes. East­
                                                                                                                      stand :mc crowded directly into the
     wood maintained that ::,ev were not
                                                                                                                      centra: er.Z. >Sfd terracmg.
     specific enough or. ■•■>. and wneiv




     8
 . /
 /          '



                                                                                                                                          mg. ‘Ten spans are affected over up to
      The' total 100m long terraces,                                                                                                      SO^c of their area" said Essex County
sloping at 12°. were contained by a 3m            C r u m                    b l i n g          ® ®            e                          Council principal engineer Tony Bag-
high steel mesh perimeter fence
                                                                                                                                          chi.
bordering the pitch and erected in the
early 1970s. It was braced on top of
 the earlier perimeter barrier, a 1m
 high concrete wall.
                                              closes flyover                                                                                  Contractor Tarmac Structural Re­
                                                                                                                                          pairs was responsible for the design,
                                                                                                                                          installation and maintenance of the
       The 2m high steel railings that run                                                                                                £20/tn- system. It has appointed
                                                  Breakdown of the polymer wearing                                                        consultant Travers Morgan, with the
 radially across the 15m deep terraces            course wax this week being blamed for
 divide it into three main areas of a                                                                                                     approval of Essex CC and ICI Che­
                                                  the closure after just fi»e months of                                                   micals & Polymers which supplied the
 central enclosed pen and two side                Britain’s firs t bridge to ha*® a fully
 terraces and were installed in the mid                                                                                                   surfacing, to carry out urgent tests.
                                                  calhodic protected reinforced concrete                                                      ‘We are very anxious to find out the
  1980s following police requests for
                                                  leek.                                                                                    cause. We do not think it is the
 better crowd control, said Eastwood.                  The 11 year old chloride damaged
 The idea was to allow fans of opposing                                                                                                    cathodic protection but we have asked
                                                  Armv and Navy flyover at the junction                                                    Travers Morgan to examine the
  sides to stand in the same terraced             of the ..4.130 and the old A12 at
  area, segregated by radial fencing,                                                                                                      whole problem and give us a report as
                                                   Chelmsford, Essex was resurfaced                                                        soon as possible* said Tarmac technic­
  but this, has, never actually been               only last year at the cost of £125 000
  adopted at Hillsborough.                                                                                                                 al services manager Doug Irvine.
                                                   with two layers of skid resistant                                                           Travers Morgan was this week
       About 60 of the 100 or so varying           polymer concrete. This also contains          S'StSJSir
  length crush barriers, sited in three                                                                                                    taking core samples for laboratory
                                                   an expensive platinum coated protec­                                                    examination and testing. In the mean
  rows right across the terracing, were            tive titanium mesh anode ( N C E 10
  erected in 1966 and consist or 62mm                                                                                                       time affected areas including the
                                                   November 1988).                                  'afiCfKSaW,                            expensive anode mesh were being
  diameter horizontal scaffold bars with               Designed to extend the life of the
■ I c e d steel channel uprights bedded                                                                                                     stripped down to the original concrete
                                                   structure by 10 years, the cathodic                                                      base.
              _v into the concrete steps. The      orotection is apparently still working.
   remaining crush barriers, with un­                                                                                                          The flyover is expected to re-open
                                                   But the two coat 16mm thick ICI                                                          temporarily to traffic this week pend­
   braced steel box legs, were added in Thorotop CP Horizontal polymer con­
   1979 when the ground was first                                                                                                           ing a permanent solution and neces­
                                                   crete on the 15 span flyover is losing                                                    sary' repairs.
   required to obtain a safety licence.            its bond and crumbling and delaminat-        Stripping the flyover’s coating.
        The terraces' designation under                                                                                            - - “*Ti ~
   the act as a ‘peak viewing area
    demands that all crush barriers and.
    tower areas of the perimeter fence are
    designed to withstand a 595 kg'm run                                                           The DTp has already increased the
    horizontal loading. The act also speci­     BTp agrees                                      money available for inspection in the
                                                                                                coming year by 30^f. The depart­
    fies that the area must be capable of
    evacuation in eight minutes and East­
                                                bridges need                                    ment's overall expenditure on bridge
                                                                                                maintenance has risen from an ex­
     wood stressed that this could be
     achieved through normal exist points
                                                e x tra                                         pected E36M in the last financial year
     without recourse to the seven gates                                                        to a forecast £101M this year.
                                                    The Department af Transport has                 Maunsell recommends 44 propos­
     positioned along the perimeter.
          ‘These gates were installed specifi­       admitted it needs up to £380M extra for    als for preventing further deteriora­
     cally to allow police to enter the              its 15 year bridge rehabilitation          tion of which the DTp is already
                                                     programme in order to carry out repairs    considering 32 including a greater
     terracing from the pitch and were
     nothing to do with crowd evacuation             identified ia the 6 Maunsel! &Partner*     concentration on maintenance and
     he said. ‘But it was always in my mind report* on concrete bridge*.                        inspection.
      that in a real emergency they would                The report says that a total of            Every effort should be made to
      act as a good safety valve.' The gates’ £880M needs to be spent on streng­                prevent bridge joints from leaking.
          iring loaded quick release catches thening the structures. Roads &                    Concrete surfaces exposed to spray             M C I g ets a ■
          e designed so they cannot be Traffic Minister Peter Bottomley said                    hut not to rain should be impregnated          new e d ito r
      opened from inside the terracing.               that the greater proportion of this had    with silane. then washed down after
           The perimeter fencing was re­ already been anticipated and included                   every winter.                                 Ty Byrd takes over this week as editor of
      latively undamaged during Saturday's in the "existing programme, valued at                    One future design measure could            Mem Dim! E n g in ee r following
       disaster but one 4.3m long older type up to S1500M (N C E 26 November                     be an increase in cover to reinforce­         management changes at the magazine's
       crush barrier was totally destroyed 1937).                                                ment.                                         publishing company Thomas Telford
       and scaffold bars on two others                    The DTp said that the £380M was           Maunsell recommends that cover             Limited.
       deflected by up to 200mm.                      an upper bound and expected econo­         in deck soffits over roads should be              Byrd has been managing editor of
            ‘All 13 or so barriers in this central mies of scale to reduce costs. It would       increased even before a study is              the magazine for nine years and
       section passed load tests last July said bid for extra funds from the Treasury            carried out.                                  becomes only the third editor in
       Eastwood. 'We have now tested again in the normal way.                                       Research proposals are also high­          N C E 's 17 year history. He takes over
       the two deformed barriers and they                 The report reveals far more wide­      lighted including the need to define          the day to day editorial control of the
       are still able to withstand a loading spread chloride attack caused by                    rates of corrosion so that timings tor        magazine from Hugh Ferguson, who
       significantly above the design load.            deicing salts than had been expected.     remedial work can be better planned.          remains editor in chief but whose
             He estimated that the actual loading Two hundred randomly chosen                        Research into sealing surfaces            responsibilities have been greatly ex­
        on these two barriers during the crush bridges representative of the depart­             against water and salts penetration by        panded to include TTL's new weekly
        was probably around 9 0 0 kg'm run - ment’s 5933 were tested in the two                   using isobutyl silane is likely to be        N e w B m l d e r which is to be launched in
        503 above design limits and equiva­ year study (N C E 3 March).                           increased, as are trials of cathodic          September.
        lent to a load of some 400kg on any               The report says action is needed        protection.                                      The new editor joined the staff of
        person standing nearby.                        now to arrest deterioration and repair        Long term effectiveness and the            N C E as features editor having been
             Such increased loading is possible, defective bridges. About 20c,t of                maintenance necessary to keep both            technical editor for three years ol
        said Eastwood, because the assumed tested structures are ‘poor’ meaning                   forms of protection operation;;! need         C o m tr u r tu m S a c s . the International
        barrier design crowd density of 5.4 that drastic treatment involving con­                 to be better understood.                      Thompson Organisation weekly
         people nr' can in practice be exceeded crete or steel replacement may be                  Ti:< Pfrfunimmr of C/>n*nh                   magazine. Byrd was previously a
         by up to 5 0 '-; when fans are squashed necessary. Only 60 bridges are                           by (i Maunseil & Partners is
                                                                                                 B rid g e s                                    management trainee with contractor
         in vorv '          together.                  •good’, the remaining 99 being classed    available from HMSO. price                     f ieorge \V:mrvy.
         David Hayward                                 iis tau .



                                                                                                                                                 yiAJWi.                                           9
                                                                                                                                           _     -_       . . .   •■*■*** sea
                                                                                                                                                                          ■ »-   nii nnr~iit • •
£/v^ p i r c
3980 -   P»       CTION AND DEV WORK                                                          1




                                                                                              1


                                                                                              j
                                                              wwwwwww       ww         wwwwwww
                                                              WWWWWWWW      ww         wwwwwww
                                                    WWW       ww    ww      ww            ww
                                                    WWW       wwwwwww       ww            ww
                                                              wwwwwww       ww            ww
                                                              ww    ww      ww            ww
                                                    WWW       ww    ww      ww            ww
                                                    WWW       WWWWWWWW      WWWWWWWW      ww
                                                              wwwwwww       WWWWWWWW      ww


                                                                                              !
                                                       WWWWWWW      wwwwww      ww     ww
                                                       WWWWWWWW    WWWWWWWW     WWW   WWW    w
                                                       ww    ww    ww           wwww wwww   ww1
                                                       ww    ww    WWW          wwwwwwwww   ww
                                                       ww    ww     WWWWWW      WW WWW ww   ww
                                                       ww    ww          ww     ww w ww     ww
                                                       ww    ww          ww     ww     ww   ww
                                                       WWWWWWWW    WWWWWWWW     ww     ww    to
                                                       wwwwwww      WWWWWW      ww     ww      <




F IL E : B LTD . DSA. G4OC0( 4 , * , 1 )
DESC RIPTIO N :STD.STDFORT
JOB : BLTD . DSMOP
REQUESTED AT 1 5 : 4 3 : 3 0 ON 21APR89



T H IS F IL E SPOOLED FROM THE VME SYSTEM AT 1 5 : 5 4 : 2 4 ON 2 1 APR89
THE SPOOLER TAPE VSN I S TC 3522 - T H IS IS P R IN T JOB 0 8 3

JOB TAG I S M934                           F IL E TO BE SAVED
MEDIA USED I S PORTRAIT                    STATIONERY — DUPLEX HOLED
COPY 1 OF 1                                                     |
                                                                                               ;
                                                                                               I
              *                                           *
              *   DON SHERIFF/SECOND FLOOR                *
              *                                           *
                                                                       Department of Land
                                                                     Deportmcrst.cf D.r'rsi a
                                                                            r -       ..   ...


                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                                                                               1 9 APR
               N ote of a meeting of the Officer Working Party [(SKeffield
               District) held at the P olice Sports & Social Club'— N i a g a r a ^
                              Sheffield, on 18th April 1985     !— ----


PRESENT:               Kcity of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                       (South Yorkshire Police)
                       (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                       (South Yorkshire Police)
                       (South Yorkshire Police)
                       (South Yorkshire Police)
                       a (South Yorkshire County Council)
                       (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)



1.     Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 9th APril
and plan from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners relating to the proposals of
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to construct two new banks of
turnstiles and various runs of fencing and new gates in order to achieve
segregation of visiting supporters at the Leppings Lane end of the
Hillsborough Stadium.

2.     Consideration of Proposals

The Police representatives pointed out that the proposals hat? been
prompted in the main by comments they had made to the Club. At one
time, both the West Stand and Terrace had been regarded as exclusively
for the use of visiting supporters, but recent patterns of attendances
at the Stadium made it necessary to allow for some element of use by
home supporters as well.

The proposals now outlined by the Club were generally acceptable to the
Police representatives, subject to:-

(a)    additional gates being provided between the turnstile numbered 16
       and the wall of the inner access road;

 (b)   the central area of the Terrace (indicated as the neutral area or
       visiting supporters' terrace) being divided in half by a new
       central radial fence running from the tunnel entrance to the
       pitchside security fence with gates erected so as to permit entry
       to be diverted to either half as appropriate (the proposed new
       secondary radial fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
       on the plan to be abandoned);

 (c)   the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as home supporters’
       terrace) also to be divided in half by a new central radial fence
       running from back to front with two gates (the existing radial
       fence dividing the present two Terrace areas - neutral area and
       home supporters - to have a second gate installed;

 (d)   the existing pitch perimeter fence to have additional exit gates
       installed - one in the neutral area and one in the home supporters
Tfte County Fire Service saw no objection in principle to the proposals,
subject^to more detailed investigation of t h e ^ - a s of escape w e t s ,
and the Building Authority similarly saw no objection,
submission of detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety
Sports Grounds Act and Building Regulations.

3.   Action

IT WAS AGREED

(a) That R, Grimshaw should investigate as a matter of urgency the means
of escape aspects of the proposals and let D. I. Vaughan know the
outcome.                                                   *

     That subiect to satisfactory clearance of these aspects by the
County Fire S e r v i c e , the outline proposals submitted by M e s s r s Eastwood
& Partners be agreed as now amended by the suggestions of the South
Yorkshire Police, also subject, of course, to the s u b m w i o n of t e
necessary detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act and Building Regulations.
                                      ■ cf** i
                       *32 - ‘S'


                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                Note of a Meeting held at the Hillsborough Stadium,
                    Sheffield on 4th February,   1982


PRESENT:   Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd

                              (Secretary)
           Dr. W. Eastwood    (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)
                              (Messrs. Eastwood & Partners)

           Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

                                   (South Yorkshire Police)
                                   (South Yorkshire Police)
                                   (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                                   (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                                   (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
                                    Council)
                                   (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
                                    Council)
                                   (South Yorkshire County Council)
                                   (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)

        Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to discuss*J:he apparent difference of opinion
on certain aspects of the radial barriers installed on the West Terrace
and the security gates at the top of the North stand ramps, as well as to
carry out the usual winter inspection of the Stadium.

-2.     Ground Inspection

A.      West Terrace

Whilst the whole Terrace had yet to be used, the matches played since the
erection of the radial barriers indicated that generally they worked well and
satisfactorily effected the segregation of opposing groups of fans.

However, (flie polic^ pointed out that in places the existing crush barriers
had been e&fceadedr'tip to and, in some cases, completely through the. new
radial barriers, which had the effect of making it relatively.easy for anyone
who wished to do so to climb from one pen to another. Also, in the pen
nearest to the South Stand, a small length of ,existing crush b arrier, had been
left unsupported.      ,'                    :v

IT WAS AGREED -

(i) : That, on balance/:idt jwas .^re£V^b;le;>€.r_o«i                                    ~
prevent crowd surge by the’ exis t i n g barriers :J>eing extended,up.^
through the new .radial barriers vthan to •:compietel^cp r ^ Y ^ ; j p e r s ^
able to climb from one pen to another, subject to review at the end of the             . -v<
current season.'      :                     -vt: ... - r. . . r .--jst ", :    ~ ;j:;'

 (ii)   That the unsupported small length of existing crush barrier would
be cut off.

                                                  -1-
 SO UTH YO R K S H IR E C O U N TY C O U N C IL
                W ith tl|e
                      tile c lm p lim e n ts of                    ’
                                                                   .ROUNDS ACT 1975
T H E C H lfeE /E X E C U T IV E                       ^                                   t^ m e id T *

r^j&] ' ' ....**                                                                         C1U>>* ”1,g        •
                                                                                                            ‘■35


                         FOR INFORMATION                            Metropolitan District Council)
                                                                   jlice)
                                                                   junty Fire Service)
                                                                   jlice)
                                                                   jlice)
                         FOR ACTION                                jlice)
                                                                    County Council)
                                                                   junty Fire Service)

                         FOR COMMENT


                                                                    ler the letter dated 9th Aoril
                                                                    rs relating to the proposals of
                                                                    3 construct two new banks of
                                                                    and new gates in order to achieve
                                                                    le Leppings Lane end of the
 From                                       D ate
 D epartm en t of A dm inistration
 C ounty Hall
 Barnsley                    Tel. Barnsley 86141 Ext       -----    that the proposals had been
 C R /A C E /C X 3 1
                                                                    ad made to the Club. At one
                       time both the West Stand and Terrace had been regarded as exclusively
                       for^the use of visiting supporters, but recent Patterns of « tendances
                       at the Stadium made it necessary to allow for some element
                   home supporters as well.

                       The proposals now outlined by the Club were generally acceptable to the
                       Police representatives, subject to: —

                       (a)     additional gates being provided between the turnstile numbered          16
                               and the wall of the inner access road;

                       (b)     the central area of the Terrace (indicated as t h e " ^ r a l area or
                               visiting supporters’ terrace) being divided m half by a ne
                                central radial fence running from the tunnel entrance to t e
                               pitchside security fence with gates erected so as to permit en y
                                to be diverted to either half as appropriate_(the proposed new
                                secondary radial fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
                                on the plan to be abandoned);

                       (c)      the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as home supporters’
                                terrace) also to be divided in half by a n e w central radial fence
                                running from back to front with two gates (the existing radl^
                                fence dividing the present two Terrace areas -neutral area and
                                home supporters - to have a second gate installed,

                       (d)      the existing pitch perimeter fence to have additional e x i t gates
                                i n s t a t e d - one in the neutral area and one in the home supporters
                                area

                                                                     1.
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                         ‘     “        "    '    ~   ’    ”           ^
                 Note of a meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield
                 fTistrict) held at the Police Sports & Social C lub, N i a g a r a ^
                 “              Sheffield, on 18th April 1985                    <-*


PRESENT: N.    Atkinson (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
         C.    Calvert  (South Yorkshire Police)  ^        _
         R.    Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
         G.    Stanley   (South Yorkshire Police)
         T.    Stewart   (South Yorkshire Police)
         G.    Sykes     (South Yorkshire Police)
         D.    I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County^Council)
         A.    Vickers  (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)



1.      Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 9th April
and plan from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners relating to the P£°P
the S h e f f i e l d Wednesday Football Club to construct two new banks
 turnstiles and-Various runs of fencing and new gates m o r d e r to achieve
 segregation of visiting supporters at the Leppings Lane end of the
•Hillsborough Stadium.

 2.     Consideration of Proposals

   ne P o i u i representatives pointed out that the proposals had been
 prompTrSfcTin the main by comments they had made to the Club. At
 time both the West Stand and Terrace had been regarded as exclusively
 for the use of visiting supporters, but recent patterns of attendances
 at the Stadium made it necessary to allow for some element of u
 home supporters as well.

 The proposals now outlined by the Club were generally acceptable,.to the
»■ Police representatives, subject to:-

 (a)    additional gates being provided between the turnstile numbered 16
        and the wall of the inner access road;

 (b)    the central area of the Terrace (indicated as         the neutral area or
         v i s i t i n g supporters’ terrace) being divided m half by a new
         central radial fence running from the tunnel entrance to the
         pitchside security fence with gates erected so as to permit en ry
         to be diverted to either half as appropriate (the proposed new
         secondary radial fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
        on the plan to be abandoned);

  (c)    the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as home supporters’
         terrace) also to be divided in half by a new central radial fence
         running from back to front with two gates (the existing radial
         fence dividing the present two Terrace areas - neutral area and
         home supporters - to have a second gate installed;

  (d)    the existing pitch perimeter fence to h a v e additional exit gates
         installed - one in the neutral area and one in the home supporters
The County Fire Service saw no objection in principle to the proposals,
subject tl more detailed investigation of the means of escape aspects,
and the Building Authority similarly saw no ob;,ect:ion subject
submission of detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety
Sports Grounds Act and Building Regulations.

     Action

IT WAS AGREED

(a) That              Should investigate as a matter of urgency^the means
of escape aspects of the proposals and let               know t
outcome

fb') That subiect to satisfactory clearance of these aspects by the
C o L t y F U e Service, the outline proposals submitted by
& Partners be agreed as now amended by the suggestions_o f _the South
Yorkshire Police, also subject, of course, to the                 *
necessary detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of Sport
Grounds Act and Building Regulations.
                      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

           Note of a Visit to the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield,
                             on 8th June, 1981
                         t           ". 1“       1
      PRESENT:   Representing the' Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

                              (Secretary)

                 Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

                              (South Yorkshire Police)
                             South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                               (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                             (South Yorkshire Police)
                              (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                               (South Yorkshire Police)
                              (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                             in (South Yorkshire County Council)

     1.     Purpose of Meeting

     The visit was the second in the twice-yearly programme of visits by Officer
     Working Parties to all five League Football Clubs in South Yorkshire, as
     mentioned at the meeting on 10th February, 1981, and originally referred to
     in the Chief Executive's letter to the Club dated 10th January, 1981. The
     visit on 7th April had been a special one in view of the Stadium being the
     venue on 11th April for a F,A. Cup Semi-Final match.

     2^_____Inspection of Stadium

     The representatives made a joint inspection of the Stadium.

     (a)   South Stand

    The progress of the monitoring of the apparent deflection in the steel
    trusses referred to at the meeting on 10th February was queried but, in
    the absence of Dr. W. Eastwood, no specific answer could be given.

    It was noted that the monitoring device to be sited adjacent to the new
    metal case for the batteries supplying the emergency power supply for the
    public address system (referred to at the meeting on 7th April) had yet to
    be provided.

    (b)    West Stand

    The cracked brickwork at the rear of the stand, as well as the apparent
    distress on the concrete pillars' supporting the steps at the rear of the
    stand and the cracks in the concrete at the top of both sets of stairs,
    had been made good.                   *

    As previously agreed, as soon as a grinder was next present at the Stadium
    the Club would round off the steel supports to the new emergency exit
    (nearest to the South Stand).

%   Following experiences at the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match, the Club were
    considering revised arrangements on the terracing in front of the Stand.
    An assurance was given that the Officer Working Party would be consulted
    when these had substance.



                                        - 1 -
                                                                           ^>wvuV.tMa
   Press Moltice 41                                                     4 February 1983

                           MINISTER REMINDS FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS OP
                            PR0GEHIRE3 TO PREVENT K50TBALL VIOLENCE

          Neil Macfarlane, Minister for Sport, has written to Mr Jack Dunnett JP MPt
 President of the Pbotball League, a reminder letter on measures to prevent violence at
 football matches.    Mr Dunnett and Mr Bert Millichip, Chairman of the Jbotball    Association
 agreed with the Minister that recent outbreaks of violence indicated that League Clubs
 should be reminded of the available FA guidelines.     Mr Dunnett is to circulate the
 Mmister*s letter to all 92 5botball League Clubs.
          In his letter the Minister expresses his deep concern — shared by the FA and -
 the Fbotball League — at the recent return of crowd violence at some league matches.
 In reminding clubs of the precautions which must be taken, Mr Macfarlane pays tribute
 to the efforts clubs have already made and looks forward to the preparation of new and
 detailed advice for clubs by the Liaison Group and the* proposed Council of Europe
Working Group.
          Experience in the UK and abroad demonstrates that adherence to the available
 guidelines effectively limits crowd violence.    The Minister highlights two key
requirements:
         —   effective segregation:
         -   careful and detailed preparation and planning, especially with the Police
             and for problem matches.
         Mr Macfarlane°s letter urges clubs to look again at their procedures and
precautions to prevent further outbreaks of violence in the weeks to come.
NOTE TO EDITORS   ^                          '
         Bie '’liaison group” was set up by Mr Macfarlane to plan'for the Kbrld Cup*
It is currently chaired by Mr Bert Millichip. It comprises officials of the FA, the
Fbotball League, Department of the Environment, Department of Transport, Home Office,
Association of Chief Police Officers, British Rail, and British Transport Police.

         It was agreed at last Thursday*s meeting of Council of Europe Sports Ministers
in-Paris that a working group should be set up to prepare a European Convention on
Violence in Sport.

         A copy of Mr Macfarlane*s letter is attached.




                                                 Press Ehquiries: 01-212 3493/2^5/6
                                                 l^ight Calls (6.30pm-8.00am)
                                                 Weekends and Holidays: 0 1 - 2 1 2 7071
                                                 Public Ehquiries: 01-212 3434; ask
                                                 for Public Ehquiry Unit
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                 BOWMAKER HOUSE
                C o n s u lt i n g E n g i n e e r s                                                                23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                    SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W . Eastwood                    B i n g . , Ph.D .. F E ng., F.I.C.E..                                              Tel.: (0742) 583871
                                F .I.S tru ct.£„ F.G S., M .C on j.E .

A. A. Wood                      B E n g ., P h.D ., C .E n g .,f .l.C .E ..
                                F I S t i u c t . E . M .I.W .E.S., M .C om .E

A. G. Burdett                   G .M .. B .S c.(E n g ), C .Eng., M .I.C.E.

R. C. A. Eastwood               B .S c.. C Eng., M .I.C.E.. M .l-S tiu ct E.

Associate* .*
Geoffrey Spir                   C .E n f.. M.I.C.E.. M .I.M.ch.E.

C. S. Greaves                   B .Enf., C .E nf M.I.C.E., M .I.Scrua.E

A. J . Clough                  8 .A .. C .E nf.. M.C.I.B.S..                                   Qnr~BflU— -KEZJA S/ SR/ 3.563
J . A. Strange                 C .E n f.. M .I.Struct.E,                                       YourRaf:                        |
C onsultant;
A. L. Percy                     M .T«fc.{Hon.). B.Sc.. C E n j., F I.C E .
                                F.I.Strutt.E ., F.I.Muo.E.. M R.T.P.I.


                                                                                        -          HAU.   L a. . . . : / . .

                                                                                            IC3£

  South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                          14 December, 1981
  County Hall,
  Barnsley,
  South Yorkshire.
  S70 2TN


  For the attention of T

  Dear

                            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                         Radial Fences at Leppings Lane End
                                          and Security Gates

                The work on the radial fences and security gates
  indicated on our drawings 3563/1-3 which we sent to you on
       T                                  , is now substantially compl<
                Three first team home games have been played since tne
 fences were erected.                                        We have not heard any formal comments
  from the Working Party about the operation of the fences and
 their access gates but we understand that representatives of the
 South Yorkshire Police have inspected the work and they are
 satisfied with the new arrangements.
                To increase security it is proposed that pairs of gates
 are installed at the bottom of the two staircases at the back of
 the West Stand.                            Two copies of our drawing 35 0,4 are enclosed
 showing details of the gates.



                                                                                 Yours sincerely,



                                                            Registered in England^ - No. 1134531
                                                                                                                              BOWMAKER HOUSE
        ST WO O D & P A R T N E R S                                                                                           23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                C o n s u ltin g     E n g in e e rs
                                                                                         1                                         [FIELD S11 9AS
                                                                                                                              Tdt.:| (0742) 583871
W. Eastwood                    B .E n g .. P h . D . F .E n g .. F .I.C ,E „                  Department oi
                               F . I . S t r u c t E . F .G .S .. M .C o n s .E .
                                                                                                                                                   a n d at:
A. A. Wood                     B . E n g , P h .D ., C . E n g . F .I.C .E ..
                               F .l.S tr u c t.E „ M .I.W .E .S ., M .C o n s ,E
                                                                                              coiw* ;,,a t ...;-                   36   H ig h   H o lb o rn
A. G. Burdett                  G .M ., B . S c .( E n g ) . C .E n g .. M .I.C .E .
                                                                                                                                   London WC1V 6AA
                                                                                             J O U M tOnXSKhU sr,
R. C. A. Eastwood              B .S c ,, C .E n g .. M J .C .E ., M ,I .S tr u c t.E .
                                                                                                                                   Tel.: (01) 242 7436
Associates l
G eoffrey Spir                 C .Ent ., M.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.

C. S. G reaves                 B.Enf., C .E n f„ M.I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                         Our R e f:
                                                                                                                               WE/KH/3 563
A. J . Clough                  B.A., C .E nf.. M.C.I.B.S., M.I.Mech.E,

                                                                                                         Your R e f:            DV/SY/583/5
J . A. S tran g e              C .E nf,, M .I.Struct.E.

C onsu ltant:
A. L. Percy                    M.Tech.<Hon,), B.Sc.. C-En*.. F.I.C.E.
                               F.LStruct.E., F.I.Mun,E., M.R.T.P.I.




 Chief Executive,                                                                                                               26 January 1982
 South Yorkshire County Council,
                                                                                                              DEPARTMENT OF PLMJHIHB
 County Hall,
                                                                                                                           AUD DESl'.'-J
 Barnsley,
 South Yorkshire,                                                                                                      Rl;C"IV'-n
 S70 2TN.                                                                                                              2 9 JAN 1932
                                                                                                              D *          1 ..!
 For the attention of Mr.                                                                                                   -------- j...

                                                                                                                                        j.
  Dear I                                                                                                       cpy to
                                               Safety of Sports Ground Act                                      ~'Lii:L>
                     Thank you for your letter of 20 January.
                     I believe the small number of points needing
 clarification have a l r e a d y                                                   b e e n ‘discussed between
                                   and \                                                 One of these refer to the
 need for a goal post type frame over the gates but this is
  in fact already provided by the sheeting frame.                                                                          There is
 also a small amount of rust staining arising from misplacement
 of reinforcement in the 100mm thick retaining wall.                                                                               There
  is no immediate danger arising from this and an appropriate
 maintenance repair will be carried out.
                     Turning now to the radial barriers on the West
  terrace it is of course accepted that where there is a
 crush barrier passing through or close to the radial barrier
  it will make it easier for anyone who so wishes to climb                                                                               .
 over.               Nevertheless we believe it is not unreasonable to
  leave the crush barriers as they are.                                                                If all barriers
 were removed back to a distance say 1.2m from the fence it
 would mean a 2.4m*wide gap which is not protected by barriers.

                                                                      Registered in England — No. 1134531
/T W O O D & PARTNERS




 There would be a consequent loss of calculated spectator
 capacity which is undesirable from the Club's point of
 view.      However from the point of view of safety a strip
 of that width without a single crush barrier would be a
 major hazard.
         It should be kept in mind that the introduction
 of these radial barriers has effected a very great
 improvement from the point of view of segregation of
 spectators but to achieve perfection from the point of
 view of segregation brings with it other disadvantages.
 I believe that what we have done is a reasonable compromise
 between the various interests.
            In the second paragraph on this subject you
 refer to dangerous pieces of rails protruding from the
 crush barriers.        I have not had an opportunity to check
 this since receiving your letter but I am informed that
 the word    'dangerous'   is a little exaggerated and they
 do not of course protrude into* a gangway as there is no
 gangway at this position.
         With regard to the security gates around the North
  stand the point at issue is whether the encroachment into
  the gate width is at all critical.       The remaining clear
 width is 3.300mm which is equivalent to a six unit exit.
 Thus th<2 theoretical number of people who can get out in
 eight minutes using the green book figure of 60 people
 per minute per exit width is 5,760 shared between the two
  routes.     The stand capacity is of course 10,000 and in
  practice more than half the number tend to use the lower
  exits since most spectators are reluctant to walk uphill
  to the upper set of exit stairways.       The picture is that
  fewer than 5,000 people will be trying to get out of
  exits which can accommodate 5,760 in eight minutes.
Received from t h e B u il di ng Sur veyor ,

S h e f f i e l d C i t y Council t h e f o l l o w i n g o r i g i n a l

f i l e s r e l a t i n g t o t h e H i l l s b or o ug h ground of

S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F.C.

F i l e s Nod.     73A, 73B.1, 73B.2, 73B.3




                                    /

Signed                                                          West Midlands Pol ic e
^       i   f   Y                              (a J x ^ /   <y£Vc—v$      <^     ?<vv"i>-cf> ,q /S - 4- .'%^i


                                                                                                 I%i^*U-*aS
    I                                                                                             D44.S3
Z                                                   tW*—    0      ‘C4,                                 ''
3                                        ’C f r r      ^wCo^— O        *^<V    Inj                      ”

f               €   *    7 ^ c       ’        ^                                      1
    s               t^   ^ e SW & Y L j ka&~s-J                                                   v     *'
    4

    7                                    U3»M T ^ l, c*.                                          4 . 5 . ffy

    *



    i<c>

     f)
    12-
         - 2




          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY   FC
                HILLSBOROUGH
'U-J
   ft-
                                         ^      -rMkF~$




The Incorporated Association of Architects and Surveyors
                                                                                                                                                     kT V      L jJ ^          l i O X    —   7 .1   V


                                                                    .'■_■■     '                                        lL - r       4,     6 />                ..    ■
               .   .    .         f                                                v                            »


     2. $                         £>o°             w W           ’                                            rcL          "2> , W 4 -                                        *ff-       wv<£=-

                                         '        : . Y_.                                               •
                                                                                                        ■ ■ 2 w ,'4'.i                    (| a                  ■.' -,...-
     2 . 4-                      C fO ^          k f l'o lt f b m - ■        * ( * * £ “ • ( > 4 -W ^                            ^         <4-f


                                                                                                                              *4-          5 j(«                     ^                          .
        2.* «S                Z^"* f                  >            ^                   ^                                             ^            ( < c p <.                             *



         2., C.               ,f\couA                                   (^)1.4 «*                                                    i              4-         (■eW


         I.!,                ^ o y IL***. ^                                                  <tSo?u ^
                                                                                                                                 <-N>V"                              I2. W,


                                                                                                                                                                                                     A
                       / C s^vw-ix .\iA'A                                    C^              co^ s                       y«^0



    * 4 * 0                 \ t~ /® ~ - K    ^                               -tGb          £r4r^        !   (\< /         M c -y C        ) f & 0




     °).Lb                      isfVaX                                                                                           j!eL^                   @                       •       fS74>
                                    Hs^T                                                   Cy           |it~-uwt4                        Aw^/<^— >                                       £/o iST                   -
                                    C * 9 ~ ^ Cfc*‘r,s                                 ^    >                                                                                        ~ S 4 P             (£S0^ j
                                           ("S^-e ■«^*o                                 |Vfc*ieyw £. H£»4-

         I'sid-X*— ^yV

    p , 2~£> ^ C3h                                                 *- tt&£%f
    |P' "2.^)                                                                          ■0^      vxA^w—              ivw^ftl-t— *

    p. 3 ^                       \^                    “TTt              1 Cew\a>~^                                 iS-K^x^                         ( ^*vlC               ^

     ^                      t A— £.                                                                 0 - ^ 6 ^ *                               KO aa ^ ^/              -/w&«». CiwfC

                                  ^ ,                   Se^U-^                Cvy0<^'~A— ’                    'As\iLX                <s~tM^L.                aJ/ sft-a/P /*-n                J^*4&
                                                                                                                                                                     ^ ^7v                           in«^J

         » 4 r                      ^                 ^4-



    .     -p. 7 f                                                                            yuetz.                 ^                             vj.        V^O-O^A-O?

v    • - ,■                                                                                                                                                                              v:

              ■
              '■'
                :
                ->           -      ■.       ■,            ..           .■ •            '.      -;              • - ,-.                                        '?■ .v^--
   A28                                                  ■birtrti                                                                                                                                                                THE SUNDAY TIMES 21 MAY 1989


 S P O R T 1
PRIOR to Hillsborough, two

                                     Ministers ignored football safety warnings
leading British safety experts                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ron Noades, the Crystal Pal­
gave repeated warnings to                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ace chairman, has been deal­
Home Office ministers that                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ing with five separate agencies
the enforcement of legislation                                                                                                                                                                                                                       —the local authority, the fire
covering safety at sports*                                                                                                                                                                                                                           brigade, the police, the St John
                                    lies with each appropriate        dom, and which is backed by a                                                                            City fire disaster, Tye and        seven replied. “We felt we         Ambulance Brigade and the
grounds was inadequate, and         local authority.                   600-strong inspectorate.                                                                                Fenton submitted detailed          were wasting our time,” said       licensing justices
that as a result a major               But local-authority control,      Tye believes the Health and                                                                           safety proposals to the            Tye. “Some people just don’t          “In themselves they are all
disaster at a British football     according to Tye, has not been      Safety at Work Act to be the                                                                            Poppleweil Inquiry.                learn.”                            reasonable,” he said. “But
ground was likely to occur.         a success. It has been frag­      best legislation of its type in                                                                            Tye argued that fences must         Fenton also contacted clubs     they overtap each other, they
    The warnings came from
James Tye, the director gen­
                                    mented and inconsistent, with
                                    some authorities enforcing
                                                                      the world. “Football grounds
                                                                      belong under it as much as any
                                                                                                                            byChrisLiglrtbown                                  incorporate adequate means         about first-aid provision, and     contradict each other and they
                                                                                                                                                                               of escape. Fenton insisted that    received an equally disap­         slow up everything.
eral of the British Safety         safety standards strictly, but     factory or shop,” he said last       Tye's worries were shared        local authorities,” he said.       clubs should provide property      pointing response. Some clubs         “It's crazy. We need the
Council, and Commander             others not. Tye and Fenton         week. “Whatever further leg­      by Commander Fenton of the            Fenton then approached          equipped first-aid posts.           merely said their arrange­        government to pull them into
Derek Fenton of the St John        believe that the much more         islation there has bssn, that     St John Ambulance Brigade.          Lord Ferrers, Home Office            Both proposals were in­         ments were fine; others, in­       one agency.”
Ambulance Brigade.                 rigorous 1974 Health and           Act should still apply to foot­   Fenton was frankly horrified        minister of state and deputy      cluded in Popplewell's final       correctly, said it was the St          Noades knows that clear
   There are two pieces of leg­    Safety at Work Act should,         ball and be enforced.”            when a brigade survey showed       leader of the House of Lords:      report. But neither was prop­      John Ambulance’s own res­          guidelines from a single
islation which can apply to        and indeed in its strict word­        When the special sports-       that eight Football League         “I told him I did not think the    erly incorporated into the         ponsibility to lay on medical      agency like the Health and
safety in sports grounds: the      ing does, apply to sports          grounds legislation was in­       elute made no provision at all     Act was definitive enough,         Green Code, which remained         facilities. Some did not reply     Safety Executive will not pre­
1974 Health and Safety at          grounds.                           troduced after th e Ibrox         for first-aid facilities. The      and that one day something         voluntary.                         at all.                            vent the kind of problem he
Work Act, and the 1975 Safety          If the Health and Safety at    stadium disaster, Tye had pro­    Green Code, he noted, de­          serious would happen.”                Tye and Fenton were also           But some clubs would wel­       faced at Crystal Palace’s home
o f Sports Grounds Act             Work Act was applied, foot­        found misgivings. He says that    votes just one line to first-aid      Ferrers also replied that       unhappy with the way clubs         come the enforcem ent of           match with Birmingham.
   The Home Office has for a       ball grounds would be the          local authorities did not im­     matters.                           safety was a matter for the        themselves responded to safe­      stricter legislation. Not least
long lime had a policy of          responsibility of the Health                                                                                                                                                                                        But it would enable him to ■
                                                                      plement the Green Code, the         Some two years ago, Fenton       local authority. But, of course,   ty matters. They both con­         Crystal Palace, where, last        feel everything had been done
applying only the Sports           and Safely Executive, which        government's guidelines on        took his concerns to the Home      subsequent events at Hills­        tacted individual League clubs     weekend, there was once again
Grounds Act, which specifies       controls safety in every other                                                                                                                                                                                   to prevent an avoidable trag­
                                                                      football safety. “They knew       Office. “They just kept com­       borough proved that Fenton’s       after Bradford. Tye circulated     the awful sight of ambulances      edy like Hillsborough or Brad- .
that the issuing of certificates   place of work and enter­           nothing about stadium safety      ing back with the line that        fears were justified.              all 92 elute, offering to ran a    on a football pilch.               ford or Ibrox occurring at his
o f safety for sports grounds      tainment in the United King­       and no one made them learn.”      safety was entirely up to the         Earlier, after the Bradford     course on ground safety. Only         In pursuit of a safe stadium,   club.
       THE SUNDAY TIMES 23 APRIL 1989
 n

                  HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                                                                                                                                           Police monitor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               bensaiii stand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SOUTH STAND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pfayer-situnne




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I! asm. natch starts.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           v Huge surge dirts already overcrowded terrace.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A crush banier st the front has failed,                                                                                                                  control




                        TRUTH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             causing deaths. As fans fall forward their                                                                                                         between stands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             plans ate filled from the tone! behind




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             crowded
                                                       ® A chance decision —opening a left or right-hand gate at Sheffield
                                                       Wednesday's stadium - turned an afternoon’s sport into a national tragedy
                                                       last Saturday. But long before the wrong gate was opened, the seeds of
                                                       disaster had already been sown. The stadium's turnstile computer system
                                                       made no distinction between the number of fans entering main stands and
                                                       the crowded, fenced sections within them; vital police communications                                                                                             less crowded pen
                                                       links had broken down; and English football's sorry tradition of__________
                                                       drunken hooliganism created confusion just
                                                        when clarity was essential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sprirt for nearest          RIGHT HAND
   R O G E R M A R S H A L L w a s su p p o r te rs h a d b e e n d r in k -
  s ta n d in g a m id th o u s a n d s o f in g h e a v ily a n d th e a t-
  L iv e rp o o l su p p o r te rs jo s - m o s p h e r e w a s b e c o m in g                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LEPPINGS
  tlin g        to      get in to             th e in c re as in g ly f re n z ie d a s th e
  H ills b o ro u g h p o u n d la s t k ic k -o ff a p p ro a c h e d . A l-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Where the fans                               ENTRANCE                  Left hand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Seating stiles
  S a tu r d a y w h e n h e r e a lis e d th o u g h m a n y w ere q u e u in g
  fo o tb a ll w a s o n th e b r in k o f in a n o r d e r ly fa sh io n , o th -
  a n o th e r d is a s te r u n le s s h e e rs w ere h in d e rin g police
  t o o k d r a s t ic a c tio n .                   e ffo rts; s o m e w ere se en                                                    Mmm
      T h e F A C u p s e m i- fin a l s tu b b in g c ig a re tte e n d s o n a
  b e tw e e n        L iv e rp o o l      and        p o lic e horse,
  N o ttin g h a m         F o rest         w as B u t w h at w as a n urgen t
  a b o u t t o k ic k o f f a n d 4 ,0 0 0 r e q u e s t f ro m M a rs h a ll to
  f a n s w e re s till c la m o u rin g th e p o lic e c o n tro l r o o m
  t o g e t in . M a n y w ere i n in sid e th e g r o u n d — a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Nrtsioe tarnstil
  d istre ss, s o m e w e re s c re a m - o v e rlo o k in g t h e c ra m m e d
  in g a n d i t w a s a p p a r e n t L ep p in g s L a n e S ta n d — w as
  p e o p le w o u ld d ie u n le s s t h e p a s s e d                                        o n to o th e r office rs
  c ru s h w a s e ase d . S h o r tly a t th e                                                g ro u n d a s no m o re                                        o f h is p r e d e c e sso r. C h i e f                  Countdown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        h o o lig a n s p u to               if the left-hand gate had been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sh in g , sh oving                                                               95 football supporters’ lives might have been spared
  b e fo re 3 p m , th e p o lic e t h a n a p r o b le m a t th e S u p e r in te n d e n t B r ia n M o le , a n d s c re a m in g f ro m                                                                     the
  s u p e rin te n d e n t m a d e a d e - L ep p in g s L a n e e n d ’                                     w h o h a d b e e n p o s te d t o c e n tr a l p e n s i n th e west                             th r o u g h th e tu n n e l in to th e                          A s c h e e rs a n d sh o u ts          d isa ste r in v o lv in g th a t c ity ’s    H illsb o ro u g h , c lu b s a re ta k ­
c is io n th a t w ill h a u n t h im                     A N o ttin g h a m s h ire jo u r - a n o th e r j o b i n B a rn sley , s ta n d . A s f a n s b e g an c lim b-                                    c e n tr e , b u t a ro u n d th e sid e s fille d th e                        s ta d iu m , th e        fan s, i t is c le a r th a t m a n y o f     in g d o w n th e ir fen cing . But
  fo r th e r e s t o f h i s life: h e n a lis t w h o s .p e n t t h e d a y - M o le h a d le d th e p o lic in g o f in g th e 12ft p e rim e te r fence                                                   o f th e s ta n d . A L iv e rp o o l c ro w d s o n th e L iv e rp o o l                                th e c la im s a r e tru e.                   Shat fen c in g w as p u t u p in
  o p e n e d a ga te.                               w -ith.      t h e p o lic   -- e a t .•t h e c u p . se m i-fin a l? tw o y e a rs b e tw e e n th e m a n d th e p ilc h                                 fan    s a id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ............ - —t h a t w h e. .n. .h. .e c..a m e    te rr a c e s su rged f o rw a rd a n d               T h e r e is n o d o u b t th a t         th e firsi place b e c a u se o f
      U n til to d a y i t w a s a s­ o p p o s ite e n d o f t h e g r o u n d b e fo re a n d h a d p r o v id e d a n l o e sc a p e th e c h a o s, po lice                                               th r o u g h         th e tu r n stile s               a c ru s h b a rr ie r b ro k e u n d e r          th e E n g lish d ise as e, w h ich           f oo tb all h o o lig a n ism M o re
  s u m e d h e h a d n o c hoice . s a id M a rsh a ll’s r e q u e s t a p - e x e m p l a r y                                        b lu e p r i n t       o f tr ie d t o p u s h th e m back.            1988, th e e n tra n c e t o th e                      th e       in c re d ib le        p ressu re ,     e v e n tu a lly re su lte d in th e          c o n stru c tiv e ly , L iv e rp o o l is
  B u t In s ig h t c a n re v e a l t h a t p e a re d t o h a v e b                e e n - g r a n te d w h a t 'u T d. o . i n . th e e v e n t o f-
                                                                                   ,------                                                                                E v e n b a n k s o f v id e o       tu n n e l le ad in g t o th e m id -                 H u n d r e d s tu m b le d d o w n                h u m ilia tin g b a n o f all c lu b s       to m a k e its sta d iu m a ll­
  M a rsh a ll h a d a n o th e r o p - a t 2 .5 5 p m , w h e n a m e ssa g e a n e m e rg e n c y                                                                   s c re e n s in th e p o lic e n io n -  d ie s e c tio n w a s b lo c k e d . A t h e                    te r r a c e s ,     tr a m p l i n g   f ro m E u r o p e a n c o m p e titio n      seating, It c o u ld be th e on ly
  tio n : h e c o u ld h a v e o r d e r e d c ra c k le d o v e r a se rg e an t’s                              D~ u c k e n fie ld ’s o p e ra tio n a l U o ring r o o m th a t relay ed                    h n e o f ste w a r d s a n d p o lic e th o s e b e n e a th th e m . A t th e                          a fte r th e H eysel d isa ste r, is          f o o lp r o o f w ay to e n su re
  th e o p e n in g o f a g a te o n th e r a d io th a t t h e m a tc h h a d p la n c e n tr e d o n w h a t all p ic tu r e s f ro m clo sed -c irc u it                                                    officers p r e v e n te d p e o p le                  fro n t, p e o p le w ere w ed ged                 still e m b e d d e d in th e n a t-          th a t n e v er ag ain d o e s th e
  left o f t h e c ro w d e d tu r n - b e e n d e la y e d fo r 15 m in - fo rc es in B r ita in a tte m p t to c a m e ra s a ro u n d th e g ro u n d                                                       g o ing th r o u g h a n d d ir e c te d              h a rd        a g a in st      th e       w ire    io n a l g a m e. A lth o u g h th e          b e h a v io u r o f se veral th o u ­
  stiles, w h ic h w as o b s c u re d u te s.                                                               d o th r o u g h o u t th e se aso n : d id n o t a le r t p o lic e t o th e                     th e m t o o th e r p a r ts o f th e                 fen c es, c h o k in g a n d g a sp in g           lo u tis h       b e h a v io u r      at     sand           L iv e rp o o l      fan s
f ro m h is v ie w b y th e c ro w d .                    T w o m in u t e s la te r, how - k e e p r iv a l su p p o r te rs„ seg- fact th a t th e y w e r e w itn ess-                                      terrace,                                              fo r b re a th .                                   H ills b o ro u g h w a s c o n fin e d       c o n trib u te to th e d e a th s o f
T h e th r o n g w o u ld ■ h a v e e v e r , p o lic e h e a r d o v e r th e rr r e sa te d ; s to p f a n s b n n p n t                                            in g m o r e th a n th e ho olig an-          T h is ye ar, a lth o u g h a b o u t                T h e d e a th a n d in ju ry to ll            to few er th a n a t H eyse l, th e           95 o f them .
s u rg e d m to a n o p e n c o u r t- r a d io s t h a t th is h a d b e e n a a lc o h o l in to th e sta d iu m ;                                                  ism th a t h a s b e co m e a            5 0 p o lic e w ere sta tio n e d in                  m u s t h a v e b een m o u n tin g                ide a th a t L iv e rp o o l’s fans
y- a rd a- n d r, o u n d th. e. . s.id. e. .o. f ------------
                                                     m is ta k e .       T. .h. e.      L iv e rp
                                                                                        —         Vo. o l uj,aa tr th u iuQse
                                                                                                                            sc w  v mh uo cuea re a lre ad y m        rituum a l Jjai
                                                                                                                                                                                  p a r It <ji
                                                                                                                                                                                           o f so   c ce
                                                                                                                                                                                                s\ ma .v r.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         i.    th
                                                                                                                                                                                                               »«•-e a re a b e tw e e n th e tu               rn - e v e n b e fo re th e g a m e h a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           . .....                                                      w ere b la m e le ss for last                 Reporters. Graham Brough.
 th e L e p p in g s L a n e s ta n d te a m w ere a lre a d y m a k in g d r u n k f ro m en terin g ; a n d                                                             T h e c o m p u te r lin k e d to.   stiles a n d th e tu n n e l, th e y                  b e g u n a n d b e fo re th e 4 ,0 0 0            w e e k e n d 's trag e d y is u n ­          Richard Caseby, Stephen
 in to te rr a c e s th a U w e r e f a r •u         t h e- :--------
                                                            ir w e y — f r o m*ut-h e d re ssin g u 'rg e- f- a n s -                               -•           '    th e tu r n stile s a t L epp in gs      w ere n o t o r d e r e d t o b loc k                 p e o p le b e h in d M a rsh a ll's               lik ely to s u rv iv e th e scru -            Davis,    D avid Leppard,
 f ro m        full. T h e d is a s te r r o o m to t h e tu n n e l a n d t h e {, r a e _                                                                           L a n e a lso g a v e n o h in t o f     its e n tra n c e a n d d id n o th in g g a te c a m e sw e e p in g d o w n                            lin y o f th e in q u e st,                   C h arles   O u lto n , M ax
 w o u ld a lm o s t c e r ta in ly n o t m a tc h w o u ld g o a h e a d                                         W ith m o r e th a n 1,00 0 im p e n d in g                                c a la m ity .      As
                                                                                                                                                                                                               t o s to p th e tid e th a t s u rg ed                th e tu n n e l to m u ltip ly t h e -                In         th e      w ake         of      Prangnell, Rowena Webster
 have happened.                                      p la n n e d . G le n K ir to n , F A o ffice rs o n m a tc h d u ty a t e a c h p e rso n f ilte re d th ro u g h                                        th ro u g h th e o p e n gate.                        d e a th to ll a n d                tu r n a
      M a rs h a ll o p te d f o r th e a s s is ta n t s e c r e ta r y , w h o                             th e g ro u n d a n d in t h e c ity , th e B tu r n stile s, th e ir e n try                         T h e la ck o f co -o r d in a tio n              tr a g e d y in to u n im a g in a b le
 w ro n g g a te w h e n h e c h o se i n th e p la y e rs’ tu n n e l a t th e v_ ,wl                            e ry th in g avv„ s e e m, ek,d t o b e w a s logged, a le r tin g police                    b e tw ee n p o lic e in s id e th e c a la m ity .
  to o p e n o n e o n t h e r ig h t o f              tim e , s a id l a t e r “ W e n e v e r r u n n in g                    t o p la n a s th e a n d g ro u n d s ta f f t o p ote n-                     g r o u n d , o u ts id e L ep p in g s                   E v en a fte r th e surge,
 t h e tu r n stile s. T h e r e s u l t               r e c e iv e d a n y r e q u e s t. I f w e t u r n s t i l e s                   opened               a t tia l o v e rc ro w d in g p ro b lem s.     L an e a n d in th e m o n ito rin g p o lic e in sid e th e g ro u n d
 w a s e x p lo siv e . T h o u s a n d s              h a d , w e w o u ld n ’t h a v e 1 .3 0 p m . F o r a n o th e r h o u r ,                                        B u t th e c o m p u te r r e -      a n d c o n tro l r o o m s la st s e e m e d o b liv io u s t o th e fact
  sw ep t in to t h e o p e n c o u r t-               d rea m ed          of         tu r n in g         it th e re w a s n o su g g e stio n o f c o rd e d o n ly th e n u m b e r o f                     S a tu rd a y         is e v e n m o r e               t h a t p e o p le w ere d y in g a
  y a rd a n d h e a d e d fo r th e                   d o w n ."                                            th e h o r r o r w h ic h w o u ld f a n s e n te r in g th e m a in                             p e rp le x in g g iv e n t h a t fea r few feet f ro m w h e re th e y
 o n ly o b v io u s a cc e ss t o t h e                  T h e fa ilu re o f M a rs h a ll’s sh o r tly u n f o ld b e fo r e th e s ta n d ; c ru c ially , i t d id n o t                                   w as a lre a d y m o u n tin g o n                   sto o d . S o m e o ffice rs c learly
 te rra ce s: a tu n n e l th r o u g h a tte m p t                      t o p o s tp o n e           t h e e ye s Df                  54 ,0 0 0 c ro w d m o n it o r th e n u m b e rs enter-               th e te rr a c e a s e a r ly a s b e lie v e d th e y w ere d e a lin g
 w h ic h th e y c o u ld se e th e k ic k -o ff a n d t h e s u b s e q u e n t ancj                                     n ie      m illio n s           w h o in g e a c h o f t h e fen ced                2 .2 0 p m , 4 0 m in u te s b e fo re                 w ith a “ p itc h in v a s io n ” as
 p la y e rs w a r m in g u p o n th e fa ta l m is ta k e w ere                                             w a tc h e d o n T V .                                  se c tio n s w ith in it. O fficers      k ic k -o ff a n d 2 0 m in u t e s                    la te a s 3.06 , a s f a n s s c ra m ­
 p itc h .                                           d o u b te d ly          th e         p r im a r y           A t a b o u t 2 .3 0 p m , 3 0 c o u ld se e f ro m th e c o m -                            be fo re M a rsh a ll re q u e s te d a               b le d o v e r th e fence to
      T h e y c r a m m e d in to th e cau se s o f B r ita in ’s I ' _                                      m in u te s b e fo re k ic k -o f f th e p u te r th a t th e re w as ro o m                     p o s tp o n e m e n t                                e  sc a p e th e frenzy.
 n a r r o w c o n fin e s o f th e a n d p e rh a p s m o s t s h a m e lu i p 0 jjce c a m e ra s fo cu sin g o n fo r se v e ra l th o u s a n d p e o p le                                                     A t th a t tim e , f e n s b e h in d                 T h e r e a lity o f w h a t w as
 tu n n e l a n d b u r s t o u t o n to s           sp o r tin g tra g e d y .           B u t t h e ,}je L e p p in g s L a n e e n d in th e w est s ta n d terraces,                                       th e g o a l o f L iv e rp o o l’s h a p p e n in g d a w n e d o n o ffi­
 te rr a c e a lre a d y h e a v in g w ith se e d s o f d is a s te r w ere so w n sta r te d                                 s h o w in g          p ic tu r e s W h a t           th e      H ills b o ro u g h
                                                                                                                                                                                                               B ra ce G ro b b e la a r w ere a!- c e r s o n ly th e n a n d th e y
 su p p o r te rs , s o m e o f w h o m              lo n g be fo re th e p a n ic set-i                     t h a t s h o u ld h a v e a le r te d c o m p u te r c o u ld n o t tell                       rea d y su ffe rin g a n d th e                        b e g a n th e ir d e sp e ra te stru g ­
  w ere b e in g c r a s h e d u n ­                                                                         D u c k e n fie ld a n d h is office rs th e m w a s th a t th e e x tra                        d is c o m f o rt         s h o u ld        have       g le to p u ll p e o p le o u t. B u t it
 c o n sc io u s e v e n b e fo re t h e E A R L Y                        la s t         S a tu rd a y         to th e g r o w in g crisis. I t w a s r o o m w a s o n ly in th e o u te r                  b e en o b v io u s to office rs                       w a s to o la te t o d o m u c h
 g a te w as o p e n e d .                           m o r n in g , C h i e f I n s p e c to r c le a r t h a t th e re w a s a lre ad y                               ‘p e n s” . T h e m id d le p e n s     s ta tio n e d o n th e to u c h lin e m o r e t h a n re tr ie v e lim p,
      O u ts id e ,            M a r s h a l l D a v id " 'D u c k e n fie ld                                .................
                                                                                                             se rio u s o.......................
                                                                                                                               v e rc ro w d in .................
                                                                                                                                                     g ii             w ere a lre a d y tig h tly p a ck e d   a n d fac in g th e c ro w d . W h e n b r u is e d b o d ie s f ro m th e still
 w a tc h e d th e su rg e e b b ,                     lo o k in g fo rw a rd w ith c o n - c e n tr a l se c tio n o f th e te rra c- w ith fan s w h o h a d a rriv e d                                      th e te a m s c a m e o u t to s u rg in g c ro w d .
 o b liv io u s to th e m a y h e m                    fid en c e t o h is fir s t                   b ig ing,                                                        e a r lie r f o r th e            c o v e tc d
                                                                                                                                                                                                               w a rm u p a t 2 .4 0 p m , u n ­                                                                                              FLY }N STYLE
  h is m is ta k e h a d u n le a s h e d               m a tc h .                                                i t a p p e a rs th a t f ro m th is p la ce s b e h in d th e goal.                         c o n tro llab le          su rg es         w ere     W H E N L o rd Ju s tic e T a y lo r                            AT TWICE THE SPEED OF SOUND
 w ith in . A d e c is io n in te n d e d                 A lth o u g h h e h a d b e e n m o m e n t o n w a rd’s, th                             ' e re w as                                                m a k in g p e o p le stru g g le a n d               c o m p le te s h is in q u iry in to
 t o p re s e rv e life a n d lim b i n v o l v e d                           in         p o l i c i n g a b r e a k d o w n in c o m m u n - W H E N                                      H ills b o ro u g h sc re am fo r h e lp .                               th e d isa ste r, he w ill ,g iv e h is
 had         trig gered th e m o s t m a tc h e s a t S h e ffield U n i-                                     ic a tio n s b e tw e e n o ffice rs h o s te d a n F A c u p sem i-                                  T h e te a m s r e tu r n e d t o ju d g m e n t o n w h e th e r                           and
 a p p a llin g traged y.                            te d , h e h a d little e x p e rie n c e                in s id e        and         o u ts id e       th e fin a l la st y e ar, p o lic e u se d        th e d re ssin g r o o m fo r a la s t- h o w it c o u ld                          h a v e b e en
      I n th e s e e th in g c ru sh , o f fo o tb a ll a n d h a d b e e n                                   g ro u n d a n d th e ir c h ief, th e                            sam e       c o m p u te r 10  m in u t e p e p -ta lk a n d c a m e a v o id e d . P o lic e p ro c e d u re s
 f a n s f o u g h t fo r th e ir liv e s. a p p o in te d a s th e o ffic e r in                             tu c k e d a w a y in th e c o n tro l c o n tro l th e flow o f th e                            b a ck o u t o n to th e p itc h a a n d t h e b e h a v io u r o f th e
 M a n y d is a p p e a r e d u n d e r cl)arg e                                  lh r e e We,.ks u.............................
                                                                                                                n it b e tw e e n th e so u th a n d c ro w d in to th e                               L epp in gs
                                                                                                                                                                                                              few m in u te s b e fo re kick -off:                  s n p p o n o r s w a ib e m in m ly
 p11ile cs o• *f sc ra m b lin g 'm  b o d' "ie s' , earlie - r.                                             w e st.................................
                                                                                                                        s ta n d s (see d ia         r agm
                                                                                                                                                         ra}m. ). LLaannee eenndd.. BBuuit tht lel ne i aa     still nnooth
                                                                                                                                                                                                              still          thin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ingg hhaadd bbeeen   en ddoonnee sc ru tin is e d b y th e 500 W est                            CONCORDE, THE ORIENT-EXPRESS AND SALZBURG
 th e ir la st a c t a d e s p e r a te                                                                                                                   d u ty s im ila r c ru s h o f f a n s w as         to a lle    - v ia• te th e g ro w in            - g M id l a n d s d e te c tiv e s in te r ­
 h a n d -h o ld o n th e legs o f                        T h is d id n o t w o rr y h im ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The Great Romantic Adventure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    v ie w in g         10,000 p o te n tia l
             crin ^ n r i i n o n l p i h o w e v e r, a s h e a tte m p te d t o th o u g h t th e y h a d se en i t all safely d is p e r s e d a lo n g                                                       th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                             crisis in th e m id d le “ p e n s”                                                                               May 21-24 and May 22-25
 had            th e ir    life’s      b r e a th e m u la te th e e x ce lle n t r e c o r d                b e fo re: ro w d y , d r u n k e n                    te rra c e , fu n e lle d                  not
                                                                                                                                                                                                             o f th e L e p p in g s L a n e                  te r- w itn e sse s.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W h a t is a lre a d y k n o w n ,
d r a in e d a g a in s t t h e w ire                                                                                                                                                                                                                               h o w e v e r, is th is : n o m a tte r
m e s h fen c e s u r ro u n d in g th e
p itc h .    N in e ty -f o u r   d ie d ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    h o w c u lp a b le p a rtic u la r in ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d iv id u a ls m a y u ltim a te ly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          srxsau
a n o th e r d ie d i n h o s p ita l                                                                                                                                                                                                                               p r o v e l o h a v e b e en , th e
la te r, 170 w ere in ju r e d , a n d                                                                                                                                                                                                                              p o lic e a t th e m a tc h c a n n o t
t h e r e c rim in a tio n s b e g a n .                                                                                                                                                                                                                            b e h e ld so le ly resp o n sib le
ONE           m an         w ho          knew                                                                                                                                                                                                                       f o r t h e d isa ste r.
 im m e d ia te ly t h a t a d is a s ­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  U n d o u b te d ly a se c tio n o f                  CONCORDE'S                '1 001        ARABIAN            NIGHTS'
tr o u s d e c isio n h a d b e e n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 th e fo o tb all-fo llo w in g f ra te r­                  Four Magical days In the Kingdom of
ta k e n w a s J a c k S to n e , th e                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n ity la s t S a tu r d a y r e g a rd e d                 Iordan
g a te m a n resp o n sib le f o r th e                                                                                                                                                                                                                             th e e v e n t a s a g o o d e xcuse                       May 28-31        ^              £2195 |
e n tra n c e M a rsh a ll h a d d e ­                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fo r a p u b -c ra w l a n d an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o p p o rtu n ity            to       pu rsu e             Isndan to Aqsba z *’ "
c id e d to o p e n . A sk e d by
p o lic e to o p e n it to le t th e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                h o o lig a n is m               in         th e
c ro w d th ro u g h , h e re fu se d ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a n o n y m ity o f th e c ro w d .
h a n d in g th e k e y s t o an                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T a y lo r's in q u ir y w ill likely
o ffic e r.         “ T h a t ’s         your                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c o n c lu d e th a t it w as th is
r esp o n sib ility ,” h e sa id .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e le m e n t th a t sp e a rh e a d e d
    C o lin M ilto n , w h o w as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   th e surg e in to th e lu n n e l
o p e ra tin g         th e        tu r n s t i l e                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a n d o n t o th e terraces.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W h a te v e r h is fin d in g s, it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               THE        LAND         OF       THE        MIDNIGHT              SUN
n e a r e s t to S to n e ’s g a te , w as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AMidsummer Nights' Dream In Lapland
sim ila r ly          h o r r i f ie d .     He                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w o u ld b e a n in ju s tic e to                          lune 20-21 and lune 24-25     EI43S
a s k e d p o lic e : “ W h a t h a v e                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sin g le o u t M a rsh a l] fo r h is
y o u d o n e t h a t for?” a n d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d e c is io n t o o p e n th e g a te. It
w a s to ld : ‘T h e r e a r e a lo t                                                                                                                                                                                                                               w as M a rsh a ll, a fte r a ll, w h o
m o r e g o ing to g e t k illed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a p p e a re d        to      rea lise th e                         I Lapp Farmhouse • IWidnigH!Cocktail
o u ts id e i f w e d o n o t.”                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e x te n t o f th e d a n g e r a n d
    T h e d is a s te r c o u ld h a v e                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a tte m p te d to p r e v e n t a
been         a v e r te d       i f a c tio n                                                                                                                                                                                                                       trag e d y b y r e q u e stin g a
p r o p o se d by M a rsh a ll 20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   p o s tp o n e m e n t.          By        th a t                   SUPERSONIC CHAMPAGNE FLIGHTS
m in u t e s be fo re th e k ic k -o ff                                                                                                                                                                                                                             tim e , th e se e d s o f d isa ste r                         I hour 4Qminute Concorde Experience Flights from Land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a t H ills b o ro u g h h a d a lre a d y                                        Heathrow 6389.
h a d b e e n ta k en . A t 2 .4 0 , he
m a d e a n u rg e n t r e q u e s t fo r                                                                                                                                                                                                                           b e en sow n .
t h e k ic k -o ff t o b e d e la y e d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T h e f a n s a l H ills b o ro u g h
b y 15 m in u te s.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 w ere th e v ic tim s o f a
    He had               w a tc h e d th e                                                                                                                                                                                                                          te rrib le a c c id e n t a n d c la im s
c ro w d o u ts id e g ro w bigg er,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                b y s o m e p o lic e office rs th a t
m o r e a n x io u s a n d m o r e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  th e ir         b e h a v io u r           w as
d a n g e r o u s b y th e m in u te .
H e n e e d e d tim e l o g e t th e m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d r u n k e n a n d u n ru ly h a v e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a d d e d s a lt to th e w o u n d s.                  Ill              0227-763336
a ll in to th e g r o u n d safely.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H o w e v e r, h a r d a s L iv e rp o o l
A n o th e r th in g w a s w o rry in g                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fin d s th e m to sto m a c h in
h im : m a n y o f th e L iv e rp o o l                The funerals begin:                                               coffin of Francis                                                      into Liverpool's St Niargaret-Maiy church t h e a f te r m a t h o f y e t a n o th e r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     THE SUNDAY TIMES 23 APRIL 1989

                                                                                              TIME TO MOURN - TIME TO BUILD
   Concept: Ron Labinski
   Graphic: Gary Cook




                                                                                                                 Replay TV screen



                                                                                                                                                                                                            FisodligMmg

                        Concourse wid
                     enough for ambulances                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ficcess/ exit spira
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ramps wide enough
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       seating in corners                                                  (or emergency vehicles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Suites
   behind columns, so no
             obscured


                                                                                                                                                                                                        throughout
                                                                                          Four corner
                                                                                          columns to raise

                                                                                           support roof




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           K £ M f~ v J u b ile entrances
            Public entrances
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mm




                                                          VIP entrance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hem public entrances
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (catering, goods,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TY vehicles etc)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Medical facilities at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !> ;       both ends
                              Toilets aid
                               catering
 Concourse                                                                                                                                             Eseaators


Concourse
                               Suites
                                                                                                                                                                              5 PUBLIC ENTRANCES
                                     Toilets and catering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /     /       ’> /    Large parking a re a s |||
              Concourse                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Service road                                                        with easy access
                                                                                             9 ft drop to                                                                                                                                      surrounding stadium                                                    on reinforced grass
                                                                                        pitch detars invasion
                                             service
                                                                                         Artificial surface




 T H IS W E E K E N D T h e Sun-                B u t H illsborough h a s also          suited o n e o f the w orld’s fore­                                                                                            been 95% filled a n d un e m ­              p le m e nted a t 2%, football
 d a y T im e s is p ublishing no           g iven football a u n iq u e a n d          m o st designers o f stad ium s,

                                                                                                                                                                                     llJICiC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       p lo ym e n t in W ales h a s fallen        w ould b y n ow h a v e b enefited
 English football m atch reports.           p ro b ab ly final o p p o rtu n ity lo     R o n L abinsk i, a n d asked him                                                                                              from 16% to 8%. O f course,                 by so m e £9 5 m . T h a t alone
 A s K en n y D alglish p u t it:           sa ve itself. T h e focus o f th e          to design a pro to ty p e football                                                                                             W ales has been a b le to cash in           w ould h ave e n ab le d th ree o r           B U IL D 1N G d e ce nt, safe sta­
 “ Football is irrele v an t n ow .”        n a tio n is o n th e n a tio n a l gam e   sta d iu m , w hich is illustrated                                                                                             o n th e success o f th e British           f o u r n e w sta d iu m s to h av e          d iu m s w ill n o t, by itself, e lim i­
    T h e on ly a ctiv ity th a t is        a n d there is a p u b lic d e term i­
 n o w rele vant for football is the        n a tio n th a t aclio n m u st be
                                                                                        above.
                                                                                            L abinski builds w hat Jim m y                        by the Sports Department                                             eco no m y in th e 1980s. B u t th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       agency h a s helped i t seize
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b een built.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B u t th e clu b s them selves,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n a te hoo ligan ism . B u t e stab ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lishing a n e n v iro n m e n t fit for
 setting in m o tio n o f ro o t a nd       ta ken.                                     H ill described last week as                                                                                                   w h atev er b usin ess o p p ortu ­         h o w ev e r m u c h they plead               fam ilies is th e m o st practical
b ran c h reform . AH energies,                 Football m u s t seize the              “ palaces ra th e r th a n priso ns” .       T h e v isio n m u st be bold.            I t should d o so, a s a m a tte r n ities w ere going.                             p o verty , h a v e ha rd ly begun to         long-term ste p th a t can be
e very resource a n d every m o ­           tim e. S o m u st th e governm ent,         T w o fea tu res a re im m ed iately T h e rebu ild ing plans o f clubs o f urgent necessity, by treating                         S i m i l a r l y , in L o n d o n 's    learn h o w to raise m oney.                  ta k en. T h e lock-th em -up -in-
m e n t betw een n o w a n d the            fo r football c an n o t so lve th e        o bvio us. T h ere a re n o fences such a s C olchester m u s t b e the football a s if it w as a de velo p­ D ock land s, th e existence o f                              T h ere a re exceptions, an d th e y          cages a p p ro a ch m u s t n e v er
sta rt o f n e x t season s h o u ld be     p rob lem s a lon e, a n d d o e s n o t    a ro u n d th e pitch; a n d th e re are n o rm , n o t th e exception.             m e n t area. T h a t m e an s estab­ th ree separate c ouncils, each                  p o in t th e w ay forw ard. In G las­       again b e co n tem p lated .
d ev o ted to m akin g English              a lo n e be ar th e responsibility          n o sta n d in g terraces.                                                          lishing a n agency, m odelled responsible fo r tra n s p o rt an d                     gow , R an gers deriv e o nly 30%                W e ll- a p p o in te d f a c ilit ie s
f o o tb a l l s a fe , d e c e n t a n d   fo r all th e neglect a n d degen­              L abinski said: “ I h a v e b een T H E O B JE C T IO N S c an a l­ o n o rganisations such as th e plann ing in its borough, m eant                                   o f th e ir in com e fro m gate re­          w ill a l s o e n c o u r a g e m o r e
m odem .                                    e ra tio n th a t led to H ills­            saying fo r five years th a t ready b e h e ard in chorus. W elsh D ev elop m en t Agency th a t a n integrated pla n w as                                                 c eipts. T hey m a k e m ore th^ h           w om en to a tte n d football
    T h a t is w hy we believe th a t       borough. I t is n o go od w aiting          sta n d in g terraces a re a n ac­ W h ere will th e m o n e y com e a n d the L o n d o n D ock land s im possible. T h e L D D C h a s a t­                              £ 2 m a y e ar fro m c om m ercial           m atches, a n d th e presence o f
th is seaso n — n o t ju s t th e FA        fo r th e rep o rt o f th e T ay lo r       c id e n t w aitin g to h app en . I from ? W h at a b o u t planning D evelop m ent Corp oratio n.                           trac te d e n o rm o u s a m o u n ts o f    a ctivities, o f w hich ov er £ lm           w om en h a s b een sh o w n lo
C u p b u t th e w hole se ason -           in q uiry . T h a t m a y tell u s w hat    c o uld n o t build th e m w ith a perm ission? W hat a b o u t coun­                  T he Football Agency w ould p riv a te inv e stm e n t. I t has                     c o m es fro m lotteries.                    h ave a ben eficial effect on
sh o uld h a v e b een sto pp ed.           happ ened . W h at m a tte rs is            g ood conscience.”                        cil pe rm issio n fo r change o f n o t be responsible for the m a d e possible th e build in g o f                                 T h ese com m e rc ial activities         aggressive b e h a v io u r b y m e n .
H illsborough, supposedly on e              w h at is to b e done.                          W h at w o uld it be like to at­ u se w h en selling an inner-city redevelopm ent o f a geograph i- a n a irp o rt, a railway an d a                                   h ave e n ab le d R an gers to re­           T h e a rrest o f w o m e n a t foot­
o f th e safest g rou nd s in Eng­                                                     te n d a m a tc h a t such a place? s ta d iu m ? W h a t a b o u t th e in- cal area, b u t o f o u r football 12,500-seat sta d ium - all in                             b u ild th e ir sta d iu m , m aking it       ball m a tc h es in E ng land is al­
la n d, h a s p rov ed th a t yester­       FIR S T , o f c ourse, th e re is th e Y o u w ould park y o u r c ar {or b re d affection for life o n th e grounds. It w ould e ncourage 18 m o n th s. T h e red tape w as                                         th e m o st m o d e rn in Britain             m o st u n k n o w n , alth o u g h th e y
d a y ’s m a tc h es w ere played in        q u e s t i o n o f o u r f o o t b a l l a rriv e by bus), n o t miles aw ay terraces? A nd w h o w ill lead p rivate a n d local go ve rn m e nt sw ept away, a n d th e dock­                                      a n d th e o n e w ith th e m o st            a cc o u n t fo r 15% o f spectators.
sta d iu m s th a t a re de a th traps.     g rounds. L ast w eek w e con- in a side street, b u t in the c ar th e gam e to th e n ew era?                                 capital to finance the changes. la n d s transform e d , in jobs,                     seated acc o m m o d a tio n . R an ­             T h ere w ill b e losers in th e
                                                                                       p a rk encircling th e sta d ium .            F o o tb all's o w n leadership, It would h ave th e p ow er to housing, a n d local am enities.                             gers arc financin g fu rth er re­             n ew football w orld. In ev itab ly
                                                                                       T o e n te r th e c a r p a rk you, and o f course, has p rov ed utterly gran t p lanning p erm issio n an d                                                               b uild in g by issuing bo nd s o f            club s w o uld go o u t o f b u si­
                                                                                       every on e else, w ou ld h a v e to useless. Last week th e Football a uthorise change o f use. It M O N E Y is th e n e x t question,                                     £1,000, w hich g uarantee th e                ness, a n d th e League w o u ld be
                                                                                       disp lay a ticket. D irectly, or A ssociatio n h a d little idea w ould also h av e th e po w er to a n d th e easiest excuse for in ­                                     h o ld e r a se at fo r life. T aking         d rastically red uced; b u t th a t is.
                                                                                       afte r a m eal, yo u w ou ld be w h at to do, w hile th e Football close dow n c lu b s th a t fail lo a ctio n . T h ere is n o single sol­                               th e b o n d idea, an d rem em b er­
                                            LONGINES                                    u shered to a n um b e re d seal.         L eague w ent in to p urd ah , m e et safety stan dards.                            u tio n here, a n d there is no             ing th a t new sta d iu m s c o st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                som e th ing th e C h e ste r rep o rt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rec o m m e n d ed 20 years ago,
                                                                                           Y o u w o uld b e protected em erg ing o n ly to censu re clubs                     M ost im po rta n t, it w ou ld be g o o d r e a s o n w h y fo o tb a ll          £500 a seat, it follow s th a t a             a n d to be w elcom ed. A fo rm o f
                                                                                       from the w eather. Y ou w ould th a t h a d p o stp o n e d m atches led by som eone w ith real pol­ s h o u ld hav e a call o n tax­                                      b ra n d n ew sta d iu m c ould be            su p e r league, o p e n to all o n
                                                                                       be able to watch replays o f the o u t o f respect to th e dead, itical clout, capab le o f knock­ p a y e r s ’ m o n e y (e s p e c ia lly                               financed entirely by fan s buy­               m e rit, w o u ld b e co m e a reality.
                                                                                       actio n o n g ia n t electronic before being sh a m ed in to ing heads to gether, a n d h old­ sin ce m o st taxp ay ers n e v er go                                       ing £5 00 bonds.
                                                                                       screens. M o st im p orta nt, y ou backtracking.                                                                                                                                                                             T h e FA a n d th e Football
                                                                                                                                                                            ing his ow n a t c ab in e t level. n e a r a football grou nd ). But                     A n o th e r o b v io u s source o f
                                                                                       w ould b e safe. T h e sta d iu m                                                                                                                                                                                        League {two ru lin g b o d ie s is
                                                                                                                                     T h e League a p p ea re d to P e te r W alker, th e secretary o f o th e r sources o f finance could                        inco m e is th e la n d on w hich             a n o t h e r B r iti s h n o n s e n s e )
                                                                                       w o uld be bu ilt o n a green-field believ e th a t H illsborough h ad sta te for W ales, springs to be m a d e available.                                                 o u r o ld in ner-city g rou nd s
                                                                                       site, aw ay from th e n arro w n o lessons for th e m . It w as a n m in d as a possible candid ate;                                                                                                                     w o uld b e co m e increasingly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L ast y e ar p ools com p an ies        sta n d. T h e va lue o f th is la n d is     irrelev an t, a n d th e ir p o w er re­
                                                                                       confines o f in ner-city streets. F A problem . Life m u st go on, he could com bin e it w ith his to o k £6 61 .2m from football                                          sufficient in m a n y cases for               d u c ed to respo nsib ility fo r th e
                                                                                       I t w o uld be b u ilt entirely o f th e y said. D id n ’t th e y m ean existing responsibilities.                             slakes, an d paid£28G m o f i t to          clubs to sell u p a n d bu ild                fixture list.
                                                                                       n o n -c o m b u s tib le m a te ria ls, d e ath m u s t go on?                         T h e W elsh D ev elop m en t th e g o v e rn m e n t in tax. In                   a n o th er sta d iu m w ith o u t pay­
                                                                                       a n d c o uld be evacuated in no              E ng land 's football a u th o ri­ Agency w as set u p in 1976 to 1968 th e C he ste r rep o rt re ­                         ing a penny.
                                                                                       m ore th a n 15 m inutes.                                                                                                                                                                                                B IG M A T C H E S in fu tu re
                                                                                                                                  ties a re a c o n tem p tib le m ix­ rekindle the em b ers o f W elsh c o m m e n d ed th a t a levy o f 1%                         Again, a Scottish club has                m u st be all-ticket, a n d sh ou ld
                                                                                           T h e sta d iu m p ictured a b ov e tu re o f inco m petence a nd industry. Five years ago the o r 2% o f Ihe to ta l p o o ls stake                                   ta k en th e lead. S t Jo h nston e
                                                                                       ■w ould ho ld 75,000 people, a n d indifference; th e y m u st be b y­ agency presided o v e r 20m after ta x b e channelled in to a                                                                                     be sho w n liv e o n televisio n.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h a v e given th e ir g ro u n d in           T h is is w hat occu rs in A m e ri­
                                                                                       w o uld la ke less th a n tw o years passed, a n d o n ly th e govern­ square feet o f e m p ty factory football levy board.                                               P e rth to th e Asda sup erm arket
                                                                                       to build . A sim ilar design can m e n t can d o th at.                                                                                                                                                                  c an spo rt, a n d it e n su re s th a t
                                                                                                                                                                           space. T o day th a t space has               I f th e levy had been im -              c h ain. In retu rn , A sda a re
                                                                                       b e used fo r larger o r sm aller                                                                                                                                                                                        large n u m b e rs o f fan s de sp er­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  bu ilding S t Jo h n sto n e a n all-         a te to se e th e ir te am in a g a m e
                                                                                       sta diu m s. T h e cost o f building                                                                                                                                       s e ale r sta d iu m o n th e out­
                                                                                       such a sta d iu m is roughly £500                                                                                                                                                                                        they believe to be a ll-im p o r­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sk irts o f th e city,                        ta n t d o n o t n eed to trav el, o r
                                                                                       a seat. S o a 50,000-seat sta ­                    The playing surface can                                                                                                     S t Jo h n sto n e ’s exam p le has
                                                                                       d iu m w o uid c o st a b o u t £25m ;                                                                                                                                                                                   a tte m p t to get in to a sta d iu m
                                                                                                                                          be raised hydraulically                                                                                                 b een follow ed by Scu nth orp e              w ith o u t a tick et. T h e re a re
                                                                                       a 2 5 ,0 0 0 - s e a te r w o u ld be              to roof level completely                                                                                                a n d W alsall. E v en Southend ,             n o w plen ty o f te levisio n, sa t­
                                                                                       £12.5m . S tad iu m s w ith fewer                  enclosing the stadium.                                                                                                  w hose R o o ts H all stad ium               ellite a n d cab le chan n e ls rea d y
                                                                                       th a n 2 0,000 seats co uld be d e­                An artificial surface                                                                                                   w as b u ilt in 1956, m a k in g it          lo b id fo r b ro ad c ast rights.
                                                                                       signed differently, a n d w ould                   can then caver the                                                                                                      th e new est in th e L eague, is
                                                                                       be m u ch cheaper.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Safety m u s t be p a ra m o u n t,
                                                                                                                                          concrete  flooring                                                                                                      m oving. I t h op es to sell R o ots
                                                                                           O f course, n o t e very club                                                                                                                                                                                       a n d p en ny -p inch ing a t th e ex­
                                                                                                                                          below.                                                                                                                  H all fo r £ I2 m .
                                                                                       c o uld affo rd such a sta diu m                                                                                                                                                                                         pense o f safety will n o lo nger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G ro u n d sh a rin g is a n o th er     d o . T h is se ason A rsen al u n­
                                                                                       a n d n e w sta d iu m s c an no t                                                                                                                                         w ay o f o b v ia tin g th e cost o f
                                                                                       a p p e a r o v e r n ig h t . I n te r im                                                                                                                                                                              veiled a c hanged stru c tu re a t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sta diu m s, a n d here, surely, is           th e ir Clock E n d . F ifty-tw o .
                                                                                       safety m easu res a re needed,                                                                                                                                             a n o p p o rtu n ity to p u t right
                                                                                       b u t a re n o t enough by th em ­                                                                                                                                                                                      executive bo xes h a v e been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  o n e o f th e m o st ludicrous as­          built, with a sp o rts hall.
                                                                                       selves. Every club m u st com ­                                                                                                                                            p ects o f B ritish football.
                                                                                       m it its e lf to fu nd am e n ta l re­                                                                                                                                                                                      But th e terraces rem ain, an d
                                                                                       building, o r be closed d ow n.                                                                                                                                                L iv erp oo l a n d E verto n ha v e     th e r o o f is su p p o rte d b y fo u r
                                                                                           M a n y still believe th a t they                                                                                                                                      large g ro u n d s w ith in h a lf a         large concrete pillars. W hen
                                                                                      w ill h a v e to m a k e d o a n d                                                                                                                                          m ile o f each oth er. A suitable            th e terraces a re full large n u m ­
                                                                                       m e nd , a n d spend m on ey on                                                                                                                                            site fo r a jo in t gro un d exists at       bers o f sp e cta to rs h a v e a lim ­
                                                                                      refu rb ish m en t. B u t th a t w as                                                                                                                                       th e d isuse d Speke airport.                ite d view o f th e p itc h . T hey
                                                                                      w h at w as d o n e a t H illsbor­                                                                                                                                          A rsenal a n d T o tte n h am also           m o v e to follow th e actio n . A s
                                                                                      ough. T h e ban d-aid ap pro ach                                                                                                                                            h a v e g ro un ds close together,           we now know , su ch a terrace is
                                                                                      ha s se rv e d th e gam e ill. It                                                                                                                                           a s d o C helsea a n d Fulham ,              inherently d ang ero us. S o w h y
                                                                                      m u st now b e a b an do ned .                                                                                                                                              M anchester U n ite d a n d M an­            d id A rsenal n o t build a can ti-
                                                                                           L ast week, th e c h ie f exec­                                                                                                                                        c h este r C ity, Rangers a n d              levered sta n d w ith n o o b stru c ­
                                                                                      u tiv e o f C olchester, hard ly a                                                                                                                                          C eltic, H ea rts a n d H ibern ian.         tion s? Cost, th e y to ld us.
                                                                                      big-inoney c lub , to ld us th a t                                                                                                                                          D u n d ee a n d D u n d ee U n ite d            T h a t ex cu se is n o lo nger
                                                                                      fu rth er in v e stm e n t in th e ir ob ­                                                                                                                                  a re on th e sam e road.                     go od enough. T h e o ld arg u ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The end stand can                         It is w idely believed th a t            m e n ts n o io n g e r apply. T o all
                                                                                      solete L ayer R o ad stad ium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          be moved to reduce                      paro chial riv alries will n o t al­         tho se w ho g ree t th e k in d o f
                                                                                      w o uld b e “ thro w in g good
                                                                                      m o ney a fte r b a d ”. C olchester                                                                                             the seating area when                      low gro un d sharing. B ut th a t is         id eas we h a v e o u tlin ed w ith
                                                                                      in te n d to sell th e ir g rou nd a n d                                                                                   otter   activities  are staged                   n o t th e experience a b ro ad. In          th e usual o b jection s - it c a n ’t
                                                                                      bu ild a n o th e r sta diu m . F o r a                                                                                                                                     M ilan, I n te r a n d M ilan share          b e done; it h a s b een trie d be­
                                                                                      fu rth e r in v e stm e n t o f £4m                                                                                                                                         the San Siro sla diu m . In T u ­            fore; w e m ust w ait for the re ­
                                                                                      th e y w ill a lso get a sp orts hall                                                                                                                                       rin, Ju v e n tu s and T orin o share        po rt; there is n 't th e m oney; th e
                                                                                      a n d c o m m u n ity facilities.           □ R O N L A B IN S K I, o f H O K In ter­                     b aseb all a n d gridiron facility in th e U nited                the Stad io Com unale. In Pa ns,             fan s w on't w ea r it; th e g o ve rn ­
                                                                                                                                  national, provided th e concepts for the illustra­ S ta te s. H e is c u rrently engaged a s a con sultan t                     M a tra a n d Paris St G erm a in            m e n t w on’t h e lp - w e h a v e
                                                                                                                                  tions above. H e is a n award-w inning                        fo r new a re n a s in Sheffield, B irm ingham                    sh are th e P arc de s Princes. In           o n e answer.
                                                                                         Research: Cltris Ltghtbown,              arc h ite ct wlio lia s been a t th e forefront o f s ta ­                                                                      R io, th ree big clubs, Fla-
                                                                                                                                                                                                a n d L ondon.__________________________
                                                                                            Sue Moll, Jason Tomas                 dium design for 25 ye ars and h a s been in­                                                                                    mengo, Flu m in e n se a n d Bota-            THAT WAS BEFORE
                                                                                                and Steve Tongue                  volved in th e d evelopm ent o f alm o st every                   • Full Weather Information Service p22                        fogo, share th e m a ssiv e M ara-             HILLSBOROUGH.
    A18                                                                                                                                                                                                           THE SUNDAY TIMES 23 APRIL
THE pictures of (be anguished         Football madness is the                                                                                                                                         goal chanting, swearing and ledge that if we had been brate,
suffering of young people          responsibility of the control­                                                                                                                                      tam ing newspapers. Nobody they would never have died.
trapped against the fences at      lers, the clubs and the support­                                                                                                                                   at that match had ever seen                             CBetty
the Hillsborough ground are a      ers, net the police, hospitals                                                                                                                                     the like before. Nobody knew                       Birmingham
sad reflection on our times, in    and travel facilities. Spec­                                                                                                                                       they were witnessing an event HOPE: I bare been a lifelong
which people going for enter­      tators should be limited to
tainment are treated as caged      seating accommodation, and                                              1 Pennington Street, London El 9XW                                                         which would lead, shortly, to supporter of football, but in
                                                                                                                                                                                                      the death of common decency, recent years my interest has
animals rafter than as the         the rest should remain at home                                                                                                                                     and, in far-off 1989, to the dwindled. This interest has,
unique individuals they are.       grounds watching on closed-                                                                                                                                        death of 95 innocents.            however, been rekindled in the
   A terrible tragedy has taken
place, for which ministers
must take their share of
responsibility - not least the
minister for sport, whose ob­
                                   circuit TV, again from seats,
                                   until football can look after its
                                   followers safely.
                                      Resources which are in
                                   short and expensive supply,
                                                                          The Hillsborough disaster:                                                                                                     Stem action was needed at current season through the
                                                                                                                                                                                                      that time, and it was expected eyes of my son.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      by the man in the street; but       On Saturday he was mascot
                                                                                                                                                                                                      his expectations were in vain. for the local dub, who looked
                                                                                                                                                                                                      The cage was introduced in­ after him well. It was a happy
session with the question of
hooliganism has overridden
any concern for public safety.
He, at least, should acknow­
ledge his responsibility by ten­
                                   like hospitals and police,
                                   should not have to be taken up
                                   for football madness. There is
                                   so much to Ik said at the mo­
                                   ment against football, and so
                                                                            whose responsibility?                                                                                                     stead. Many in my age-group family day. But at the same
                                                                                                                                                                                                      who remember the football time as my son was enjoying
                                                                                                                                                                                                      stadiums of the 1950s, with his small moment of glory,
                                                                                                                                                                                                      their mixture of eccentrics and another 10-year-old was being
                                                                       middle section of terracing was   the middle section of the ter­ areas which were sparsely- did it take so long for the        professors, feel a lump in the crushed to death in Sheffield.
dering his resignation now.        little for it.                      severely congested, whereas       race long before the final populated?                       police to appreciate how seri­   throat when it dawns on os
                       A Weeks                        K Shackleton                                                                                                                                                                        I don’t quite know what I
                                                                       there was abundant space in       surge, when it was plain that it  Why, when the external ous things were?                    what we gave away. Like cow­ think now, but I just hope that
       Winchester, Hampshire                 Lancing, West Sussex      the adjoining sections, especi­   was grossly over-populated? gate was opened, probably                        Jon Schofield   ards, we caged and segregated football, such an essential part
CONTROLLERS: Last Sun­             POLICE: As one who, stand­          ally to the northwest. But the    Why, when it was obvious to allowing many people into the                      London N2'    good people, rather than pick of our culture, is not destroyed
day morning I was in church,       ing at the Liverpool end,           terrace was divided by barriers   everyone in the ground that ground who did not have tick­ COWARDICE: I remember              up the gauntlet.                 in the aftermath.
where prayers were said for        experienced the Hillsborough        running from top to bottom,       saturation point had been ets, were die fans dm pre­ standing on the terraces at                The innocents betrayed at                 Michael Shenstene
these bereaved and injured at      disaster at first hand, I have to   which prevented the crowd         reached, were steps not taken vented from crowding down Birmingham’s S t Andrews             Hillsborough paid a terrible                 Wetheral, Carlisle
the Sheffield football match. 1    say that the tragic events had a    spreading itself out naturally.   to siphon off some of the crowd the tunnel under the west ground in 1963 looking un-         price. Our price is the sight of
urge you to keep up your pres­     sad inevitability.                     Why were spectators al­        from the middle section and stand into the already suf­ comprehendingly at a group of        their crashed, caged bodies • Stadium o f the future: page
sure for radical action.              Long before the kick-off, the    lowed to continue flooding into   relocate them in the adjoining focating middle terrace? Why supporters standing behind a     and the sure and certain know­ A24. Press photographs: F3.
mm
              pours
        out at the
        Kop shrine
                                                       1,000 men, w omen an d child­
   -V: Sunday Times Reporters                         re n g a th e re d o u ts id e th e
                                                      ground's Leppings Lane gates,
               FOOTBALL fens an d the which have become a shrine to
         - people o f three cities rem em- the 95 dead.
               bered the dead o f H illsbor-             Inside the stadium , an esti­
         : ough yesterday in the biggest m ated 300 relatives and fr­
        *..< display o f public m ourning iends o f those who died had
        A since Sir W inston Churchill’s travelled from Liverpool to
              funeral in 1965.                       pay their ow n private homage
                 H alf a m illion soccer fans a t near the spot where their
              league grounds throughout the          loved   ones perished.
     ^ , c o u n try s to o d s ile n tly a t            B ut the cathedral o f flowers
     iZ: 106pm in m em ory o f the 95 a t Anfield’s K op end was
     .s?. supporters crushed to death at w h e re                  m o st    of      th e
      > . the F A cup semi-final between H illsborough survivors gath­
              Liverpool and N ottingham ered to seek solace.
    <* Forest a t Sheffield.                            M ore than a m illion people
                At Liverpool's Anfield gr­ have com e to th e ground in
             ound, 15,000 fens inside the the last seven days to pay their
          . stadium and another 250,000 respects. O fficials have still to
             q u e u in g o u ts id e sang th e decide w hat to do w ith the
       _ club’s anthem , You’ll N ever countless thousands o f flow­
       -■ Wa^k Alone, in a rem em- ers, whose fragrance hangs in
     V brance service led by the city’s the Anfield air. But 95 o f them
            leading churchm en.                     — one for each o f the dead —
                                                    will be cast from a b o at in to
    4.          H ie Liverpool players and
                                                    the Mersey in a gesture o f
    * chief executive Peter Robin- remembrance.
            sonw eptopenlyasaS alvation
            Army band played the song                   M eanwhile, Keva Coom b-
            th a t has com e to symbolise the es, leader o f Liverpool city
            club, the city, and now the council, m arked the one-week
            tragedy.                                anniversary o f the tragedy by
                                                    calling fo r a new national
                O ne week to the m inute sports stadium to be built on
    ^ after the disaster, a ribbon o f Merseyside.
   ir ; thousands o f s e a r a s joining
    ^ th e th ree-q u arterso R m ileb e- - “ Society deserves that,** he
            tw een E verton’s C o o d iso n said. “ We need th a t in Mer­
            Park and A nfield was com ­ seyside. G overnm ent should
            pleted. In Stanley Park, fens give th e lead. Local authorities
           from the two d u b s arranged a should support an d the pri­
           giant heart o f scarves with vate sector should donate as
           “ R IP 95” picked out in the well.”
           centre.                                     Six o f the injured were still
   ~           In N ottingham , Sheffield seriously ill in hospital yes­                                                               spent on ground improvements
  ;**■ and Liverpool all activity                  terday.   Five were described as                                                     in English football over the
           cam e to a halt. Bells rang out, “ very poorly” in the intensive                                                            p ast 14 years.
  ^ sirens sounded, traffic stopped               c  a re   u  n it a t th e R o y a l Continuedfrom page 1                                O ne senior m inister noted
           and people wept in the street HaUamshire H ospital an d one aw ay s u p p o r te r s a t th e                                last week th a t hotels had not
           as thousands observed a min-           as    “ poorly”   in the coronary                                                    been given taxpayers’ money
  -- ute’s silence.                               intensive care unit a t the Leppings Lane end for lp^inie                            to pay for expensive safety fea­
                                                  N orthern G eneral. Five others matches.                                             tures such a s fire doors. “The
               In Liverpool 8,000 people, there were said to be im prov­ • T he government will not                                    customers had to pay more”,
    „ m any citin g and clinging to ing.                                                    pick up th e bill for turning th e         he said. “And th e customers
    : loved ones, packed the m ain                                                         c o u n try ’s b ig g e st fo o tb a ll
                                                      The father o f tw o teenage grounds into all-seat stadium s                      will have to pay th e irne cost ol
  ■fc. Church Street shopping pre-
                                                                                                                                       th e sport once th e safety
   £ cin ct in hushed grief when a sisters from M iddlesex who in th e wake o f th e H ills­
                                                                                                                                      requirem ents a re tightened
          siren m arked th e m inute o f died in the disaster said yes­ borough disaster. Senior min­
          mourning.                               terday th a t they w ould be bur­ isters said la st week th a t th e                up ." M inisters insist th a t the
                                                  ied in Liverpool, 200 m iles clubs, and ultimately the fans,                        costs to fans need n o t be
  ___ A sim ilar stillness descen-                                                                                                    prohibitive.
                                                 from th eir fam ily hom e, this would have to find th e money
   « ded over N ottingham . Thou-                                                                                                         They see the change to all­
  * sands o f people o f all ages                week.     T revor Hicks, w ho gave to pay for th e alterations.
                                                 m outh-to-m outh resuscitation                                                       seat grounds a t th e big d u b t
  * gathered in the m arket square to his daughters, Sarah, 19,                               The tough W hitehall stance             a s a move th a t will not onh
 * as church bells rang and a ir and V ictoria, 15, as they lay reflects m inisterial anger a t                                       m ake football safer but will
  v raid sirens, not heard in the                                                          fo o tb a ll’s fa ilu re over th e         change the nature of th e sport
 t. city since VE day, sounded.                  dying, said: “ We decided to
                                                                                           years to invest its revenues In            fro m w h a t o n e o f th em
                                                 take them back to Liverpool
              The m inute’s silence sig- because it is a city they both better and safer facilities —                                 described as “gladiatorial con­
* nailed the start o f Notting- loved and where they found                                while    it h as h ad no difficulty         tests” to a gam e th a t can be
. ham -for-liverpool Week with much happiness ”                                           finding huge sum s for transfer             appreciated for its skills in a
 > events fa n n e d throughput                                                           fees.
                                                                                                                                      non-partisan way, “where you
  -         the city to raise money for the          The day’s only so u r notes              “ The government h as noted            can adm ire a brilliant pass,
 •I H illsborough fund, which has were struck a t W est H am ’s th a t £70m has been spent on                                        even by your opponent”.
         already reached £l.25m .                gam e against Millwall an d a t transfer fees th is year,” said
                                                 Sunderland. A section o f M ill­ senior government sources last                         There is also coolness in
J"           Executive boxes have been wall supporters chanted thr­                                                                  government towards th e idea
■; opened up a t N ottingham for ough th e m inute's silence, aweek.                              “ T h e re is no evidence o f
                                                                                             sho rta g e o f c a sh .”
                                                                                                                                     o f new super-stadium s being
> fens who w ant to s it in quiet w hile a t Sunderland police re­                                                                   built in out-ot-town locations.
 « and reflect on the tragedy.                                                                A  recent    estim ate indicates       M inisters believe both finance
                                                 m oved a yonth after he broken
,,           In Sheffield, m ore than the silence w ith a n obscenity. th a t th is year’s transfer spend­                           and planning problems rule
                                                                                          ing equals th e to tal am ount             them out.
wrong gate                             presence of the police cordon.
                                        Marshall, in fact, had a second
  I N S I C i H T
                                        option: another gate was just
NEW evidence discovered by 10 yards away, which led di­
The Sunday Times Insight rectly to the empty outer pens.
team has pinpointed errors in              The decision to open the
th e police o p eratio n th a t gate to the right of the set of
contributed to the deaths of 95 turnstiles where the crowd was
people in the football tragedy gathered will be regarded as
at Hillsborough last weekend. crucial to the inquiry npw
     Police failed to follow a plan being carried out by Lord Jus­
 that safely controlled a similar tice Taylor.
 situation at the same ground              He will discover that the
 last year when fans crowded people going through the gate
 into the Leppings Lane terrace were confronted by a bnck
 where the disaster occurred.            wall on their left, which meant
      On that occasion, as the two they could only walk to the
  central pens on the terrace right section of the terrace or
  filled to capacity a cordon of through the tunnel into the
  police blocked off the tunnel crowded centre section.
  leading to them, funnelling               When Marshall took the de­
  fans into the two half-empty cision to open the gate, how­
  outer pens.                            ever, the choice he had to
       But no order was given to make was a difficult one.
  block off the tunnel last Sat­            The gate which he did open
   urday and an officer, fearing would have seemed an easier
   that people in the crowd out- option because it is just round
                                         a corner from the turnstiles. It
                                         was also easier for police to get
         Focus, page 1 3                  to because the crowd was not
        Letters, page 1 8                 obstructing it.
    Action now, page 2 4                     Insight has also discovered
         New Society, F3                  that Sheffield Wednesday had
                                          considered, but did not make,
                                          changes to the turnstile ar­
    side were in danger, ordered a rangements at the Leppings
    gate to be opened. The result Lane end that might have
    was a surge of fans that swept averted last Saturday’s di­
    through the tunnel and burst saster.
    upon the packed central pens.            Four years ago, the club s
        Insight has also discovered architects applied to increase
    that the police appear to have the number of turnstiles used
    relied too heavily on a com­ by fans standing on the ter­
    puter that counts the number races. The plan was to seg­
     o f fans passing through the regate those supporters using
     turnstiles. Crucially, the com­ the left section of the terrace
     puter showed Only the overall from those in the centre and
     number in the four pens rather on the right.
     than those in each pen.                  Although perm ission to
        The officer who ordered the make the changes was granted
     g ate       to    be     op en ed , by Sheffield city council, Shef­
                                                                             Matt Ford




      Superintendent Roger Mar­ field Wednesday never carried
      shall, was therefore acting on them out. It is thought the
      the only knowledge then avail­ club changed its mind after
      able, unaware that it was in­ deciding to abandon a plan to
      correct.                             accommodate both home and
         Still, the disaster might have              Continued onpage 3
      been averted even without the
                                                                                                          B3




                             Unpalatable truth
                             but here were the
                             echoes of Heysel
                            THE response to Hillsborough sug­
                            gests that a class war is being fought.
                            First there was the hysterical overreac­
                            tion to the words of Jacques Georges of
                            Uefa: “He should be made to resign,        football into a cult is the city’s only
                            not fit to stand in the shadow of our      modern acquaintance with excellence,
                            glorious dead.” And then Father            matches elsewhere the one chance to
                            Hattersley, friend of the workers and      swagger and intimidate. Liverpool
                            man of the people, raised a tear-soaked    supporters carry disaster around with
                            cuff in admonition —“too contemptible      them like a marshal’s baton. But when
                            for consideration”.                        disaster comes, blame it all on the
                               But although the actual words of        Sheffield police . . . for not realising
                            Georges were a trifle Vivid, did he say    what brutes they had to handle.
                            anything but the unpalatable truth?
                            For the second time in half a decade a
                            large body of Liverpool supporters has      WHAT is it that makes so many
                            killed people! At the Heysel stadium        cricket commentators such buffers?
adequate protest’           they violently attacked Italian support­    The man on The Independent, Martin
                            ers. At Hillsborough they screamed to       Johnson, sounds as if he had been


 ews
ju t m ay prove, ul-
                            be admitted without showing tickets,
                            were let through because they looked
                            so dangerous and then charged the
                            crowded central section and so brought
                            about the deaths of innocent people.
                               The difference between Heysel and
                                                                        apostolically anointed with the lees of
                                                                        E W Swanton’s second port. “Dis­
                                                                        graceful,” he puffs, shocked that the
                                                                        authorities tried to get this fellow
                                                                       Graeme Hick quickly into the England
                                                                       side. “Only right and proper if he was
: destructive. W ith        Hillsborough is the difference between      pushed further down the schedule; to
 tied to th e co st o f     vicious intent and moronic inad­            1993. Decent chaps everywhere know
C has been unable           vertence. That remark of Georges           that having played for Zimbabwe, he
le explosion in tele-       about “an aggressive mentality” says       should be on a longer Hst”
. C hannel 4, an ex-        it all. But to certain blowsy rhet­           As it happens the delay will be only
, Sky an d, now,           oricians nobody from Liverpool can          to 1991. But that is far too long. Hick
lite B ro ad castin g ,     have done wrong. They are, according       is probably the best batsman since
a haem orrhage o f         to that ineffable political sandbag, Eric   Bradman. The side whieh has him and
s ago, BBC produc-          Heffer, “our lovely supporters”. So        his 3,000 runs a seaiMt & going to beat
mnd 30% less th an         Georges, a bloody foreigner, ought to       the others. Any ritni-pvttiag off the
a rts in th e priv ate     resign.                                     pasting he can give the West Indies
 th e gap is often            The truth is of course that we vastly    should have been cemented over. As it
                           underestimate the contempt of conti­        is, I am surprised that Hick, for whom
 now h as its eyes         nental opinion for British underclass       apparently New Zealand might waive
 n tw o dates: 1991,       youth abroad. Gianni Agnelli of Fiat,       regu lations, w astes his tim e on
 :nt index-linking o f     who also chairs Juventus, Liverpool’s       England.
 : com es to a n end;      heroic conquest of 1985, speaks for            Like those professional soldiers, the
 en its ch arter ex-       millions by saying: “Let the British        condottieri who laid on security for the
 ioint, if th e C onser-   clubs in but not the supporters.” The       cities of Renaissance Italy, and would
 I in power, th e very     red-faced, drunken British football fan     defend Florence from Milan, or Milan
•BBC in its present        offering violence and insult, urinating     from Florence according to price, Hick
i serious jeopardy.        in the street and stealing from shops, is   is too valuable to worry about regula­
:m ent is said by in-      a hated plague to be excluded from          tions crying out to be avoided. As for
:ing its present hard      Europe, one hopes for good.                 the trainee buffers in the press box,
irtly to appease the          But “our lovely supporters” must         they should ask themselves what the
It w ants to show          only have kind words. There is sugges­      doctor would have done. W G Grace
  how tough it can         tion from Sheffield of barbarous ob­        used to cheat!
  is th a t she m ight     scene behaviour after the event. If true
r disposed to the          this is an affront to the dead, and the
                           dead make a wonderful alibi for the         I RARELY feel significant disagree*
)xically, th is policy     guilty. By speaking baldly of “the          ment with John Peter. And our theatre
  d estroy precisely       crowd” one confuses the mad wedge           critic rightly admires the new produc­
a n t to protect: the      making the charge and the children          tion of Ivanov at the Strand theatre. It
organisation w here        and other innocents who were charged        isn’t, in Ronald Harwood’s highly
in M r B irt’s w ords,     into. After such deceitful elision the      skilled revision and compression, quite
loney b u t fo r “ the     brutal destructiveness of the chargers      the new play which Michael Frayn
 ctio n ” .                is snowed over.                             made in converting Platonov into Wild
 ys hoped a n d be-                                                    Honey. But the melodramatic edges
  BBC m ieh t snm e-                                                   "«*«!   ia«i*lo»ltno*l        nf   p a rlv
                                                                                                   B5




iare      SaHv Soames
                         AN unprecedented 2,500 signed
                         complaints have been received by
                         (he Press Council about newspaper
                         treatm ent of the Hillsborough
                         disaster. O ne danger of the inquiry
                         th at the council has now initiated is
                                                                            R O U N D
                         that serious editors will be unjustly          by Brian MacArthur
                         condemned for doing one of the
                         proper jobs of journalism — which
                         is to tell unpalatable truths — sim­       some of the national comment on
                         ply because the reputation of nat­         Hillsborough, but as journalists
                         ional journalism has sunk so low.          both defended the right of Pearce,
                            Ju st how low th a t reputation has     Moore and Gale to their opinions.
                         sunk was shown in a memorable                 Both O akley and Corner pub­
                         philippic in the Commons debate            lished special Sunday editions
                         on M ay 21 from Jonathan Aitken,           after the disaster. Both have pub­
                         the Tory M P who was himself a             lished special four-page selections
                         distinguished journalist and victim        of readers’ letters. All the profit
                         of the Official Secrets Act.               from O akley's Sunday edition went
                            “A t the lower end of the tabloid       to the disaster fund. So will the
                         market, journalism has been re­            proceeds from a special colour edi­
                         placed by voyeurism,” he said,             tion publishing the order of service
                         “The reporter’s profession has             for yesterday's memorial service.
                         been infiltrated by a seedy stream         H is journalists have given their
                         o f re n t b oys, p im p s, b im b o s,    pay for writing and editing them to
                         spurned lovers, sm ear artists bear-,      the memorial fund.
                         ing grudges, prostitutes and perjur­          Yet the Liverpool Echo has been
                         ers. It is a cast of shame which has       criticised for publishing normal
                         not been seen in public since the          death notices of those who died and
                         trial of O scar W ilde.”                   Corner has been accused of “cash­
                            It is easy to upset newspaper           ing in” on the tragedy. Neither
                         readers, as I learned again last           accusation was deserved — The
                         week when I forgot one of the basic        S tar lost money on its special edi­
                         rules of reporting. M y own child­         tion — but each demonstrated the
                         ren, I wrote, had not been “dis­           minefields of emotion in which
                         tressed” when 1 showed them the            journalists often work.
                         notorious Daily M irror photograph            Corner argued in The S ta r last
                         of Hillsborough. They demanded a           week th a t it could not select only
                         right of reply. O f course they were       those photographs that did not of­
                         distressed, but they were not “emo­        fend. T hat was not only impossible
                         tionally damaged” by the photo­            —what offends one reader may not
                         graph. Basic rule: careless, sloppy        offend another —but also produced
                         writing costs reputations.                 a “sanitised” view th a t tried to
                            Yet we can also upset readers           make even tragedies such as
                         when we write very carefully. M any        Hillsborough “acceptable” .
                         readers accused us of causing                 Speaking for Merseyside, O ak­
                         gratuitous offence by republishing         ley challenged The Sun and the
                         in New Society the photographs             Daily S ta r to produce evidence for
                         th at had offended them (see letters,      their sensational claims th at some
                         pages A18 and F2). Yet how else is         fans had picked the pockets of vic­
                        a serious paper to discuss serious          tims, urinated on policemen and
                         issues than by serious commentary,         beaten up a policeman giving the
                        written on the assumption that              kiss of life. W hat upset O akley was
                        readers are mature adults who de­           The Sun’s headline, printed in
                        serve all the evidence?                    three-inch type: “The T ruth” .
                            The journalism of polemic is               T he Sun quoted an M P and one
                        deliberately intended to upset and          named and one unnamed police­
                        one of its most opinionated prac­          man but it did not check whether
                        titioners is Edward Pearce in his          the allegations were true. All th at
                        weekly column in The Sunday                Corner’s staff could discover was
                        Times. H is comments last Sunday           evidence of drinking but none of
                        on the “brutal destructiveness” of         looting. Oakley points to provable
                        Liverpool fans (which were made            facts, which were that 43 fans —
                        with equal force by C harles Moore,        including some from Nottingham —
                        editor of T he Spectator, in the           were arrested: 16 for drunkenness,
                        Daily Express, and George G ale in         one for urinating in a public place.
                        the Daily M ail) provoked an even             Normally, the more the tabloids
                        more outraged postbag than usual.          are cursed, the more they sell. On
                            M any of us on The Sunday              this occasion offended readers
                        T im es d isag ree violently w ith         wreaked their own revenge. The
                        Pearce but we also know th a t his is      Sun was burned in the streets of
                        a widely held opinion, certainly in        Liverpool and newsagents have re­
                        metropolitan circles. Is it seriously      fu s e d to d is p la y it on t h e ir
                        suggested th a t newspapers should         counters. Sales of The Sun in
                        suppress such views, which, as the         Liverpool have slumped. “ T his is
                        Press Council might say, are p art         the first spontaneous boycott of a
                        of the “tragic political record” of        national paper that I can recall,”
                        our time?                                  says Oakley. Another basic rule of
                            As citizens of Liverpool and           journalism is not to take state­
                        Sheffield, both C hris Oakley, edi­        ments by M P s or unnamed police­
                        tor of the Liverpool Echo, and             m en a t fa c e v a lu e , w ith o u t
                        M ichael Corner, editor of The             independent corroboration. The
                        S tar, Sheffield, the two editors          consequences when it is ignored
                        closest to the disaster, were hurt by      can be very painful.
going it alone
                                                                                        THE SUNDAY TIMES 30 APRIL 1989

I H A V E ju st returned from                                                                                    no doubt th a t Lord Ju stice
Anfield, the focal point for the                                                                                 T aylor’s inquiry will, as you
grief we all feel in Liverpool.                                                                                  claim, conclude th a t it was
H aving read Edward P earce’s                                                                                    “ th e p u b -cra w lin g elem en t
L a st W ord (News Focus, la st       —       —      II N il—                                            ...     which spearheaded the surge
                                                                                                                 into the tunnel and on to the
week), I wish he had come
with me. H e m ight then have
                                        1 Pennington Street, London El 9XW                                       terraces” . C learly, the con­
reconsidered his h arsh article                                                                                  sequences of placing the blam e
w hich linked H illsborough to                                                                                   for this appalling tragedy
 H eysel, suggesting th a t the
causes of the death s were of
th e sam e nature.
    Edward P earce’s own col­
leagues elsewhere in T h e Sun­
                                           Liverpool                                                             where it should lie, th a t is w ith
                                                                                                                 the South Y orkshire police
                                                                                                                 force, are too frightening for
                                                                                                                 society to contem plate.
                                                                                                                                         J Stirzaker



                                            has the
day Tim es clearly showed th at                                                                                       H exham , N orthum berland
a prim e cause of th e disaster                                                                                  TV C O V ERA G E: Jo h n Lipp-
was a gigantic failure of nor­                                                                                   man underm ined his case th a t
m al crowd control methods.                                                                                      broadcasters should have inter­
H is condem nation of th e city                                                                                  rupted programmes more often
of Liverpool was b reathtak-



                                           last word
                                                                                                                 during the afternoon of the
ingly ill-timed. H ad he been                                                                                    H illsborough tragedy by say­
 here the week before last, he
                                                                                                                 ing (Screen, la st week): “it was
would have witnessed a most
                                                                                                                 known by 4pm th a t a t least 70
im pressive sense of together­
                                                                                                                 people had been killed”.
ness and support, sustained by                                                                                      T he facts are th a t a t 4pm we,
 like-m inded people from the         thousands rushing through th e        orderly queue, but they would
                                      opened Leppings Lane gates            willingly allow others to do so,     and the news media in general,
whole football fraternity.                                                                                       were reporting th a t “som e”
                 Charles Lam bert     and through the tunnel into           if it m eant safe progress. Too
                                      the central enclosure caused         few police were present, and          people had died, and there was
                     Liverpool 21                                                                                no indication of the true scale of
                                      the m ajority of th e fatalities.     those who were inevitably lost
L O S S : How could Edward               But to call this “ moronic in­     control and attem pted to alle­      the disaster for another hour.
P earce suggest th a t for the        advertence” and the product of        viate the situation by taking        During our 5pm bulletin we re­
second time in h alf a decade, a      “an aggressive m entality” is         the unforgivable and strate­         ceived the news th a t 53 people
large body of Liverpool sup­          preposterous. It was nothing          gically incorrect decision to al­    had died, and it was then th a t
po rters has killed people? H e       more or less th a n hum an n a­       low free entry into another          we decided to extend our news
ended by saying: “ blam e it all      ture. A t 2.55 pm , with the          uncontrolled area.                   bulletins on ITV and C hannel
on the Sheffield police for not       m ain gates opened, the sam e                                              Four. By the end of the week­
                                                                              I, like m any others, adm it to
realising w hat b rutes they had      surge would have happened a t                                              end, we had transm itted nearly
                                                                           feelings of guilt and respon­
to handle” . If th a t isn’t scur­    any stadium , in any sp o rt, in                                           an hour and a half of special
                                                                           sibility, in th a t by entering the
rilous, I d on't know w hat is.       any country in the world.                                                  programming.
                                                                           tunnel into th e central pens I
   M y own daughter was there,                              P G w atkin                                                            Stewart Purvis
                                                                           directly contributed to the ul­
and the friend she was with                    W allasey, M erseyside                                                                  Editor, IT N
                                                                           tim ate tragedy. T h a t is my
was killed. They are “b ru tes” ,                                          own personal problem . To
according to Edward Pearce! I         U N C O N T R O L L E D : I was at                                         P O L L S : You declared (page
                                      the Leppings L ane entrance on       have you so self-righteously          A3, la st week) th a t 65% of the
can assu re him they are not.                                              conclude th a t all-seater stad i­
M y daughter is a nurse, and he       the day o f th e H illsborough                                             public were ag ain st the C up
                                      disaster, and I saw none o f the     ums are the only way “to en­          Final being played, according
was an office m anager. M y                                                sure th a t never again does the
d aug h ter suffered some inju­       drunken hooliganism implied                                                to a H a rris survey. T his was
                                      in your article (page A13, la st     behaviour of several thousand         cited a s evidence of opinion
ries, b u t was saved by P earce’s                                         Liverpool fans contribute to
“ bru tes” , and lifted over the      week). W h a t I did witness was                                           being divided on th is sensitive
                                      the growing concern o f a large      the deaths o f 95 of th em ” adds     m atter, since G allup showed
side fences to safety.                                                     massive insu lt to already un­
                    Iv o r W heeler   num ber of people who had                                                  61% in favour of the gam e
                                      been queuing for 15 m inutes         bearable injury.                      going ahead. T here was no
             Childwall, Liverpool
                                      without being organised by the           T he victims of H illsbor­        such division. O u r poll re­
O N R U S H : I was greatly sad­      authorities in any way and           ough becam e so as a result of        corded 65% in favour o f con­
dened by Edw ard P earce’s            without m aking progress.            the massive inefficiency and          tinuing with the com petition.
article. Nobody in Liverpool            Two thousand people cannot         inadequacy o f the authorities,                          R obert W aller
would deny th a t the surging         organise them selves into an         specifically the police. I have         T h e H arris R esearch C entre
   W a i s s i b
   ‘iimiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiijniniiiiuiii^^
                                                                                                                              «S 5»

                                                                                                                                                        Safety terser was taken
   m                    m                           w h s                                                                                               i'Tit to create tie
  •hismfitiii!M                                                 1
              eiiiiin(iiniiiJiiiiinnjiimiiiiiiiHiiniiji;iitiimii niiiiisiiiiniiijii)iriismili
  A LIVERPOOL supporter from near Retford
  is trying to trace the man who saved her life
                                                                                                                                                        ohanneS if death
                                                                                                                                                      REMOVAL of part of a barrier near
  after she was pulled unconscious from                                                                                                               the Leppings Lane tunnel created a
  Hillsborough’s crushed terraces.                                                                                                                    “ channel” for the crowd surge in the
     Val Yates w a s given Ihe felss-oWife on the pitch by
  som eone with a Liverpudlian acc en t she knows only a s                                                                                            pens, the Hillsborough inquiry heard.
  Tony.
     She sp en t a w ee k on M erseyside hoping lo find Mm
                                                                                                                                                        Andrew Collins QC, counsel to the inauiry, said
  but failed lo tu rn up any clues.                                                                                                                   that no-one seemed to consider whal would happen lo
     "I w a s very, very lucky to g e t o u t alive,” s h e s a k t                                                                                   capacities in the terraces after all but a third o f the
                                                                                                                                                      barrier was taken out in 1986 from pen three.
  “ Now I ju st w an t to tlnd Tony a n d thank him for saving
  my life.”
                                                                                                                                                        M any o f the 95 fans who died in the Hillsborough
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DISASTER INQUIRY
     Bank w orker Val, a ged 20, of Clarborough, lost co n­                                                                                           Disaster had been in that pen.
  sciousness fo ur tim es in the Leppings Lane end a t the
  FA Cop sem i-final.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B v Nivel Morris and Donna Saul
                                                                                                                                                         H e stated that without that barrier: "There is a
                                      Accent                                                                                                          channel fro m the middle o f the tunnel down to the         How the terrace capacities were calculated also
    She r e m e m b e rs hearing Tony's Liverpool accent as                                                                                           barrier that collapsed.                                   came under scrutiny. M r Collins said: "W e could fin d
  he knelt over h e r on th e Held a t Sheffield W ednesday’s                                                                                                                                                   nothing in the documentation which indicates who
  ground.                                                                                                                                                                    Capacity                           assessed those quantities. How they were assessed, or
    Eventually s h e lold him sh e w as ail right, and to help                                                                                           " A t n o tim e d id a n y o n e s e e m to h a v e when they were assessed.
  someone e ls e — and ne ver saw him again.                                                                                                          considered....the affect on die capacity o f pens, or the
    During t h e c r u s h s h e w a s tra m p le d un derfoot,                                                                                       likely affect on people coming into pen three ."            During his address he read out part o f a document
  dragged by th e h a ir and p r esse d against a barrier, but
  escaped with s e v e r e bruising an d cuts.                                                                                                           The decision to take out the southern h a lf o f the from Sheffield W ednesday officials questioning
                                                                                                                                                       crush barrier was made at a meeting attended by whether an exit gate on to the pitch was necessary as
 | Val, who h a s m ade several unsuccessful trips to                                                                                                                                                           there was already a gate further up the terrace into the
  Liverpool In s e a r c h of Tony, said: “He’s out there som e­                                                                                       Sheffield City Council; police: fire brigade and Dr                                                                                                    to ca r e w h at happ en ed
  where and I'm determ ined to find him.”                                                           GRATEFUL Val: s e e k in g h e r r e scu er        Bill Eastwood, from a firm o f consulting engineers.     neighbouring "isolation" area.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    QC.




          ‘Gates not for
                  emergency’                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m           m
g H IL L S B O R O U G H S              T hree emergency exits          A s s i s t a n t C h i e f F ire
B p e r im e te r f e n c e g a t e s were e a rm a rk e d ^ the back Officer Alan Seaman told

ti l l e r e d a s e m ergency a -        , cl>*f » r «<“ l>        the                          would be better to have ihe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m
Bji-
|i t s by hv sac ifr
                  lcrty               wa3itral
                      v ex p erts, ta centralf e ||tunnel,   because it
                                                             bei
                                                     |h a t fani                                 exits a t the tear, because
                                                                   >uld                          people a t the back could
| f i r e p r e v e n t i o n a n d m ove ra0fC freely             th e                          move.”
Hsafety c h ief h a s said.           back.
                                                                                                   The perim eter fence gates
                                                                                                 were “ never contemplated



                                                                                                                                      FREE REFRESHMENTS FO M LL THE FMMILYl
                                                                                                 for use for mass evacuation
                                                                                                 on to the pitch,” he said,
                                                                                                 and they recommended lhat
                                                                                                 a police officer o r steward
                                                                                                 should man these gates a t ail

                                                                                                 6) A n em erg en cy evacu­
                                                                                                 ation procedure involving
                                                                                                 special signals was circulat­
                                                                                                 ed lo Sheffield Wednesday
                                                                                                 stewards as early as 1981 for
                                                                                                 lhat year's FA C u p semi­
                                                                                                 final.
                                                                                                    S o u th Y o rk s h ire Fire
                                                                                                 Service an d the police con­
                                                                                                 sulted each other as they
                                                                                                 drew up !he recom m en­
                                                                                                 d a tio n s . w hich th e club
                                                                                                 agreed lo pass on to their
                                                                                                 stewards.
                                                                                                    This was revealed tc
                                                                                                 inquiry in the evidence of
                                                                                                 Mr. Seaman, who said that
                                                                                                 the procedure detailed the
                                                                                                 signal which would inform
                                                                                                 stewards and police that an
                                                                                                 emergency hao arisen.

                                                                                         Action following receipt
                                                                                   | o f the signal was also out-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m                     m                     m
H i*..              .       . .
g-SAFSTY c h i e f S e a m a n :
                                    » -
                                                                                   I l i n e d . T h i s w o u ld be
                                                                                    d e p e n d e n t o n h e a r in g
                                                                 e v a c u a t io n a n n o u n ce m en ts over the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MINIMUM GUAMNTiiD
                 p roced u re                                                       public address system.
                                                                                                                                     F S fM U C i PLAN AVAILABLE O N ALL NEW NISSA N                                                                                      FOR    ANY OLD CAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NO MATTERWHAT AGE OR CONDITION

               ‘Failure’ over                                                                                                        ORDERS TAKEN FOR G REGISTRATION AUGUST 1st DELIVERY                                                                                                    ALTERNATIVE OFFER




               safety issues
   jrH E R E w a s a n overall                jeet to being in good con­
                                                                                                                                     OFFER ENDS 5.30PM SUNDAY 18 JUNE
                                                                                                ing of^pens on the terraces
   failure t o c onsider vital                d ition, b u t (heir accepted
   issues such a s tu rn stile c a ­          c a p a c it y w as fo r 2 ,2 0 0                  ® The first-aid room a t the
                                              supporters.
   pacities a n d th e even dis­
   tr ib u tio n o f s p e c t a t o r s          B reaches o f the G reen
                                                              Guide included:
                                                                                                 ground “ never seemed to
                                                                                                       ! g o t i i p ro p e
                                                                                                equipment” .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fttmgw
   before th e H illsborough
                                              9 An inordinate delay in                           # The Green Guide on foot­
   ^ragedy, inquiry counscl                   doing anything about inade­                       b a ll g ro u n d s a f e ty w as
   A n d re w C o l l i n s h a s             q ua te an d in a p p ro p ria te                 breached in respect of the
   claimed.                                   safety matters.
                                                                                                                                                                                   PER WESK
                                                                                                capacity of pens, the crush
    , And these factors, com­                 9 A failure on “ anyone’s                         barriers, perimeter gates and
   bined w ith a n u m b e r o f              part” to consider Ihe effects                     the tunnel.
   preaches of the Green Guide                o f removing a barrier on the                     © Crush b arriers were in
  Ibooklet on safety a t sports               terraces.                                         breach of (he Green Guide
  [grounds, are “major matters                © Failure to assess what                          f o r b o th p o s i t i o n a n d
gti> be considered” .                         effect on capacity the divid­                     strength.
1!:' His criticisms were levcl-


                                                ieffer wanmei
|ie£) at either Sheffield Wcd-
H aesday. S h e f fi e ld C iry
|€ o u n d i, or both, he said.                                                                                                       SPECIAL OFFER
      “ There appears to tm e                                                                                                                                      m m      ■K5S   1='kouiwLim          mm         -«r|Eoi»            «**« I ™»*s u im flu m m u S S m
HBeen little, if any. consider-
Batjon in 1985 of the number
I of turnstiles needed at the
8 Leppings Lane end to cope
                                                         d ty council                                                                 micra   579926813118 NIL 140386*6119.99 pbemiumm 1255013811NILm            Saving b a se d o n 15% fla t a p r 29.6%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                m
Bwlth sny reasonable flow                       S H E F F I E L D C i t y the K op” a n d added that
I*h ich might be expected o f                   C o u n c i l w a s w a r n e d the tum siiiecapacity at the
BSpeciaiors coming into the                     m o re th a n a y e a r be fo re Penist° ne Road end was
                                                                                                                                          YEARS N IS S A N IA N Y OLD CARA

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      £300 CASH
                                                t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h "inefficient".

I - '- . *
             Maximum
                     L         »,
                                               trag e d y o f a situ a tio n          Particular concern was
                                               th a t c o u ld le a d to suc h a expressed about the lack o f
                                                                                                                                          INANCE PLAN 1 15% FULL DEPOSI
^ As;for filling the pens,JVlr                 d isa ste r h a p p en in g , th e free gangways on Ihe Kop.
  Collins criticised the way                   fn o u ;rv w as ! o u              which the surveyor said
   fans were allowed to fill them              in q u iry w as lo w .               .
                                                                                   should  be kept clear.
    a whatever way they wanted.                    | n a ]c!ler {jalC!j p e^.
      •The two pens on the ter-
       ces should have held a
                                               ruary 2 Iasi year, a building
                                               surveyor talked of a "lack
                                                                                      These claims, combined
                                                                                   with the number o f late ar­                                                        D.C. COOK-SHEFF 1ELD                                                      WHIN YOU ORDERNOW FOR&U6USI 1st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 £300 cash given wilh every carpyfchos«d for August Hi delivery on Saturday and Sunday,
       ijiimum of 2,051 fans sub-              o f efla
                                                     iflective siewaruing o        rivals, mirrored the situ­                                                    SHEAF GARDENS, S t. Marys Rd., Sheffield
                                                                                   ation that built up at the
                                                                                    Leppings Lane end, said
                                                                                   in auiry counsel Andrew
                                                                                   Collins,
         24-HR. CHAUFFERING SERVICE
         1UR         CAR - OUR CHAUFFEUR
                                                                                                    H e said it was “essen-                                       D.C.COOK - CHESTERFIELD
         Our C h auffeurs a r e availab le for:                                                  did not blame the club for
          'll/part-time/Relief Ghauffeuring                                                      ihe           effe
           ■iiness requirem ents an d Company functions                                          stewarding".
             rting events and T heatre and Restaurants
             itng s out, n o drink and
                                                                                                   T he stewards' jo b was,                                                                                                                                              MAIN DEALER
                                                                                                 he said, ‘'generally to make
                                                                                                 sure spectators go evenly
                                                                     R e lie f                   on to the terraces."
               nqu irles S a .m .-S p .m .                           D riv e r    Jj                Sheffield Ciiy Council
                ip hcne (0 7 4 2 )                                                                Q C R i c h a r d M a x w e ll

                 12 05 e x t. 2 2 2                                §tJ!                           pointed out that !he memo
                                                                                                  had been noted and details
                                                                                                                                   C         1        T    Y
               Telex:       2 6 5 8 7 1 MONREF G ( q u o t e re f LLA 3 0 2 0 )
                                                                                                                                   c o u            N. C 1 L

Your r e f e r e n c e :    W IT /3


 O ur r e f e r e n c e :    ^

                                                                                                                                   Administration & Legal
                DaIe         5th November, 1990.                                                                                   Department
                                                                                                                                   Head of Department
                                                                                                                                   M ark W e b s te r, City solicitor
                     Detective Sergeant
                                                                                                                                   T o w n Hall
                     c/o West Midlands Police,
                                                                                                                                   Sh effield
                     Hillsborough Inquiry,                                                                                         SI 2HH
                     Nechells Green Police Station,
                     Birmingham,
                     B7 5DA.

                     Dear Sir,

                     Hillsborough Inquest - Witness Letter

                     I refer to your letter dated      October, 1990 addressed to the Principal
                     Site Surveyor, Building Surveyors Division of the Sheffield City Council,
                     Mr. Arthur Butler.

                     I would confirm that it will not be necessary at this stage for a witness
                     summons to secure his attendance a.i the Inquest, scheduled to commence on
                     the 19th November, 1990.  Should the situation change, then I shall of
                     course, inform you immediately and in any event not later than 10th
                     November, 1990.

                     Your faithfully,




                    City Solicitor and
                    Head of Administration


                    MS1AAZ/JL




    K eith T relfa
    Senior Assistant Head                                                                          E liza be th B a s h f o r th
    (AamimsTratfcr,                                                               Assistant Meao




                                                                                        4004-Mrs. Essara
   R2220/X14
 VXvi        ^u^'Nr                     'Ti'ofr ^


|V-c_              vtV- ^   ^       ^
J^Xkv         V V A C 35,
^ -X         <^-
W^-V        , $>\*Jojf-^
        ^  1 r «
        VTjvTi^       tv t yAf \O ^ ., ,

to'..,        ^\-               v   *      |V ° T
Wv-t-                               W ^>      ^
 w^         sw ^>           c
     R3719                                                                                                                        Sch 9 1 6 0
                                              C IT Y OF S H E F F IE L D — M E M O R A N D U M

From         The B u ild in g S u rv e y o r                                To      H ead o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n   and
             D e p a r tm e n t o f L a n d a n d P l a n n in g                    L e g a l D e p a rtm e n t


Date         2 3 rd J u l y , 1990                                                  F o r th e a tt e n t io n    of
Ref.         BSD/ABu/MBG                                                            M r.
Tel. Ext.      4162 - M r .                                                 Ref.



             Safety of Sports Grounds
             Recommendation 31 of Taylor Final Report into the
             Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
             Visits to Grounds and enforcement_________ _

             Referring to your memorandum of 5th July, 1990 on the above subjects, I
             note that your Chief Licensing Officer (sports Grounds) has indicated
             that he will make 9 "during-performance" inspections per year to observe
             football, Dog Racing and Rugby League, in addition to any Athletics
             events as and when they are arranged.

             I a g r e e t h a t s u c h a n u m b er o f i n s p e c t i o n s b y y o u r s t a f f a r e n e c e s s a r y ,
             a n d in d e e d m in im a l i n r e l a t i o n t o some c e r t i f i c a t i n g a u t h o r i t i e s .       I am,
             h o w e v e r , n o t c o n v in c e d t h a t my s t a f f n e e d t o a t t e n d t h e s e e v e n t s on s u c h
             a r e g u l a r b a s i s , a n d I w o u ld s u g g e s t t h a t a s a g e n e r a l i t y , i t m ay o n ly b e
             n e c e s s a r y f o r th e m t o a t t e n d o n e p e r fo r m a n c e o f e a c h t y p e o f s p o r t i n g
             e v e n t a t e a c h g ro u n d p e r y e a r .       W h ere t h e r e l e v a n t m em bers o f s t a f f
             c o n s id e r t h a t a d d i t i o n a l v i s i t s a r e n e c e s s a r y f o r a s p e c i f i c p u r p o s e ,
             th e s e o f c o u rs e w i l l be c a r r i e d o u t.

             R e g a r d in g t h e m e c h a n ic s o f c a r r y i n g o u t t h e s e i n s p e c t i o n s , i t w o u ld b e
             a d v i s a b l e i f my s t a f f a c c o m p a n ie d y o u r C h i e f L ic e n s in g o f f i c e r , s in c e my
             o f f i c e r s do n o t h a v e e n f o r c e m e n t p o w e rs u n d e r t h e S p o r t s G ro u n d s
             le g is la tio n .           s u c h j o i n t v i s i t a t i o n s w o u ld a ls o e n a b le y o u t o a r r a n g e
             f o r o f f i c i a l .p a s s e s t o b e made a v a i l a b l e .

             A n y s u c h v i s i t s w o u ld n e c e s s i t a t e ' o u t o f n o rm a l h o u r s ' w o r k in g , a n d t h e
             q u e s t i o n o f t h e c o s t o f o f f i c e r t im e so e x p e n d e d w i l l n e e d a d d r e s s in g ,
             p a r t i c u l a r l y i n t h e c o n t e x t o f w h ic h p ro g ram m e c o m m it t e e s /c o s t c e n t r e i s
             to   be c h a rg e d .

             You a l s o r a i s e t h e is s u e o f e n f o r c e m e n t; i t i s my u n d e r s t a n d in g t h a t t h e
             e n f o r c e m e n t o f t h e S a f e t y o f s p o r t s G ro u n d s A c t i s d e l e g a t e d t o y o u o r
             m em bers o f y o u r D e p a r tm e n t w h e re e m e rg e n c y a c t i o n i s r e q u i r e d t o be
             ta k e n .     My o f f i c e r s h a v e no s u c h p o w e rs , a n d may o n ly u s e t h e p r o v i s i o n s
             o f t h e B u i l d i n g A c t i f t h e y sure a p p l i c a b l e t o t h e p a r t i c u l a r c a s e .

             F u r t h e r m o r e m em bers o f my s t a f f a r e u n a w a re o f a n y m eans o f c o m m u n ic a tin g
             w i t h e i t h e r y o u o f y o u r s t a f f , so t h a t a c t i o n may b e t a k e n , o n a n e v e n in g
             o r w e e k e n d , t o e n f o r c e t h e p r im a r y l e g i s l a t i o n .

             As y o u s u g g e s t , t h e s e is s u e s s h o u ld b e d is c u s s e d a t t h e s a f e t y o f S p o r t s
             G ro u n d s A d v is o r y G r o u p s , a n d c l e a r l i n e s o f c o m m u n ic a tio n a n d e n f o r c e m e n t
             s h o u ld b e e s t a b l i s h e d so t h a t t h e y may b e u s e d i f t h e n e e d a r i s e s .




             m b g /d iv h e a d s /K W G B / s p o r t s g r d s
     R3719                                                                                                                          Sch 9 1 6 0
                                            C IT Y OF S H E FFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From          The Building Surveyor                                          To       Head of Administration and
              Department of Land and Planning                                         Legal Department

Date          23rd July, 1990                                                         For the attention of
Ref.          BSD/ABU/MBG                                                             Mr.                            —


Tel. Ext.      4162 -                                                         Ref.



              Safety of Sports Grounds
              Recommendation 31 of Taylor Final Report into the
              Hillsborough stadium Disaster
              Visits to Grounds and enforcement

              Referring to your memorandum of 5th July, 1990 on the above subjects, I
              note that your Chief Licensing Officer (sports Grounds) has indicated
            * that he will make 9 "during-performance" inspections per year to observe
              football, Dog Racing and liugby League, in addition to any Athletics
              events as and when they are arranged.

              I a g r e e t h a t s u c h a n u m b er o f i n s p e c t io n s b y y o u r s t a f f a r e n e c e s s a r y ,
              a n d in d e e d m in im a l i n r e l a t i o n t o some c e r t i f i c a t i n g a u t h o r i t i e s .        I am,
              h o w e v e r , n o t c o n v in c e d t h a t my s t a f f n e e d t o a t t e n d t h e s e e v e n t s o n s u ch
              a r e g u l a r b a s i s , a n d I w o u ld s u g g e s t t h a t as a g e n e r a l i t y , i t may o n ly be
              n e c e s s a r y f o r th e m t o a t t e n d on e p e r fo r m a n c e o f e a c h t y p e o f s p o r t i n g
              e v e n t a t e a c h g ro u n d p e r y e a r .       W here t h e r e l e v a n t m embers o f s t a f f
              c o n s id e r t h a t a d d i t i o n a l v i s i t s a r e n e c e s s a r y f o r a s p e c i f i c p u r p o s e ,
              th e s e o f c o u rs e w i l l be c a r r i e d o u t.

              R e g a r d in g t h e m e c h a n ic s o f c a r r y i n g o u t t h e s e i n s p e c t i o n s , i t w o u ld be
              a d v i s a b l e i f my s t a f f a c c o m p a n ie d y o u r C h i e f L ic e n s in g o f f i c e r , s in c e my
              o f f i c e r s do n o t h a v e e n f o r c e m e n t p o w e rs u n d e r t h e s p o r t s G ro u n d s
              le g is la tio n .          S u c h j o i n t v i s i t a t i o n s w o u ld a ls o e n a b le y o u t o a r r a n g e
              f o r o f f i c i a l p a s s e s t o be made A v a i l a b l e .

              Any s u c h v i s i t s w o u ld n e c e s s i t a t e 'o u t o f n o rm a l h o u r s ' w o r k in g , a n d t h e
              q u e s t i o n o f t h e c o s t o f o f f i c e r t im e s o e x p e n d e d w i l l n e e d a d d r e s s in g ,
              p a r t i c u l a r l y i n t h e c o n t e x t o f w h ic h p rogram m e c o m m it t e e s /c o s t c e n t r e i s
              t o be c h a rg e d .

              You a l s o r a i s e t h e is s u e o f e n f o r c e m e n t; i t i s my u n d e r s t a n d in g t h a t t h e
              e n f o r c e m e n t o f t h e s a f e t y o f s p o r t s G ro u n d s A c t i s d e l e g a t e d t o y o u o r
              m em bers o f y o u r D e p a r tm e n t w h e re e m e rg e n c y a c t i o n i s r e q u i r e d t o b e
              ta k e n .     My o f f i c e r s h a v e no s u c h p o w e rs , a n d may o n ly u s e t h e p r o v i s i o n s
              o f th e B u ild in g A c t i f th e y a re a p p lic a b le t o th e p a r t i c u l a r c a s e .

              F u r th e r m o r e m em bers o f my s t a f f a r e u n a w a re o f a n y m eans o f c o m m u n ic a tin g
              w i t h e i t h e r y o u o f y o u r s t a f f , so t h a t a c t i o n may b e t a k e n , on a n e v e n in g
              o r w e e k e n d , t o e n f o r c e t h e p r im a r y l e g i s l a t i o n .

              As y o u s u g g e s t , t h e s e is s u e s s h o u ld b e d is c u s s e d a t t h e s a f e t y o f s p o r t s
              G ro u n d s , A d v is o r y G ro u p s , a n d c l e a r l i n e s o f c o m m u n ic a tio n a n d e n f o r c e m e n t
              s h o u ld b e e s t a b l i s h e d so t h a t t h e y may b e u s e d i f t h e n e e d a r i s e s .




              mbg/divheads/KWGB/sportsgrds
                                                I
; Fro*    The Building Surveyor                 ITo The Bead of Administration and
          Departaeafe of Land and Planning      1   Legal Departaent
                                                1
 Date                                                                    1
                                                                         ----------------1
                July 1t90                       1   For th« attention
 Kef*      BSS/ABu/Ui
 Tel* Sxt. <162 *                               fRef
                                                I......... ..............          ...............


          Safety of Sport* Grounds
          Sheffield S e d M ^ r ^*C» P.L.C*
          Removal of tvrla*t«r Fence and
          gaaglal Barriers to Spioa Eop

          I refer to the letter fro® Eastwood and Partners dated 5fch July 1990
          and to theif* drawings 12267/31* and 12267/36 regarding the above*

          1*      Removal of Perimeter Fence

          1.1     This has already been agreed in principle by the General Purposes
                   Panel of the Council.

          1*2 Ths re»oval of the steelwork of the fencing, would however cause
               th-s front wall to be a crusts barrier, and should be- tested for
               that purpose*

          1.3     It should be noted that the area. ©f terracing between pitoft exit*
                   6 and the North end of the terracing, shown on drawing 12267/31A
                   is incorrect, The terracing in that urea is actually curved to
                   the SfiSe contours as the layout of barriers. Consequently, it
                  will bo necessary for the pitch side wall to be Increased 1b
                   height ovsr part of this length in order to achieve a defined
                  edge to the area for standing spectator*,

          2,     Forward Exits to Pitch

          2*1    The mrasber and size of these have not been' oh£eked, since I
                  consider that these matters are within the resit of the Fire
                  Authority.

          3.     Yellow Hatched Areas

          3*1    It is assumed that the intention of these .c^.as is that they be
                  kept clear of spectators. Since aoaa of the araas were
                  previously classified m peak viewing areas, I would appreciate
                  the sight of Police coasaents to confira that the intention m a b@
                  achieved*

          3*2    In order to aid this intention, appropriately worded signs could
                  be displayed on the rear ©f the front wall#

          4*     Crush Barriers

          *5.1   To a&iatsin the hatched area as being fr®<? fros spectators,
                  consequential aRsndments to barriers appear to be necessary.

                 a)    Barrier 1 W needs to be extended la a northerly direction

                 b)    Barrier 1*5 seeds to be extended in a southerly direotion

                 e)    Barrier 140 needs to b* extended la a northerly direction

         LW6ABJ
if) 8an*£«r   ISf n«««is to few r«duo*<J   (Scction 2-3 to fea re;m v &<1)

•)   Barrier 126 naeds t© %• «xtaa*a4 Ia « aautfcarly l i n o l i w

la &» altarnativa ta a), 4) m 4 a) mbwm, tte new landing to astt
6 eould to® lMtallad on tb* obliqa® towards tha gap fcttmm
tarritn 139 wad 1*6.

Beaoval of Radial Barrlara
Prc« ay record®, thea<t radial barriara war# apeoifleally
installed at tha r«f**@at of ih© Polio* subsequent to oeeurreooaa
of dangerous lateral surges of apaotatora on the tarracing*

Tha praaant «araan Ottida* raeognlaaa tfca danger of lateral aurgaa
In Clauses 16 and 102.

1 &» not convinced that tba need for thaaa radial barriers baa
yet bean nullified. The Police may however be able to provide
further information on this issue, and I would veleone seeing
these before the matter la dlaauaaed at a meeting of the Advieory
Group.
liU        73 c

      'j'ToO

j      ^
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


Meeting with: Detective Superintendent Taylor
              Detective Inspector Tope
              Both of West Midlands Police


10.00 a.m. Wednesday, 20th June, 1990, in my Office

Mr. Taylor explained that this was a courtesy call to inform me that he
would wish to interview Arthur Butler as soon as convenient. He intimated
that this interview would revolve around the circumstances which lead to the
decision to accept the removal of part of barrier 144, the role and
operation of the Advisory Groups in this decision, and related matters.

In response to Mr. Taylor's observation as to what he had learned of the
system so far, a general discussion ensued regarding pitch perimeter fence
doors, the HSE report regarding the collapse of barrier 124A (which I said
did not, in my view, show without doubt that the removal of barrier 144
contributed to the overloading which lead to the collapse), the need for
professional discretion to be applied to 'Green Guide' recommendations, the
usefulness of an Advisory Group of officers to thrash out issues and advise
members accordingly. I expressed myself satisfield with the concept of
Administration and Legal Department being the lead department in the matter
of certification of grounds.

Subsequently, I informed Arthur Butler of the Superintendent's request and
asked him to contract him on either

              or
____________ Ext. 6901/2 or
Messagemaster

and also inform Liz Bashforth or Frances Woodhead (Administration & Legal
Dept.) of any interview date (which I had intimated to M r . Taylor would be
unlikely before Thursday, 28th June) and make arrangements with
Administration & Legal/Nalgo for legal representation.

Late a.m.

Informed Frances Woodhead of the gist of the morning's discussions.




KWGB                                                           SP/SWIAAM
20.6.90
 INQUiror INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




FINAL SUBMISSIONS SUBMITTED CM BEHALF OF

        SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL




                   1
                FINAL SUCCESSIONS CN BEHftLF OF SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL



  What happened?



  Why?



  What went wrong?




           The viewpoint of the City as certificating authority provides a

  special perspective on these questions.    At best the factual investigation

  appropriate to this Inquiry allows only a broad brush technique in the

  assessment and interpretation of the facts.    So far as the City is

 concerned the factual investigation involved produces a special difficulty

 in that whilst the City, through the officers in the relevant departments,

 has knowledge of matters concerning the certificating function since 1st

 April 1986 the City has only imperfect knowledge of the relevant matters

 prior thereto.     No corplaint is made on that account, but the cautionary

 note has to be that there are areas of potential knowledge and Information

 which, as far as the City knows, have not been explored.    The purpose of

making this point is not to suggest that any conclusion 1which this Inquiry

m y cane to is inevitably jeopardised by any lack of total information.

Sensible conclusions can be reached on the information available.        The

point that is made, though, is that the City at this stage prefers to deal

with the,questions posed above in a broad manner.

          The questions can be answered with what, it is hoped, is not

deceptive sinplicity in the proposition that the essential problem here was

one where too many people were in a confined area so that there was

crushing of sane of then who did not escape in tine to avoid death or

injury.    It is possible to add refinement to that proposition and to
    produce an increasingly complex version of it by overlays of detail.      The

    City, though, proposes to mate final submissions here by reference to the

    essential problem as so described.   In essence the City seeks to deal with

   the question whether any conduct on the part of the certificating authority

   helped to create that problem.    The formulation of the problem as set out
   above gives rise to a series of issues:



   (i)     Too many people

           Did the certificating authority contribute to any risk that there

  might be too many people on the terrace?      This involves a consideration of

  the certificating authority's conduct in respect of, inter alia,

   (a)    crowd management outside and at theturnstiles;

  (b)     limiting numbers of spectators within the grounds;

  (c)     crori management within the ground.



  (ii)    Confined area

          Did the certificating authority, by permitting the developnent of
 the pens, create seme dangerous area?



 (lii) Crushing

          Did the certificating authority create sane unnecessary risk of

 crushing or take insufficient steps to guard against crushing?



         Inability to escape or avoid iniurv

         Did the certificating authority create or fail sufficiently to

minimise a risk that spectators might be unable, in the event of local

overcrowing or crushing occurring, to escape the injurious effects of it.

         There is a considerable measure of overlap between the issues which

arise.   lhat overlap reflects the reality that on the facts this tragedy

was the product of a conbination of various circumstances.
        The essential submission an behalf of the City in respect of the

 conduct of the certificating authority is that this tragedy was not caused

by any wrongful act or emission on the part of the certificating authority.

 It is conceded that there were shortcomings in the execution of the

administrative system but it is, nevertheless, contended that the system as

practised was sufficient to achieve reasonable safety.



FRELIMINftKY MATTERS

       It is necessary to consider as a preliminary matter the scope and

nature of the statutory function and duty of the certificating authority.

The City is the local authority presently charged with the duty of

enforcing the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 as

amended and is of course the successor in title to the County, which was

the local authority that granted the general safety certificate for

Hillsborough Stadium.   The questions "what happened?    Why?   What went

wrong?" so far as the certificating authority is ^concerned need to be

considered in the context of the relevant legislation - the 1975 Act and
                                                     i

Regulations made under it.   The investigation involves the consideration of

whether or not any act or emission on the part of the certificating

authority, either in granting the certificate in the terms in which it was

made or in enforcing the provisions of the Act or relevant Regulations, was

a cause (and, if appropriate, a culpable cause) of this disaster.    A

material question for the later part of this Inquiry is of course whether

or not the machinery of the certificate or of enforcement of the

legislation (in particular by inspection) could be used so as to prevent or

help ,to prevent any further such incident.   There is, though, an obvious
   /
danger that the considerable wisdan which has been amassed by virtue of the

painstaking nature of this Inquiry may cause views to be formed of past

conduct which are the product of hindsight.   Whilst clearly, or at least

hcpefully, all parties have already learnt from these disastrous events,

                                     4
   and whilst the City can identify acts or emissions which will not be

   repeated, it is still a proper conclusion that at the relevant time when

   seme action was taken the decision was reasonable and proper having regard
  to what was then known.

            There are certain features of the relevant legislation that need to

  be taken into account as relevant and important background circumstances so

  that the role of the certificating authority may be put into context,
  namely:-

  (i)      "Qualified person"

           Before granting a general safety certificate to an applicant the

  certifying authority's first duty arising under Section 3(1) of the 1975

 Act is to determine whether the applicant is a person likely to be in a

 position to prevent contravention of the terms and conditions of a

 certificate, i.e. a "qualified person". Clearly the certificating

 authority must have in mind the terms and conditions referred to when

 considering the question of whether the applicant is likely to be in a

 position to prevent contravention. When answering that question the

 certificating authority would have to reply on reasonable grounds and they

 would include, for example, in appropriate circumstances whether the

 applicant has the personnel and means as well as the ability to organise

 seme efficient system in order to prevent contravention.! In concluding

 that .the Clubs was such a qualified person the County did not abrogate its

statutory function and duty and, of course, did not create an insurer.      It

would be impracticable for any applicant to guarantee that contravention

would not;occur.

        . Hcwever, the conclusion in favour of an applicant that he is a

qualified person helps to establish a perspective of the certificating

authority's duty in the following way.    In issuing a certificate to the

Club, and in enforcing the Act subsequently, the certificating authority

are to be taken as having concluded that the club was and remained likely
 to prevent contravention of the terms seen in the certificate.      The

 certificate is tailor-made to suit authority's requirements for that

 ground.      The Club was reasonably regarded as likely to be in a position to

 prevent contravention of its terms.      In deciding in favour of the Club that

 it was likely to be in a position to prevent contravention of the terms and

 conditions such a vote of confidence in the Club is a factor of sane

 significance.      Condescending to particulars, by way of example, the City

 refers to Paragraph 3 of Schedule 2:      "the number of spectators admitted to

 the Stadium and to the several areas of spectator accomodation within the

 Stadium shall not exceed the figures specified in Part 1 of Schedule 3".

 Thus the certificating authority regarded the Club as likely to be in a

position to prevent more than 7,200 spectators being admitted to the West

Terrace.       If the Club (or any interested party) had felt at any stage that

the Club could not prevent contravention of the term the Club (or any

 interested party) had a statutory right of appeal in respect thereof.

                                                       \

 (ii)       The Police and Fire Service

            Under Section 3(3) of the Act the certificating authority has to

consult other bodies about the terms and conditions to be included in the

certificate.       The Police and the Fire Service were in fact consulted by the
                                                              «

County.       The significance of this is that these were authorities with

obvious expertise and knowledge of matters relevant to their respective

disciplines. The Police would know about crowd control and matters of

public order.       The Fire Service would make a material contribution about

fire hazards and emergency evacuation procedures and so on.       Both

organisations are entitled to enter the sports ground and make inspections
        ✓
of the ground.

            Consulting such organisations is clearly sensible since the

certificating authority is unlikely to have as much knowledge and expertise

as the Police and Fire Service in relation to those matters mentioned
above.     The fact that the relevant terms and conditions have been subject

matter of consultation and have been expressly or tacitly approved by the

Police and Fire Service again does not involve any abrogation of the lnr»i

authority1s duty.     It is thought again a potent factor in leading to the

conclusion that these terms and conditions were reasonably regarded by the

County as sufficient to secure reasonable safety at this sports ground.

         Similarly, the regular involvement of the Police and the Fire

Service in the Officer Working Parties/Advisory Group and the annual

inspections and the consultation of appropriate officers on relevant

matters is an important factor in deciding whether the certificating

authority acted reasonably in the way in which it sought to enforce the

provisions of the Act.

         In this context is is to be noted that both the Police and the Fire

Service are each of them "an interested party" to wham is granted by

Section 5(3) of the 1975 Act the right of appeal to the Court against the

inclusion of anything in or the emission of anything frctn a Safety

Certificate or the refusal of the local authoritysto amend or replace a

Safety Certificate.    The fact that no appeal was ever made, or indeed ever

threatened, is sane indication that these authorities did not find fault

with the terms of the Safety Certificate and that in turn would support the

certificating authority in concluding reasonably that the Safety

Certificate was and remained sufficient and appropriate to secure

reasonably safety.



(iii) The encouragement towards a flexible approach

         Certificating authorities are given the following advice:

   /     "Procedure regarding applications for general Safety Certificates

         ... in framing such conditions local authorities will no doubt wish

       to keep in mind the principles or guidelines set out in the Guide to

       Safety Sports Grounds.    In this connection local authorities are
       reminded that, as was pointed out in Paragraph 6 of the Annexed Herne

       Office Circular No. 150/1975, this non-statutory document is not a

       set of requirements to be rigidly applied regardless of individual

       circumstances.       The maximum flexibility should be maintained to take

       account of the different circumstances at individual grounds

       deriving frcm differences in such matters as age, size and mode of

       construction.       In this regard, it should also be noted that the Act

       provides that the terms and conditions should be such as "necessary

       or expedient to secure reasonable safety" and it would be

       unreasonable, even if it were practicable, to seek the absolute

       safety of everyone attending the sports stadium."



       The words quoted cane frcm Heme Office Circular No. 130/76 (page 6

of Core).       Their relevance, even today, is preserved by virtue of their

repetition in Annex C to Hone Office Circular No. 7/1986 (Core at 307).

       This enphasis on ''maximum flexibility" and the undesirability to

slavish application of the Green Guide is important because it clearly has

influenced a number of persons who had dealings with this football ground,

for example Doctor Eastwood and Mr. Lock.

       There are of course further references to flexibility.      On the 26th

August 1976 the Fire Department of the Hone Office issued advice on

amendments to the Green Guide and (page 14 of Core):

       "It is again emphasised that the recommendations made in the Guide

      to safety at sports grounds are essentially guidelines and should be

      applied to existing football grounds with the necessary degree of
            »


      flexibility to take account of the particular circumstances at

    / individual grounds.       The aim of securing a reasonable degree of

      safety should be kept uppermost in mind; it would be unreasonable,

      even if it were practicable, to seek the absolute safety of everyone

      attending a ground".
          Such advice echoes of course what is found in the Green Guide
 itself

          (a)    In the 1976 Edition at Paragraph 1.4.:

                  "Deviations frcm individual guidelines are possible without

                 necessarily detracting from the overall safety of the

                 ground.     A flexible approach should be maintained to take

                 account of the particular circumstances at individual

                 grounds".

          (b)    1986 Edition Paragraph 6:

                 "Deviations frcm individual guidelines are possible without

                 necessarily detracting from the overall safety of the

                 ground.     The variety of type, function and layout of sports

                 grounds means that a flexible approach should be maintained

                 to take account of the particular circumstances at

                 individual grounds".

                 and Paragraph 8:

                 "It should be borne in mind that when using the Guide to
                                                     \
                 assess whether existing circumstances provide adequately for

                 the safety of spectators the criterion to be aimed for is

                 that of a reasonable degree of safety. 'It would be

                 unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the

                 absolute safety of everyone attending a ground"

    s            and again Paragraph 11:

                 "The principles referred to in Paragraphs 4-10 above should

                 be kept in mind by both ground management and, where

                 applicable, by the local authority when applying the Guide

                 to an individual ground.    The Guide is an aid to, not a

                 substitute for, professional judgment and ccmmon sense".

        This enphasis on flexibility is still part of current orthodoxy as

can be seen by reference to Mr. Bownes1 experience when he attended a

                                         9
Seminar in October 1987 (Transcript 29: 129G and following) and was told by

the Hate Office speakers (as evidenced inter alia by his note) that "the

whole   concept of the legislation was related to "reasonable safety" bearing

in mind that existing grounds could not realistically be re-built to modem

standards; it is necessary to work with the existing structures and obtain

the best result possible".    In the literature made available at that

seminar is the following description of the Green Guide:

"It most be emphasised that the document is a voluntary code which although

intended to demonstrate standards of safety to be achieved is expected to

be applied reasonably and with a degree of flexibility"

        There is a problem in according the Green Guide this kind of status.

What is "flexibility" to one mind may be slapdash permissiveness to

another.   Clearly emphasis on flexibility was and is well-intentioned but

the effect is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where

non-canpliance can be justified as falling within the scope of sane

flexible discretion allowed to the relevant authority.     There is no

suggestion that at any stage the certificating authority has sought to

excuse itself from taking action by sane contrived preference to the

flexibility allowed under the Green Guide.   For the future perhaps the

Inquiry would wish to consider reccrrmending that the approach of the Green

Guide should move away from that of "flexibility" to, for example, an

approach of the following kind:-

        That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the Club

itself, should always seek to establish whether there is sane reasonable

cause why a relevant guideline is not complied with, and that in the
        .*
absence of same such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the

guideline should be achieved or insisted upon.   That, of course, was not

the orthodox approach when this disaster occurred.

        The suggestion of flexibility is, after all, a curious approach to

take with regard to the Green Guide whose very purpose is to provide
 measures for Improving spectator safety. Admittedly the Green Guide does

 not have the force of statutory regulations but whilst the references to

 flexibility do not go so far as to emasculate the Green Guide they

 certainly reduce the impact that the Guide makes.

             As a final reference to this aspect of flexibility it is noted that

 the County's Officer Working Party considered the point.          On the 30th March

 1979 (Core at page 65) the County's Officer Working Party was told that the

County Council had contacted the Herne Office but little information

additional to that contained in the various circulars was obtained.

Basically the Heme Office had said that any new work or reconstruction had

to be a standard not lower than set out in the Green Guide but "the maximum

flexibility had to be maintained in the case of existing structures and

differences in such matters as age, size and mode of construction had to be

taken into account". The advice was in accordance with what has always

been the approach taken but such an approach, whilst being far from a

recipe for disaster, is likely to achieve less by way of reasonable safety

than is possible                                          ;                 .
                                                                            ---- —

(iv)         The practical implementation of the statutory function and duty

             What a certificating authority in practice is able to achieve in

carrying out its certificating function and enforcement of the statutory

provisions must necessarily be influenced by the nature and quality of any

advice available to the authority and, indeed, the time and money available
       •iv
for action.

             As to the former it is inevitable that the certificating authority

will rely on advice frcm various quarters as there are unlikely to be
              .*
in-house;experts who can advise the certificating authority on all relevant

matters.           It is quite clear that the County relied on experts frcm the

beginning.          Although the Fire Service was "in-house" the Police and the

Building Authority were not.


                                             11
           It is equally clear that the City relies on the experts who advise

 and such was a repeated theme of Mr. Bcwnes' evidence.       For exanple, with

 regard to the removal of Barrier 144 in August 1986 Mr. Bcwnes said

 (Transcript 29: 6IF) that he was relying there on the experts who were

 present.       Again in connection with inspections Mr. Bcwnes said (Transcript

 29: 7OH and 71A) that as far as he was concerned he was not an expert but

 he relied on the advice of experts who frequently gave advice on the

various matters relating to safety.

          Mr. Bcwnes1 lack of expert knowledge on matters of safety is not, of

course, in any sense a disqualifying factor.       What qualified him to act as

co-ordinator of the experts available to him is his expertise in

administering a wide variety of licensing systems.

          The Act contemplates consultation with Police, Fire Service and

Building Authority. The Statutory Guidance, in accordance with which the

certificating authority has to act when carrying out its inspection,

contemplates the involvement of persons qualified for the purpose of

carrying out an inspection. The reliance by the ;City on experts is,

therefore, the product of the legislation.

          Qi behalf of the City a general point is made here that there is no

reason to suppose otter than that the persons available to give advice were

at all material times reasonably competent.       The abiding impression created

by the documentary evidence is that the certificating authority's vrork was
    ■lv
carried out conscientiously and, it is submitted, with reasonable care.

Specific examples of the conscientious approach can be given and in

particular reference may be made to the way in which the City made

endeavours to keep the Club abreast of safety requirements:

   /      (i)       In May 1985 (post Bradford) the County sent a press release

                    to the Club (documents attached to Statement of Mr. Bcwnes

                   at page 135-6).   This was followed up on 9th August 1985

                    (ibid - page 137 and Core at page 274) by specific advice as
                to evacuation procedures, stewarding, first aid and other

                matters

        (ii)    Oi the 15th October 1987 the City drew attention to the

                revised Green Guide and certain aspects of management

                responsibility (Core at page 421).

        As to the question of time and money available for action by the

 certificating authority, there have to be limits and this is recognised,

 for example, by the Hone Office in for exanple, Circular No. 72/987 (Core

 at page 423) where it is suggested that the statutory inspections should

not result in significant resource implications but that in general

 inspections are not expected to take more than about 2 man days per ground.

This point is made in the context of emphasising that the scope of

inspections together with associated report vrork are not intended to be as

detailed or extensive as that often required of the holder of the

Certificate.   (Even allowing for such limits the City always paid due

regard to the achievement of reasonable safety and accorded safety at

Hillsborough a high priority.)   In fact it is known frcm Mr. Bownes'

evidence (Transcript 29: 70D) that an inspection took a day but since it

involved several experts clearly far more than 2 man days were taken up on
this matter.

       The availability of time is relevant of course to the suggestion of

delay ^n producing a replacement Safety Certificate and the City's answer

is given in detail at a later stage of these Submissions.   The point can be

made though at this stage that it is hardly appropriate to expect a

certificating authority to take on additional staff to deal with its

statutory function and duty when the Home Office view is that there should

not Joe significant resource implication.

       Although the certificating authority is allowed to charge fees in

respect of dealing with applications for the issue or amendment of a

certificate (by virtue of the Safety at Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) no
express provision was made in respect of fees for the on-going work of

enforcing the provisions of the Act and dealing with the inspections that

have to be carried out at least once a year.     This Inquiry may wish to

consider whether express provision should be matte to allow a certificating

authority to make sane reasonable charge.

          Mr. Bcwnes was asked to consider a suggestion that on taking over as

certificating authority the City ought to have had a meeting of everybody

involved, including the Club and its engineer, in order to say in effect

"Look, we have taken this over.     We are responsible for the certificate.

Tell us if the situation at the moment is satisfactory.     Have there been

any changes or anything to be done?"     (Transcript 29:124G).   However, in

considering ho? far the City needed to go consideration has to be given to
the following matters:

(i)       The substitution of Mr. Bcwnes for Mr. Vaughan of the County was

          effectively the only inmediate change that came about in the

          certificating function. It was not a case of the City taking over

          sane function which had not previously been administered (when a

          fresh start fron zero base would have been appropriate). It was not

          unreasonable for the City to proceed on the assumption that the

          existing system was one which had been operated in a reasonable

         manner.

(ii) #The letters sent out by Mr. Bownes to Dr. Eastwood of 23rd October
  '. W


          1986 (Core at 373A and B as copied to the Club), to the Chief Fire

         Officer on the 3rd November 1986 (Core at 373C) to the Chief

         Constable on the 13th November 1986 (Core 373D), and to the Building

         •Surveyor of the City on 3rd March 1987 (Core 380A) and finally to

         the Club (Core at 383) certainly gave other parties the opportunity

         to indicate their views about what was to be done and of course, in

         the case of the Police, produce the encouraging reply that the

         ground met Police requirements under the 1975 Act (Core at 373E).
        The approach taken by Mr. Bownes in this context is, it is

 submitted, an appropriate and reasonable one.     There was no point in him

 muscling in as the new certificating authority and making change for

 change's sake.   His approach was more gradual.   He proceeded upon the

 assumption that all parties were reasonably content with the system that he

was taking over (T29:52E) and he sensible supposed that the ground was

 reasonably safe (T29:63D) and was not given cause to believe otherwise



RELEVANT ISSUES ARISING

 First issue : Too Many People

 (i)   Outside the turnstiles

       The fact that too many people were in Pens 3 and 4 was to a material

extent a consequence of there having been a very large crowd especially at

a late stage prior to kick-off outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.

Paragraph 44 of the Green Guide indicates that turnstiles should be of such

numbers as to admit spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds are

kept waiting for admission and yet at no faster rate than the arrangements

for distributing spectators within the ground permit.     This ground had a

total of 93 turnstiles. A capacity crowd could arithmetically be admitted

in a little over 45 minutes.

       Leppings Lane end terraces and the West Stand were capable of being

served by a total of 23 turnstiles which at an ingress rate of 750 per hour

would require a little over 50 minutes to bring about full capacity.

       The kind of event which involves a capacity crowd e.g. semi-final is

one where most members of the public would have an expectation of sane

delay in"'gaining admission and where most people would mate sane effort,

even/if not told do so, to arrive well before kick-off.     Fran the

certificating authority's point of view it is not unreasonable to have

concluded that the number of turnstiles was such as to provide a reasonable

rate of admission.   It is not the sort of matter that would spring to the
mind of the administrator. Any such consideration would need to be

initiated by for example the Police or even the Club.     No doubt was ever

expressed to the certificating authority that the turnstiles were

inadequate or that there were any crowd problems outside the turnstiles.

        If there had been a problem brought to the attention of the

certificating authority then sane reaction might have been expected, either

by way of suggesting an alteration to the layout or by way of asking what

contingency plans Club management had made to deal with such a situation.

Unless the certificating authority was made aware of such a problem it is

not reasonable to expect any action to be carmenced independently.       This is

not a case where to the certificating authority's knowledge the available

entrances at the ground had "proved insufficient to stop unduly large

crowds from gathering outside" which is the kind of circumstance envisaged

in Paragraph 46 of the Green Guide as necessitating the provision of a

contingency plan.

        The Certificate impinges upon this topic to sane modest extent.
                                                    \
Under condition 6(1) the holder has to agree with the Chief Constable the

methods of admission to be employed;     under Condition 9 there have to be

stewards provided for the control and direction of spectators entering the

stadium;     under Condition 11(4) all means of ingress have to be maintained

free from obstruction;    under Condition 29 that the stadium shall be

maintained with the entrances and means of access to the entrances in the

number, size and position existing at the date of the Certificate and

indicated on the plans.

        It/would be wrong to ascribe the presence of any large or excessive

crowd outside the turnstiles to any wrongful act or emission on the part of
    /
the 'City.




                                       16
 (ii)    Safety Certificate provision in respect of Crowd Capacity

         The Safety Certificate provides under Condition 2 of Schedule 2 that

 "the number of spectators acknitted to the stadium and to the several areas

 of spectator acccmmodaticn within the stadium shall not exceed the figures

 specified in part 1 of Schedule 3".   Part 1 of Schedule 3, headed "Crowd

 Capacity", indicates that the number of spectators admitted to the stadium

 and to the various areas of spectator accarmodation within the stadium

 shall not exceed in the case of the West Stand 4,465, the West Terrace

 7,200 and the North-West Terrace 2,900.

        These provisions have to be considered in the light of Section 2(2)

 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 in its then unamended form and

 which provided that

        "(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1) above, a Safety

        Certificate -

        (a)    shall specify the maximum number of spectators to be

                admitted to the stadium;
                                                    S

        (b)    may specify the maximum number to be admitted to different

                parts of it ...;"

        It is clear that it was not obligatory to specify the maximum number

to be admitted to different parts of the stadium.

        Although Section 2(2) has been repealed the Heme Office advice is

nevertheless that such terns should still be included in a Certificate.

        The capacities specified in the Safety Certificate are plainly

derived frcm Dr. Eastwood's report, which was accepted by the County's

officer working party (page 60 of Core).    Dr. Eastwood discounted the total

area on the West Terrace by 10% to allow for the absence of gangways.     He

then applied the rate of 54 persons per 10 square metres as suggested in

Paragraph 15.4 of the 1976 Green Guide.    That 10% discount was presumably

in accordance with the suggestion that an appropriate reduction should be

made in the area available for standing when the positioning and width of
gangways did not meet the recommendations at Paragraph 7.5.1 (every

spectator to be within 12 metres of a gangway or an exit). It was based

upon professional judgment.

        The approach taken by Dr. Eastwood found favour with the officers of

the officer working party.    It came frcm a man who was highly experienced

in sports ground safety and for whan the question of safety was paramount

(transcript 26:79F), who did not feel that he was acting solely for the

Club and was conscious of the public interest (transcript 26:79B) and who

would have felt it his duty to report had he any reservations with regard

to matters of safety (Transcript 26:86E).

        The approach has been challenged cm the basis that Dr. Eastwood

ought to have applied the more restrictive provisions of Paragraph 15.4.3

of the 1976 Green Guide which applies "when the spacing of crush barriers

does not conform to the guidelines...".     However, the reference to spacing

is that set out in Paragraph 12, which deals with the maximum horizontal

distance between barriers.    Dr. Nicholson's report at 2.5 indicates that in

Pen 3 only one spacing does not conform and in Pen 4 only 2 spacings do not

conform.   On the other hand it may be said that the. spacings are much

closer than they need to be which adds to the safety.    It is felt,

therefore, that Dr. Eastwood was in no way unreasonably in adopting the

method he did or in putting forward the figure which he did of 7,200.



(iii) The Green Guide and Capacity

        It would be wrong to suppose that the Green Guide provides any hard

and fast rule for dealing with the assessment of safe ground capacity.    At

Paragraph 15.1 of the 1976 Green Guide what is described as "a method of

calculating the number of people that can be safely accarmodated" is set

out.   The 1986 Green Guide at Paragraph 217 adds that the paragraphs which

formulate the suggested method of assessment "contain as of necessity
 generalised guidelines in view of the wide variety of types, sizes,

 configurations of sports grounds, their use and general condition".

        Moreover, with regard to the packing density rates it is to be noted

 that these are put forward as being in the nature of "allowances" for the

 purposes of the calculation and whilst achievement of those allowances in

 practice ought to produce safety it does not follow that non-compliance

 produces danger.   In localised areas, where fans nay well prefer to gather,

 higher rates of density are often achieved but without danger.

 Furthermore, reference may be made here to the Fire Service photographs and

 the experiments carried out.

        It is to be noted, moreover, that in putting forward "a method" of

 calculating safe ground capacity Paragraph 220 (formerly (25.3) of the 1976

Green Guide) deals with the number of people that can be safely

accommodated "on a terrace".    There is no unequivocal suggestion in the

Green Guide that a capacity needs to be estimated for an area such as a

pen.   If reference is made to Paragraph 101 of the 1986 Green Guide it is

seen that a recormendation is made that a ground should be divided into

"sections" to prevent potentially hazardous migrations by spectators and

"each section of the ground has its own limit of safety capacity".     There

is at least a hint that Paragraph 101 contemplates a larger unit than a pen

in its term "section" because it does provide "each section of the ground

for example each end or side should be self-contained..."

       Moreover, Paragraph 102 describes hew each of the "major sections"

should be sub-divided by gangways and crush barriers.   Again in Paragraph

103 railings, fences etc. "dividing sections of the ground" should be of
            t
        ✓
the strength of crush barriers.   One might be forgiven for thinking then

that the Green Guide is not contemplating a pen when proposing that each

section of the ground should have its own limit of safety capacity.

Alternatively there is either a lacuna or an ambiguity here.
 (iv)    Revision of capacity

         There is no evidence to shew that the County, through its Officer

Working Party, ever considered the question of holding capacity in 1981

when the radial fences ware installed or 1985 when the layout of radial

 fences was modified.   On the other hand it is not surprising that this is

 so since no provision either in the Act or in the Green Guide or elsewhere

 (for example in any safety regulations which might have been issued)

expressly dealt with the need to calculate capacity for an area such as a

pen.

        There is, though, a further and practical reason why such a capacity

was unlikely ever to have been calculated as a holding capacity and that is

that the areas created in 1981 and 1985 werenot self-contained areas with

the means of monitoring numbers at the point of entry.         The assessment of a

holding capacity would sensibly be understood to require assessment of the

number of spectators who would be held i.e. remain in an area during the

football game.   Since the spectators were free to move about frcm one pen

to another, and since no pen had the mechanical means for checking the

numbers altering it, provision of a holding capacity was quite meaningless.

        It might be said that a revised holding capacity should have been

calculated if only to reflect the access channel created between the two

runs of radial fences between pens 4 and 5 or, later, to reflect the
                                                           t
                                                         . i
removal of barrier 144.   It is unlikely though that specific capacities for

pens 3 and 4 would have been produced for the very reason that any such              '

capacity, even if it could have been monitored, could not have been

enforced as long as spectators-were-free-to move-between-the pens.----------



(v) /   Not a cause of what went wrong

        Even if Doctor Eastwood's original calculation was higher than it

should have been or even if the certified capacity for the West Terrace

should have been reduced or sub-divided into the component areas it is
 submitted that the evidence does not establish that any revision of the

 certificate to reflect these matters as for example by providing that the

 maximum number to be admitted to pen 3 should not exceed say 800 was a

 cause of what want wrong.      A sensible interpretation of these events is

 that death and injury resulted fran the sudden influx of large numbers of

 spectators once the gates were opened, and which were numbers so great that

 overcrowding and crushing was ever likely to occur.



 (vi)       Overcrowding

            Realistically the tragedy occurred because of localised areas of

 overcrowding giving rise to intolerable crushing pressures. The

 certificating authority's position here is that crcwi management within the

 ground is essentially a management responsibility, and this is envisaged in

 the Green Guide.     That is not to say that the certificate does not touch

upon this aspect at all.      The emphasis at the mcment though is on the

managerial responsibility which is envisaged for example in Chapter 13 of

the Green Guide:      "Effective stewarding should prevent overcrowding in

sections of the ground, reduce the likelihood and incidence of disorder,

help disperse spectators in such a way as to reduce crowd pressure ...".

Again at paragraph 195a a "basic" duty which a steward is called upon to

carry out includes that the duty 'to help achieve an even flow of people to

the viewing areas and safe dispersal of spectators on the Terraces or
    . 'S.


viewing slopes'. By paragraph 197 stewards have to be fully capable of

carrying out the duties allocated to them.      Again at paragraph 204 the

Green Guide specifies "As in other areas of safety, management is

responsible for the crcwd control arrangements..

    / This responsibility is developed in chapters 5 (Ingress) and 8

(Terraces and Viewing Slopes). in particular chapter 8 describes hew

"arrangements should be made to encourage the even distribution of the

crcwd on the terraces to provide ease of access and egress; to control and
facilitate movement, particularly if a local emergency should arise during

the event;       and to contain pressures before they reach dangerous

proportions ..



 (vii) Provision in the Safety Certificate relating to crcwd management

       The safety certificate provides quite apart fran the limit of

spectator capacity on the West Terrace seme further specific terms that

Impinge upon this issue.       Under Condition 6(ii) the holder has to refuse

admission to or evacuate spectators fran any part of the stadium before or

during a specified activity upon receiving instructions so to do fran the

Chief Constable (as defined). Under Condition 7 the holder has to arrange

for the attendance of Police Officers "to secure the orderly and lawful

behaviour of the spectators".       Overcrowding in a particular area may well

cause disorderly behaviour.       The Club and the Police would therefore have

an interest in ensuring that there was no local overcrowding and that might

if necessary be achieved by refusing admission to spectators to parts of

the stadium.                                         ;

       Again Condition 9 provides for the holder to arrange for the

attendance of safety stewards who are to carry out amongst other duties

that of control and direction of spectators entering using or leaving the

stadium.       It is true that the certificate provides expressly for the

minimum number of safety stewards required and this minimum number does not

include stewards specifically assigned to that duty on the West Terrace.

On the other hand the safety certificate mates no provision for such

stewards to be on the Spion Kop but the Club do provide stewards there.         It
           $
           *
would be wrong to interpret the safety certificate as meaning that the

minimum number of stewards was the- correct number for each and every

occasion. Hie minimum number has to be provided for every specified

activity and that presumably includes religious conventions, reserve

matches and so on.      In practice seme football matches would plainly require
 more than the minimum number and this was recognised by the Club who

 provided more than the minimum number on the occasion of this semi-final.

 It is to be remembered that this is a general safety certificate and not a

 special one for each game.    It makes general provision.

          The submission made on behalf of the City is that the general safety

 certificate provided a sufficient framework within its conditions that

 would have enabled the Club to fulfil its' responsibility of securing safe
 crcwi management.



 (viii) Practical avoidance of overcrowding and crushing

          In practice in the past this was achieved by visual monitoring.    The

 description of the methods used varies in the Police evidence but the

          feature is that of reacting to any detection that the density of the

 crcwi unless further restricted would beccroe excessive.    This has been

 described variously as packing or filling the terraces.     It appears to be a

 traditional method.   It was one used by Mr. Evans (transcript 26), now F.A.

 Official but who previously as a Police officer used to walk the terraces

 observing and detecting and restricting further entry to any area if he

felt that the level of canfort was at risk.    It would be wrong to

categorise this method as that of reacting only to discomfort or danger. An

informed and competent observer alive to the risks of overcrowding and

crushing ought to be able to detect that the density is within tolerable
limits.

       All the more so should that be possible where the area under

scrutiny is relatively small as was the case with pens 3 and 4 which

measured in round terms 13m x 14m and where there were advantageous viewing

positions for the person carrying out the monitoring task (either frcm the

West Stand or frcm the perimeter track or at the rear of the terrace).

       Such visual monitoring would be a necessary part of any system

because even with numbers in a particular area less than any recannended
 capacity there still is the risk of local overcrowding and crushing.    It

 would be folly for anyone to assume that a totaliser was a sufficient

 precaution and of course reliance on it might be dangerously misleading.

 Spectators go to popular areas and may prefer to be a close-knit group.

 The vital requirement is to knew what conditions are like on the terraces

 and there cannot be any substitution for careful visual monitoring.    That

 is not an inefficient system if carried out by persons aware of the
 potential risks.



 (ix)    Lack of Knowledge by the City

         The City was never told that there was any risk of local

 overcrowding or crushing.   Had there been any such risk that was known of

 then it is likely that a member of the Advisory Group would have been aware

 of it and that its existence would have been made known to the City.    Had

 the City become aware of any such problem then on Mr. Bowne's evidence the

means was available for achieving safety and this        have included, if
                                                    \
necessary, a prohibition notice.

        It is therefore submitted that the City believed reasonably that the

Club with the assistance of the Police would be able to’achieve the safe

dispersal of spectators cn the terraces in a manner that would avoid local

overcrowding and crushing.   The City can reasonably be forgiven for not

having included any more specific provision as to the manner in which

terraces should be filled or as to the need to look out for and guard

against local overcrowding. These are matters which are of a basic nature,

which do not need spelling out and which could safely be left to those

involved in the match-day operations to achieve.



(x)     Ingress

        Two aspects relating to ingress to the ground need to be considered:

Directional Signs and the Tunnel.
 (a )   Directional signs

        There is no provision in the Certificate with regard to signs.     The

1976 Green Guide made sane provision under Paragraph 6.6 in recotnnending a

comprehensive system of signposting being such as would clearly indicate

routes to various parts of the ground.    Unfortunately this is in a part of

the Guide deeding with egress and it does not obviously relate to

directional signs for    the purposes of ingress.

        The same point   can be made with regard tothe 1986GreenGuide     which

also deals with signposting under Paragraph 57 but is again in the chapter

headed "Egress". Management have to provide directional flew signs under

Paragraph 29(xv).

        The absence of any detailed recarenendation in respect of signposting

for the purposes of ingress in the Green Guide is unfortunate. It is

thought, though, that the matter of signposting is better left to

management to deal with.    The information to be put upon a sign would

probably depend upon the operational requirements affecting a particular
                                                    \
match and for example if a small group of spectators attended there would

be no point in putting up   signs which if reliedupon'might allow them use

of the full width andlength of the terraces.

        The Police in those circumstances would wish to contain the fans

within a particular area and the signs ought to reflect that.

        It is in any event submitted that any suggestion that spectators

were likely to create danger for themselves through being confused by the

lack of appropriate signs would have been treated as a remote possibility

prior to this tragedy.   The likely response of the Club and the Police to

such a suggestion would have been that if spectators found through lack of

signs that they had in fact gone into an area which was already crowded

then for reasons of their own ccmfort they would have left that area and/or

looked out for somewhere else to go to.
        Fran the City's point of view it is another of those matters where

 they would have expected to be told if there was a problem (transcript:

 29:90A) and in the absence of specific carrnent arising fran probably the

 Police or possibly the Club it is unlikely that this was an issue which

 would ever have seen the light of day at any advisory group meeting.
 (b)    Tunnel

        So far as the tunnel is concerned it is with respect submitted that

 whilst its gradient does not accord with the Green Guide reccmnendation it

 was not unreasonable for the Certificate to be provided in spite of that.

 It would probably have been unreasonable to require extensive work to be
 done (see Dr. Eastwood's evidence).

        It is unlikely that the tunnel had any effect on the events of this

 day and there is a wealth of evidence to shew that spectators proceeded

 through the tunnel without mishap.    Mr. Foster (transcript 1:63) described

 a solid mass in the tunnel walking steadily;     he was not buffeted and was

 not even aware it was a slope (1:80).    Mr. Hennessey had no apparent

problem in the tunnel (transcript 2:48) and suffered no pushing.     Mr.

Cruice had no problem in the tunnel (transcript 2:94).     Mr. Cunningham

described the catapulting effect at the end of the tunnel as a result of a

surge in it (transcript 2:104) but that was the result of the numbers

involved rather than the gradient.

       In any event the "landing" effect of the level area at the bottan of

the tunnel needs to be stressed since this would have had a compensatory
effect after the gradient.

       Generally it is submitted that the tunnel had no effect at all on

the events of the day and whilst it may be Dr. Eastwood's view that the

tunnel would need to be looked at again that is a view dependent very much
upon hindsight.

       Dr. Eastwood evidently had what appeared to him to be good reasons

for leaving the tunnel as it was.     It is suggested that the City could not
 reasonably have required extensive works on the tunnel since there was no

 evidence of any history of canplaint or accident affecting the tunnel

 although its presence was well kncwn and it was presumably used regularly

 and probably by the majority of spectators attending those Terraces.



 SECOND ISSUE:   CONFINED AREA (the pens)

 (i)   History and Purpose

       The history of the pens is fairly straightforward. The perimeter

 fence was there before Certificate and was there as a security fence to

keep spectators off the pitch.

       The radial fences were provided in 1981 and 1985, as appears frcm

the documentation.    The purpose of having radial fences appears to have

altered.    Initially they were provided as a means of controlling lateral

movement of spectators. In 1985 the scheme approved was for the purpose of

effecting segregation of hone supporters fran away supporters on the

terraces and to that end a sterile area between pens 4 and 5 was created by

the addition of a radial fence there with the added option of creating a

larger sterile area if necessary by shutting off pen 4.

       The purpose of the radial fences changed again after the 1986 season

when it ceased to be the practice to have any mixture of supporters at that

end of the ground.   The radial fences then became available as a means of

containing smaller groups of away supporters in specific areas. On the

occasion of any big match where the whole of the Terraces might be needed

the policy became one of letting the fans find their cwn level subject to

visual monitoring.   Thus latterly in the case of sell out matches the

radial fences have been restored to the purpose of controlling lateral

movement.

(ii)   The Reasonableness of the Certificating Authority's Approval

       It is quite clear that the certificating authority approved the

introduction of the radial fences in 1981 and the creation of the pens in
  1985.    It does not seen that after 1985 the certificating authority ever

  had its attention drawn specifically to the abandonment of the policy of

  segregating rival supporters at that end of the ground.       It is submitted

  that the certificating authority at all material times acted reasonably in

 approving the installation and continued presence of the radial for the
 following reasons:-

  (a)     The 1976 Green Guide provides at paragraph 18.1:

            CrcMi movenent on terraces should be severely limited in order to

          give the Police the fullest opportunity for crowd control.      Less

          problems occur where the terraces are divided as far as possible

          into sections by the use of railings or barriers, both radial and
          lateral...".

 The radial fences were introduced in 1981 largely as a result of Police

 recanmendations and in the absence of any contrary view.        Again in 1985 the

 Police favoured the introduction of the central radial fence between pens 3

 and 4 and the provision of the sterile channel for their access purposes
                                                        \
 between pens 4 and 5.      The certificating authority would have needed

weighty reasons to challenge the Police view but it is in any event

submitted that the Police purpose was a sensible and proper one.

          (b)               The proposals both in 1981 and 1985 were supported by Dr.

Eastwood.       Pie had some vacillation (transcript 27: 23 A) !but never felt in

the event that there was any problem in controlling spectators (transcript

27.75A). He appreciated the manner in which in 1985 the pens were to be

filled by for example using the gates leading into the central pens so that

once either pen 3 or 4 was full it could be closed off and people

channelled into the remaining pen of the two central pens. It is important

to remember, from the certificating authority's point of view, that Dr.

Eastwood felt himself able in the exercise of his professional judgment to

issue annual certificates of safety as for example that dated 2nd August

1988 (Core at page 475).      Dr. Eastwood intended such a certificate to
  relate to those structures with which he as engineer was concerned and this

 included the radial fences, gates, perimeter fence, crush barriers and so

 on.    He meant the certificate to be read as meaning that as feu: as those

 structures which were within his remit were concerned the ground was safe

 to use.     Such a certificate carries therefore great weight, coming as it

 does fran an apparently reputable source such as Dr. Eastwood who would not

 put his professional reputation in jeopardy.     It is to be noted that Dr.

 Eastwood was certifying that the various structures in the ground were in a

 satisfactory condition and appropriate for the stadium to be used to the

 full capacity as laid down in the Certificate of Ground Safety.

           (c)    It was reasonable for the certificating authority to suppose

 that the Club with the assistance of the Police had the ability to control

 spectators entering and using the pens.    Properly organised the pens were

 capable of being used safely.     There is no evidence that the certificating

 authority was ever made aware of any disquiet on the part of anybody about

 any risk attaching to the pens.    The certificating authority was never put

 on enquiry, and that probably reflects the belief of the Club and the

Police that the pens could be used safely.

         (d)      It was not necessary to enshrine any particular method of

filling the pens in the terms of the General Safety Certificate.     The

method was best left as an operational decision to be made by the Club with

the assistance of the Police.    The methods described in evidence vary fran

the certificating authority's point of view it was reasonable to suppose

that those responsible for fixing a method would be able to do so without

difficulty.



(iii)   Effect on Capacity

        At least to the extent that the sterile channel took away a part of

the area available for standing the provisions of the pens in their final

form could have had an effect on the holding capacity of what is left. It
 is to be noted though that the central pens created were relatively small.

Originally 10% of the area of the terrace had been discounted to allcw for

 the absence of gangways.   That discount might well be regarded as generous

and perhaps even unnecessary in the case of the central pens where the

majority of spectators would be within 12 metres of the tunnel exit.

        The fact is that it does not seam that the certificating authority

ever reconsidered capacity for the pens but the reason for that is probably

that it was meaningless to do so in terms of any holding capacity for any

area which was not self-contained and in respect of which a number of

spectators could fluctuate.   The Fire Brigade were evidently satisfied

about the pen capacity in terms of evacuation times.



 (iv)   Administrative Shortcomings

        The presence of the radial fences should have been noted up on the

plans and that would have involved an amendment of the certificate of which

the plans are part.   The same may be said of the additional perimeter fence
                                                  \
gate provided in 1985.   However, though the paperwork was not dealt with as

well as it should have been it is submitted that this did not contribute in

any respect to the tragedy.

        If it were said that appropriate advertising with regard to

necessary amendments might have allowed seme interested party to query what

was being proposed or dene the answer must surely be that any such argument

is somewhat remote and unlikely but in any event if any interested party as

defined under Section 5(5) of the Act wished to challenge the introduction

of the radial fences then since the radial fences were obvious to see on

the terraces an appeal could have been brought to Court under Section 5(3)

if necessary.

        The perimeter gates which are part of the structure comprising the

pens are dealt with under the 4th Issue below.
THIRD ISSUE: CRUSHING

       It is proposed to consider here the matter of the crush barriers

and, specifically, the removal of crush barrier 144.        The City's position

is that even allowing for differences between the crush barriers as they

were in pens 3 and 4 on the day of this tragedy compared with

reccromendations in the Green Guide, nevertheless as far as the crush

barriers were concerned they were reasonably safe and sufficiently strong

for the kind of situation which could reasonably be envisaged. Barrier

124a failed because of gross overloading arising in exceptional

circumstances.    The following points are made:

      The adequacy of the crush barriers at the       time of issueof

      certificate.

      Deficiencies in the barriers as they were before the issue of

      certificate were noted by Dr. Eastwood and the Officer Working

      Party.     A Schedule of Required Improvements was drawn up.       Barriers

      were tested and where necessary replaced.       Additional barriers were
                                                      \
      provided.    The County took into account the professional judgment of

      Dr. Eastwood.    In the event what was provided was, it is submitted,

      a reasonable system of crush barriers.       Although there were

      deviations from the Green Guide this was an area where it was

      appropriate to apply maximum flexibility since the !system was so

     ^greatly influenced by the presence of barriers which had been there
     for upwards of nearly half a century.

     Moreover, it is to be noted that the terrace in front of the West

     Stand is quite a narrow one from front to back.         Effectively there

     are only 3 rows of barriers and the situation is quite different

     from, for exanple, that which obtains at the Kop end where there is

     a much larger area of terracing on a much more significant incline.

     There seems little doubt that the barriers were strong enough to

     meet the recarrasndatians in the Green Guide.        The heights of the
                         , tiarnable bat it is submitted that the heights
       barriers are somewhat variable cu

       Involved are not dangerous.
       So far as ths layout is concerned Dr. East«ood advised the 0£ roer

       Worlung party that the gaps should be larger than —                   «   “
                           ..       lfiAx and hetook account of the fact that
       Green Guide (transcript 28:16A) ana ne
       the barriers were materially closer together row to

        required in the Green Guide.
        It «as very          a situation wtere a^roval of the systan * s

                     by professional                  « * « - » —       •



        o r ff^ ia n c v nf the Terns of the C e r t i f i g g -
(ii)
               certificate neXes s ^ i c P ^ i c n in respect of the bakers

        by way of:                                                               .   m
         (a)       condition 15(i)      The holder s h a U at all tames maintain

                   structural parts of the stadium in sound order and to the

                   appropriate artf relevant sta^tords in the Siide and in all

                   cases to the satisfaction of the Council.

         (b)        condition 25 in relation to the systa.atic testing of
                   b r i e r s by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer.

                             OQ in resoect of the maintenance of the crush
          (c)      Condition 29 in respect uj-
                    barriers as indicated on the plan.

          clearly « » -rtifl-t. ^             not ^      ^ a t e    ^       «»
          the Green Guide in that testing under condition 25 was ccntanp
                                           +-Han a 1 / 2 years and to be by way
          as involvinga cycle of not less than     •/
                                  .    x      logs than20% ofthe total nunber
          of a representative sample of not less tnan
          of barriers.       Properly the certificate ought to reflect^          ^

          e* „ testing stauid ta*e pi*, every 4 years (Green and*
                                            _•fiaronne nn the day because the
          paragraph 38).       This made no differen

           relevant barriers had been tested in July 1988.
(iii) Maintenance of a reasonable system of crush barriers after issue of

      certificate.

      It is submitted that the system of crush barriers present cn 15th

      April 1989 was reasonably regarded by the City as a safe and proper

      system.     There have been sane alterations over the years since the

      certificate was issued both when radial fences were put in and,

      particularly, in JUly 1986 when barrier 144 was partly removed.        Hie

      significance of barrier 144 is dealt with further below.    At this

      stage though the City advance the submission that they reasonably

      concluded that the barriers were sufficient and proper having regard

      in particular to the following matters:-

      (a)       The barriers were subjected to regular and appropriate

                testing in respect of their strength and where necessary

                remedial or repair work was carried out.

      (b)       Dr. Eastwood provided his annual Certificates of Safety

                Testing and anybody reading such a certificate would

                properly conclude that his professional view was that the

                crush barriers were in good order, and sufficient strength

                and made the terrace fit and safe for use.

     (c)        There were regular inspections by the Officer working Party

                or members of the Advisory Group which included inspection

                of the crush barriers.

     (d)        There were no canplaints of any danger arising fran the

                presence of crush barriers (except in relation to 144 - see

                belcw). There were no accidents arising fran the presence

             of crush barriers.

     (e)        The crush barriers appear to have done their job effectively

                in that they had been in regular use and on occasions

             subjected to capacity crowds as for example in 1988.       It


                                      33
                would not be surprising if the certificating authority

                regarded the crush barriers as a tried and tested system.

        (f)     The City on taking over the certificating function in

                respect of the ground would reasonably have concluded that

                the crush barriers as provided had been approved and that

                they rrmlri only be changed if there was reasonable cause to

                do so.   Given that the system had indeed been approved and

                subjected to regular testing and inspection the City would

                have found it difficult to assert any reasonable cause for

                changing what was there and any attempt to change would have

                been contrary to the recatmendation in favour of maxinon

                flexibility in the application of the Green Guide.



(iv)   Barrier 144

       This was removed after the inspection of August 1986.    It is

relevant because of the thesis advanced that the absence of barrier 144 was

causative on the day in allowing a channel through which crcwi pressure

flowed with the result that barrier 124A was broken dcwn.

       The circumstances under which barrier 144 came to be removed are

unfortunate.   No prior notice was given of the proposal to remove 144 and

the matter seems to have been dealt with on an ad hoc basis on site.     Sane

time was taken up in probing whether Mr. Bownes was acting ultra vires ixit

he refuted any such suggestion (transcript 29:77E).

       What can be said is that even if barrier 144 had been dealt with in

a procedurally impeccable manner the same result was going to occur namely

that barrier 144 would be removed.   The reason for removal was that

advanced by the Police (see Calvert and 318A of Core).

       There plainly were safety considerations in mind (see especially

318A of Core) when the Police advocated the removal of 144.    Those safety

considerations were assessed by Dr. Eastwood and Mr. Strange and in
fi.-.4-




          particular were assessed against the ocmpeting ccnsideraticns including the

          possibility of providing a replacement barrier.     The considered and

          balanced view taken was that removal was in the circcsnstances a reasonable

          course to take.    That was a matter of judgment based on reasonable grounds

          and probably would have been the decision no matter in what circumstances

          the discussion took place.

                 Whether or not removal of barrier 144 was in the event causally

          relevant is a matter of speculation because:-

          (i)    even if present barrier 144 only partially intruded into the gap

                 between the central radial fence and barrier 149.     If crcvd pressure

                 flowed through that charnel then the presence of 144 would have had

                 little if any effect in reducing such crcwd pressure.

          (ii)   it is by no means certain that crowd pressure did flew through the

                 channel so as to have any effect upon barrier 124A.     The evidence as

                 to the circumstances in which 124A came to be damaged is in sane

                 conflict.   Gary Gains (transcript 2:150) described barrier 124A

                 breaking down after a steady build up of pressure and he pat that

                 very clearly as occurring before kick-off.    Statements were received

                 fran other witnesses for example Lewis Johnson who put the collapse

                 of barrier 124A at the time when a surge coincided with Mr.

                 Beardsley's shot hitting the crossbar.   As a matter of speculation

                 it is possible to envisage how a large grot?) came through gate C,

                 down the tunnel and then through the channel so as to cause

                 increased pressure on barrier 124A but it is equally possible that

                 the pressure which affected barrier 124A was generated on the pitch

                 side of where barrier 144 would have bean.

                 It is unfortunate that the video recordings do not resolve the

                 doubt.   There is a suspicious movement to be seal on tape at about

                 2.47 but no certain evidence as to what was happening within Pen 3

                 at that time.

                                                35
(iii)     Moreover the continued presence of barrier 144 might well itself

          have been highly dangerous in the circunstances of the 15th April

          1989 since it could well have lead to a different accident where

          excessive pressure was thrown onto barrier 144 itself or obstruction

          occurred with great risk of injury to persons in, say, the tunnel.

(iv)      The channel as envisaged is probably illusory.   In fact the removal

          of 144 opens up an area where any crowd pressure is likely to be

          dissipated and certainly it involves opening up another channel down

          the length of the radial fence.   Whilst that might not be desirable

          in itself it would have had the effect of reducing any pressure

          caused by people flowing in fran the tunnel.                          ^
          At all events after barrier 144 was removed its absence did not lead

to accident or injury at any match before the 15th April 1989 in spite of

the attendance of capacity crowds. No report or conplaint was made about

its absence.     It was never suggested to the City that action needed to be

taken with regard to the absence of barrier 144.      Dr. Eastwood provided his

ground safety Certificate for 1988.      It is respectfully submitted that the

City would reasonably have concluded that the removal of barrier 144 had

achieved the desired objective put forward by Mr. Calvert and that its

absence had not given rise to any other risk.



(v)       The Strength of Barrier 124A

          This barrier failed.   It did so because it was grossly overloaded.

Dr. Eastwood's evidence about this as set out at the aid of his statement

has not been challenged.     It is therefore submitted that barrier 124A was

sufficiently strong and probably complied with the requirements of the

Green Guide as much in April 1989 as it had done in July 1988 when last

tested.     No one could reasonably have foreseen that such excessive

overloading would be applied to barrier 124A.
 KXIRIH ISSUE - Unable to escape or avoid injury or death

  (i)    Perimeter Pence Gates

        As a matter of history the majority of these gates were present

 before certification although 2 gates were added later namely gate 4 in

 1985 and gate 7 in 1987.   Because of the ample width of the exit points at

 the Leppings Lane end of the Terrace the perimeter fence gates were never

 regarded as part of the primary exit system but were simply a secondary

 facility available.

        The gates are in round figures about 30 ans., or say one foot,

 narrower than the recormended width for such gates according to Paragraph

 209 of the 1986 Green Guide.    There was of coarse no recommendation of a

 specific width in the 1976 Green Guide.

        The width of the gate was evidently a matter of deliberate choice

 when consideration was given to the point in 1985.   The carpeting interests

were on the one hand those associated with matters of security and public

 order when for example the Police might need access within the Pen and

preferred a narrower gate as against those associated with emergencies and

evacuations when for example the Fire Service would prefer a wider gate.

        It is submitted that the certificating authority acted reasonably in

concluding that the gates as provided were of a width which satisfied the

relevant interests.

        One instinctive reaction in the face of this awful tragedy may be

that the gates were so narrow as to hanper rescue and evacuation attempts.

It is submitted that such a conclusion is a tenuous one.    The evidence

suggests that spectators were crushed together inside the Pens but that

when they reached the gate they passed through without being further

obstructed at that point.   Certainly if a canpariscn is made against gates

of the width recannended in Paragraph 209 of the Green Guide it is

suggested that an extra foot or so would have made little if any difference

to the ability to escape or effect any rescue.
        Hie attitude of the certificating authority was ever likely to be

affected by the way in which the Green Guide is couched.      Paragraph 209 of

the Green Guide (which is in similar terms to Paragraph 18.3 of the 1976

Green Guide) advises that "access to the pitch must be made as difficult as

possible in normal ciroanstances while at the same time ensuring that the

Police have effective access to the Terraces for the purposes of crcwd

control and enabling the pitch to be used (where appropriate) in the event

of serious emergency..      The priority consideration in the case of these

gates was ever likely to be Police access as the determining factor since

the gates vasre only intended as a secondary means of exit.    Conditions were

different at the Kop end (see Core page 82) where gates of the minimum

width were necessary.

        It is therefore submitted that the certificating authority acted

sensibly and properly in allowing these gates to be present, that there was

no sufficient reason to require alteration prior to the 15th April 1989 but

that in any event the particular reduction in width in the order of a foot

compared with the reccranended width in Paragraph 215 of the 1986 Green

Guide made little if any difference.



(ii)   Evacuation and Bnergency Procedures

       It is submitted that these are not matters that can be dealt with by

way of specific detail in the Certificate which ought to provide generally.

The relevant Certificate does make provision as follows:-

(a)    By Condition 6(2) the Club have to evacuate spectators fran the

       stadium or any part thereof upon receiving Instructions so to do

       fran the Police.

(b)    By Condition 9 the Club have to arrange for stewards to man the

       exits, to patrol the stadium and deal with any emergency and have to

       arrange for training exercises relating to the action to be taken by

       such stewards in the event of an emergency.
  (c)     By Condition 10 the Club have to ensure that egress routes are as so

          secured as to open iinnediately and easily frcm the inside and to be

          manned at all tiroes.

  (d)       By Condition 11 the Club have to sign, illuminate and maintain exit

          routes.

  (e)       By Condition 14(3) a public address system audible in al T parts of

         the stadium and available for priority use by the Police has to be

         provided.

  (f)       By Condition 17 emergency procedure notices have to be posted as

         required by the Chief Fire Officer.

         There are of course other and specific provisions relating to

 emergencies involving fire.

         It is the City's case that the provision made within the Certificate

 is sufficient to ensure that appropriate means for dealing with an

 emergency were available and that it would not be reasonable to require the

 certificating authority to have dene more.     The specific training of those

 who might have to be engaged in dealing with an emergency and bringing

 about an evacuation is not a matter that would need to be dealt with by the

 certificating authority and ought to be left to those services with t~hp

expertise and where appropriate authority to deal with the relevant events.

Moreover, since the kind of emergency likely to arise is one which would

probably require a Police presence it would have to be a Police decision as

to hew many Officers to have available and what kind of expertise might be

required.     This is not a matter that can be dealt with in the Certificate

and of course under Section 2(2)A of the Act the provision of Police

services is reserved for the determination of the Chief Police Officer.



(iii)   First Aid

        Hie Certificate makes provision under Condition 8 in requiring

Club to provide and maintain a suitably equipped First Aid roan (adequately
 signed and lit), a physician to be available at the First Aid rocm if

 required and the provision of First Aid assistance.

       Mr. Bownes told the Inquiry that there was no nationally available

 index of appropriate equipment for these purposes.    He had made specific

enquiry of the G.L.C., a body which had experience of major pep concerts,

but was unable to discover any specific detail.

       Originally the County's Officer Working Party had made enquiry of

Dr. Bailey, Community Physician, and he had provided a list of equipment

which the Officer Working Party had in turn put to the Club.

       However, that list had it is submitted ceased to be relevant by

April 1989.    After the City became involved their Health and Consumer

Services Department had been introduced as a member of the Advisory Group

and had made specific enquiry of the Club with regard to First Aid

facilities (see the evidence of Mr. Graham Mackrell) and the position which

resulted was that the Club undertook to find out fran St. John's Ambulance

Brigade what equipment they recarmended and to ccmply with their

suggestions.   Hie evidence of Mr. Wells of the St. John's Ambulance

suggests that this arrangement was put into effect.    Certainly the Club

relied 15x21 St. John's Ambulance to provide First Aid assistance and to

suggest what equipment was needed.

       Having regard to the obvious expertise of the St. John's Ambulance

Brigade it is submitted that it was entirely proper and reasonable to rely

on them as the source of advice. It is though further submitted that the

Certificate by Condition 8 makes sufficient and appropriate provision in

respect of the subject when by virtue of the 1986 Green Guide Paragraph 29

the provision of First Aid facilities and First Aid staff is stipulated to

be a management responsibility.   It would be unfair to require the

certificating authority to do more than was in fact done here.

      One consequence of relying on St. John's Ambulance Brigade was that

in so far as they relied on their cwn equipment that equipment was not
 likely to be available at the Club on the occasion of any annual

 inspection.     Hcwever, it was reasonable to believe that St. John's

 Anfculanoe Brigade would attend any specified activity with appropriate

 equipment because they invariably do attend and provide First Aid at the

 events of mass entertainment.

        Two specific points call for further carment.    Firstly Dr. Bailey's

 list did provide for a Minute-man Resuscitator and it seems that such an

 item of equipment was not provided by the Club or St. John's Ambulance

 Brigade.     It is thought that the absence of such an item of equipment was

 not culpable because had such an item been required then St. John's

Ambulance would have advised accordingly.     Its absence, moreover, was not

 causative.    In the event various resuscitators were made available by the

Fire Service and Ambulance Service.     It is unlikely that any resuscitator

in the First Aid roan would have been got into use earlier than the

resuscitators which were in fact used.     It is unlikely that a Club

resuscitator would have made any difference to these events.     Mr. Wells

felt that mouth-to-mouth resuscitation was at least as good.     It was his

view and that of other witnesses including Mr. Higgins of the Fire Service

that no equipment would have made any difference to what occurred.

       Secondly there is sane confusion as to whether or not a Club

Physician to attend at the First Aid Roan was provided.     The Club believed

that this was so, in the form of Dr. Purcell. Dr. Purcell was regarded as

the Club Doctor.     Doubtless he would have attended if required so to do,

even though he felt himself to be more specifically the Team Doctor.     It is

though submitted that the absence of a Club Doctor to be available at the

First Aid roan (if such was the■position) made no difference to these

events and that was essentially the evidence of Dr. Purcell.
                           DRAFTING NEW OCNDITICHS

       Attention was drawn to the lapse of time between 6th May 1986 when

Mr. Bownes first referred to re-drafting the conditions (Core at 314) and

the absence of any perfected revised version by April 1989.     Mr. Bcwnes'

personal answer is as set out in the memorandum supplied to the Inquiry in

the course of his evidence and which was incorporated as part of the

written evidence on which the City rely.   So far as his position is

concerned it is with respect submitted that Mr. Bcwnes has not acted

unreasonably or in a dilatory way.

        So far as the City is concerned it must be remembered that:-

(i)    Analysis of the conduct of the Administrative and Legal Department

        in respect of the alleged delay in a manner appropriate to dismissal

       of an action at law for want of Prosecution (of the suggestions that

       the delay was inordinate and inexcusable) is inappropriate.     This

       was not a matter of litigation nor even a matter of any kind of

       dispute or confrontation between the parties.    Hie task which Mr.

       Bcwnes had set himself and carmenced by way of the re-drafting was

       exactly that kind of work which could be put to one side when work

       of a higher priority demanded attention.

(ii)   Mr. Bcwnes did not feel that there was any risk which arose from the

       conditions as they were in the original Certificate.   As mentioned

       earlier he believed that the system was working reasonably well and

       assured that the ground was reasonably safe.    His letters to the

       various parties, involved in the Officer WoridJig^Party whid^have^

       been referred to above and the answers he got would have confirmed a

       view that the re-drafting was not a matter of any great urgency.

(iii) Whatever time was talcm up in re-drafting the new conditions it

       should not be supposed that work in respect of administering the

       system or enforcing the provisions of the Act stopped.    The

       inspections carried on.   Work continued.

                                      42
 (iv)     It was suggested that additional staff should have been taken on.

          That ought not to be required where the work involved in dealing

          with the certificating function ought not to have any significant

          resource unplications. In any event one member of staff was taken

          on as an extra namely a clerical assistant in 1986.

          It is though submitted that the absence of a re-drafted Certificate

was not a cause of this tragedy.

          The system as it was was such as to enable reasonable safety to be

achieved for spectators at a football match.     Hie system under the existing

Certificate dealt with issues which were raised and responded to these

issues.    There was cleaxly a general belief amongst those involved in

organising such an event as this semi-final that it could be organised

safely at this ground, with its fixtures and fittings as they were, and

with the manpower which would by arrangement be available.      That belief was

ever likely to affect the City in dealing with its certificating function.




                                      43
A w K". u . Q            .




                                                         A<vui r
                                                    I s^Pcejg*
   with?...                    .                                                  <7                             C O U N C I L
      I;                      >•:v:
                                 •;
          *                  :'vi



          ?<                                              :::::*: :::r;:/:::•****.:;
                                                          : : : ;« • .• :   • ■ ■ ' : : : .;.                   Department of Land &. Fssnnfngl,
                                    .j
                                         •,.   -;‘;H::-=*--:-4                                                  D irector
                                                                                                                R.D.Jones.MRTPI,

                               Si"*                                                                             Property Services Division
                                                                                                                Colin D. Farmer, BA(Hons), BArch(Hons), RIBA,
                                                                                                .(0742) 7 3 -   Property Services Manager,
  T h a Officer dealing with this
                                                                                                                Town Hall,
                                                                                                                Sheffield S1 2HH
Property Services Manager                      C ity T reasurer
Department of Land & Planning

28th June, 1989
AD/DM/10026
5048 -I                                        MD/BAK




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER A MD JUDICIAL ENQUIRY



I refer to your memo dated 8th June and the provisional information
provided by           to           regarding costs incurred in connection
with the above.

I an still awaiting details from the Director of Cleansing in respect of
tixae spent by the Town Hall workforce in connection with the Enquiry;  I
have no information on this and consequently have made no allowance for
these services in the figures now submitted which relate solely to the
Department of Land and Planning.   Details are attached and are summarised
below.

1.   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

     a)   Additional costs incurred                     £9138     (see attached
                                                                   schedule)

                                                                        - /A**--   ■ftpC-
2.   JUDICIAL ENQUIRY                                             A"" *.*3*7 fr*
                                                                                        '~T-
     a)   Additional costs incurred in               £18,435      (see attached
          making accommodation available.                          schedule)

     b)   Additional costs incurred as a
          consequence of Civic Accommodation
          being used for the Enquiry*                    £876     (see attached
                                                                   schedule)

     c)   Staff time.                                   £2642

     d)   National rental in respect of
          accommodation used up to 30th June*
          1989 (7 weeks at £150 per week)               £1050
It is likely that further costs will be incurred in connection with
returning the Civic Accommodation to its normal condition and these,
together w i t h Cleansing Departments costs, will need to be added at a
later stage.     In addition, whilst the figures quoted in the schedules
attached are the best estimates currently available it is possible that
the final figures may vary from these.      It may also be that there are
additional consequental costs, of which I am aware, incurred by other
Departments in finding alternative accommodation for events which would
normally taken place in the Town Hall.     Those with which my staff were
involved are referred to on the attached schedules.




Property Services Manager




AG5ABV
                                                  4 c - t.   tT E -* + 1 S'   ■£r-t*sZ<-' =

EXPENDITURE DIRECTLY INCURRED IN CONNECTION WITH THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
                                                                                              «sA/


ORDER NO.          DESCRIPTION


07940, 07942 )
08021, 02946 )     Developing films                               57.79
08003        )

08004              Provision of barriers by                    1000;00
                   Recreation Department

08008              Photocopies of plans of                       306.50
                   Stadium

08035                                                                6.50

08002                                                              91.00

40207              Provision of scaffolding and                4520.63
                   barriers by S.W.D.

40211              Raking shores - S.W.D.                      2742.34

08194, 08310 )
08317        )     Prints - Instant Images                         58.14

                   Video tapes                                     17.89

                   Films                                         123.25

                   Copy of evidence etc.                           20.00

                   Copies of files                                 44.23

                   Use of Range Rover
                   3 days @ £50 per day                          150.00

                   Car mileage                                   116.29

                                                               9254.56
    EXPENDITURE DIRECTLY .INCURRED ON HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY




    ORDER NO.           DESCRIPTION                             COST
                                                                  £



    08056               Y.E.B. (Materials & labour)           4000.00
                        costs for attendance and
                        services
                                   *



    07720               Hire of Chairs for preliminary         388.00
                        hearing

    07723               Transport of hired chairs               50.00

    17557     )         8 filing cabinets                      636.08
    15034     )

    11381               Letter Trays                            56.48

•   56071               Stacking Chairs                       3500.00

    40602               Signs for disabled access              100.00

    40554               Council Chamber Gallery               1300.00
                        - formation of writing desk

    07743               Removal of safe                         50.00

    40556               Clamping seats in Council             4070.86
                        Chamber and Reception Suite

    40608               Trestle tables and witness box        3103.06

    40613               Alterations to desks (Room 226)        552.02

    40611               Dismantle chairs in Reception          383.15
                        Suite after preliminary hearing

•   40822               Plywood box                             50.00

    40640               Ramps for disabled access              100.00

    40642 .             Cheney Row - fit bolt to door           50.00

    40649               Room 226 - replace sockets              65.00

    40650               Repair model                            15.00

    40854               R oo m 226 - gain entry                 15.00

    07998               Signs - various                         64.20

    08087               Cut Keys                                37.95

                                                             18586.80
                              *




    AG5AB0
ADDITIONAL EXPENDITDBE ARISING AS   a   CONSEQUENCE OF HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY
  f o y x ^ f        /4.               f    -H- fl    S.
    <                                                           ♦
                     >7                if   t h Z Z
                                           V'
                     /?                 / AVC.
                                     '5 m s
                 o i X o             <3 ^/es\




                                                               ft/

  -j>*y                               o)




      ypt0^            :$Srkk4-y>.__ ^^j_t<U^L O^-v/__



                                                                                                  ,2         2<-f&
, ^ m 7 /&.                5"ASer.          41h/l/              .    3 *-£■%,              /kp*y i*.        jf^er
                                                f                                             /
        /7                 £/^,l                                ._ '*’'*** ,                          h     M^s.
                                                           -ak_      4 . ^ .. _                      if    Xv-te;
         /q                *2 v&s.                                                                   iU    S-itfiz.
                                                                                                     >7    3&y$T
                      -...                            ....           _   ..                          t<*   ?***.

                                     f/^rT'tIs'fti                          *~,;_>-..\
                                                           ...... r---- :
                                                                        ----•'-—                                      ....... -■

 M u ./ /£<                                                          /W^,       JL,           o3^<6t.
            . .                 S i 4fcr          _ -                    '&f          .        L fa
             <2as                <S (+&<                                  $%■                   /for.
                *T         _.                                               ^                   O
 - ..2 < £ _                         ^ ^c.

                                 vij£'*'"\^l*£W qS^1— ^*-7«v~'
-Jifn/~ JSL                                                                           <"
                                                                                      o,      >■a-
                                  DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING

                                    BUILDING SURVEYOR' S DI VI SI ON


                               I N T E R N A L                   M E M O R A N D U M


TO:

F R 0 M:                                                                              DATE:        25th       May,       1989



H ills b o ro u g h      In q u iry ;   T e c h n ic a l       Report

I w o u l d l i k e to p u t on r e c o r d , my t h a n k s              for the effort     you    put        in   to
p r o d u c e t h i s r e p o r t in s u c h d o u b l e - q u i c k      time.

T h e i n v e s t i g a t i v e t h o r o u g h n e s s y o u d i s p l a y e d in c o m b i n g t h r o u g h t h e
f i l e s a n d p l a n s w a s , in my e s t i m a t i o n , f i r s t - c l a s s a n d t h i s w a s c o m b i n e d
with the n e c e s s a ry lengthy a n a l y s i s which p ro d u ced the fin is h e d document

I trust           you   will     have enjoyed          your         w ell-earned   break.




                                                                                                                       (f*
                                   t ^          ^               U
                                                                                         I


                                        1                  ~        ^         Jr


                                                                     JL
                           '                                                         .. T.
                                    j                                                   ^          p      ^

Copy    to:        Director


                                                                          \          ,                        “i - j
©             '




                                                                                      r-^----
                                                                                                                                      wi } < ^GfS>
               0 3 7 19                                                                                                                                   Sch 9 1 6 0
                                                              C IT Y O r S H E F F IE L D           M G M O tiA N D U M
                                                                                                                                                         <^Jr-               j($
        From                                                                                            Director, Department of Land and
                               City T reasurer                                                 To
                                                                                                        Planning     _
                                                                                                                       W: A p J       ‘
        Date
                               8th June,          1989                                                                     &XL        .

        Ref.                                                                                              •II-
                               MD/BAK
      Tel. Ext.                                                                                                           &k*<e A jJt               &     Tv**
                               4302 -                                                          Ref. •
                                                                                                                           K*.xac H*.


                                                                                                ?&
                                                                                                 }
                                                                               .3'        1V
                                                                                                                          C CJrp 'f       ^   ^     )     L f    o s **—c
                                                                                                                           &Ct.           +t‘t>£(       U -                   4.
        t-VO^.^2, (-3-vU. cxi^o                      SrO               uLwt^                                                                                            •H
         *~r~->cv) U«-                               .                                                                         /                                1       (
                               HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
                                                                                                                         ; C p y (o

                              F o l l o w i n g t h e l a s t m e e t i n g o f t h e P o l i c y C o m m i t t e e t h e C h i e f E x e c u t i v e and
                              m y s e l f h a v e b e e n r e q u e s t e d t o p r e p a r e a c o m p r e h e n s i v e r e p o r t on t h e
                              Hillsborough tragedy.                   I n a d d i t i o n t h e C o u n c i l h a s be e n a s k e d by t h e Home
                              O f f i c e t o p r o v i d e an e s t i m a t e o f t h e t o t a l c o s t o f t h e I n q u i r y , f o r w h i c h
                              t h e y ha ve u n d e r t a k e n t o r e i m b u r s e t h e C o u n c i l f o r t h e c o s t s i n c u r r e d .

                              I n o r d e r t h a t I ha ve         a s f u l l a p i c t u r e as p o s s i b l e , t h e r e f o r e , and t h a t a
                              reasonable assessment                   c a n be made o f t h e e f f e c t s on c o m m i t t e e c a s h l i m i t s
                              and a l l p r o p e r c o s t s       a r e r e c l a i m e d f r om t h e Home O f f i c e , I s h o u l d be
                              o b l i g e d i f you w o u l d       p r o v i d e me w i t h t h e f o l l o w i n g i n f o r m a t i o n : -

                                 / 1.         The a c t u a l c o s t s i n c u r r e d to d a t e p lu s t h e e s t i m a t e d t o t a l c o s t s
                                              r e l a t i n g to the co n d u ctin g of the I n q u ir y .                These c o s t s should
                                              i n c l u d e t h e d i r e c t c o s t s ( i n c l u d i n g o f f i c e r t i m e , h i r e of r ooms
                                              e t c . ) a nd a d d i t i o n a l c o s t s r e s u l t i n g f ro m t h e I n q u i r y ( e . g . h i r e
                                              o f a l t e r n a t i v e a c c o m m o d a t i o n or l o s s o f i ncome b e c a u s e f a c i l i t i e s
                                              a re not a v a i l a b l e for o th e r u se s).

                                 '       2.   A c t u a l a nd e s t i m a t e d t o t a l c o s t s r e l a t i n g    to the o p e r a t i o n a l
                                              a s p e c ts of the D is a s te r i t s e l f ( in c lu d in g            the I n q u e s t ) .
                                     /
                                         3.   Ongoing c o s t s       arising       f r om t h e T r a g e d y .

                              It. woul d be h e l p f u l i f y o u c a n - p r o v i d e a s much d e t a i l a s p o s s i b l e on t h e
                              c o s t s i n c u r r e d b u t i n p a r t i c u l a r a l l c o s t s n e e d t o be d i v i d e d b e t w e e n wha t
5^,       A \ vhrs        I   i s m e r e l y an a l l o c a t i o n of e x p e n d i t u r e t h a t t h e C o u n c i l would have
          Ivt                 i n c u r r e d anyway ( e . g . o f f i c e r s ' t i m e ) a nd t h a t w h i c h i s e x t r a e x p e n d i t u r e
                              ( e .g . overtim e, car allowances e t c . ) .

 £>*-. slkf-T*                As f a r a s t h e n e e d f o r a r e v i e w o f t h e C o u n c i l ' s p e a c e t i m e e m e r g e n c i e s
j).-OjcU^o                    p l a n i s c o n c e r n e d , t h e C h i e f E x e c u t i v e w i l l be w r i t i n g t o you s e p a r a t e l y .

        (,rv^-C_P             I s h o u l d be o b l i g e d i f you c o u l d l e t me h a v e t h e a b o v e i n f o r m a t i o n by 1 6 t h
                              J u n e a n d .» i n t he m e a n t i m e , i f y o u h a v e a n y p r o b l e m s o r q u e r i e s p l e a s e r i n g
                                                    :Ext,               or                    (Ext.             )■
                   %
  ^*1



                              City T reasurer



                                                           * .•'
                              MD1AAC
         R3719
                                      C IT Y OF SHE FFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M
•v

     From        Principal Admin. Officer                   To      The Building Surveyor
         1       Property Services Division

     Date        13th June, 1989
     Ref.        AD/DM/E10026
     Tel. Ext.   5048 - Mr.                                  Ref.




                 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

                 I refer to   the attached copy memo from the City Treasurer.  In
                 order that   the information required can be provided by the deadline
                 quoted can   you please let me have, for 15th June if possible,
                 details of   costs incurred in your Division in respect of

                      a)   the Disaster itself, and
                      b)   the subsequent Enquiry

                 The costs should be as detailed as possible, as requested in the
                 third paragraph of the City Treasurer's memo; if any overtime has
                 been worked on other projects in order to make up for time spent
                 on the Hillsborough Disaster this should also be indicated (I am
                 seeking clarification as to whether these costs can also be recovered).




                 AG
                  H 37 19                                                                                                                                Sch 9 1 6 0
                                                               CITY     O F S H E F F IE L D — M E M O R A N D U M

           From                 City Treasurer                                                   To      Director, Department of Land and
                                                                                                         Planning

           Dale
                                8th June,          1989
           Ref.                 MD / B A K ,
        Tel. Ext.               4302 -                                                           Ref.

       0--01 \s~\)
                              p\            -P-O-o/t)            -

           kv-ig»g ,        m l '- cJ»fl                        oCniL. uUv^U


                                HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY


                                F o l l o w i n g t h e l a s t m e e t i n g o f t h e P o l i c y C o m m i t t e e t h e C h i e f E x e c u t i v e and
                                m y s e l f h a v e be e n r e q u e s t e d t o p r e p a r e a c o m p r e h e n s i v e r e p o r t on t h e
                                Hillsborough tragedy.                   I n a d d i t i o n t h e C o u n c i l h a s be e n a s k e d by t h e Home
                                O f f i c e t o p r o v i d e an e s t i m a t e of t h e t o t a l c o s t of t he I n q u i r y , f o r which
       ^                        t h e y ha v e u n d e r t a k e n t o r e i m b u r s e t h e C o u n c i l f o r t h e c o s t s i n c u r r e d .

                                I n o r d e r t h a t I h a v e a s f u l l a p i c t u r e a s p o s s i b l e , t h e r e f o r e , a nd t h a t a
                                r e a s o n a b l e a s s e s s m e n t c a n be made o f t h e e f f e c t s on c o m m i t t e e c a s h l i m i t s
                                and a l l p r o p e r c o s t s a r e r e c l a i m e d from t h e Home O f f i c e , I s h o u l d be
                                o b l i g e d i f y o u w o u l d p r o v i d e me w i t h t h e f o l l o w i n g i n f o r m a t i o n : -

                                       1.      The a c t u a l c o s t s i n c u r r e d t o d a t e p l u s t h e e s t i m a t e d t o t a l c o s t s
                                               r e l a t i n g to the co n d u c tin g of the I n q u i r y .              These c o s t s s h o u l d
                                               i n c l u d e t h e d i r e c t c o s t s ( i n c l u d i n g o f f i c e r t i m e , h i r e o f rooms
                                               e t c . ) a nd a d d i t i o n a l c o s t s r e s u l t i n g f r o m t h e I n q u i r y ( e . g . h i r e
                                               o f a l t e r n a t i v e a c c o m m o d a t i o n o r l o s s o f i ncome b e c a u s e f a c i l i t i e s
                                               a r e not a v a i l a b l e for o t h e r u s e s ) .

                                       2.       A c t u a l a nd e s t i m a t e d t o t a l c o s t s r e l a t i n g t o t h e o p e r a t i o n a l
                                               a s p e c t s of the D i s a s t e r i t s e l f ( i n c l u d i n g the I n q u e s t ) .

                                       3.      Ongoing c o s t s a r i s i n g       from t h e T r a g e d y .

                                       wou^^ k*2 h e l p f u l i f you can* p r o v i d e a s much d e t a i l a s p o s s i b l e on t h e
                                  c o s t s i n c u r r e d b u t i n p a r t i c u l a r a l l c o s t s n e e d t o be d i v i d e d b e t w e e n wha t
1st-                        \ i s m e r e l y a n a l l o c a t i o n o f e x p e n d i t u r e t h a t t h e C o u n c i l wo u l d ha v e
                              I i nc u r r ed anyway ( e . g . o f f i c e r s ’ t i m e ) and t h a t w h i c h i s           extra expenditure
 0~                         i , ( e . g . overtim e, car allowances e t c . ) .
 Ov-cTtiwtj
  ow—                          As f a r a s t h e n e e d for            a review of the C o u n c i l ' s peacetime emergencies
              l.n              plan is concerned, the                    C h i e f E x e c u t i v e w i l l be w r i t i n g t o you s e p a r a t e l y .

                               I s h o u l d be o b l i g e d i f you c o u l d l e t me h a v e t h e a bo v e i n f o r m a t i o n by 1 6 t h
                               J u n e a n d , i n t h e m e a n t i m e , i f you h a v e a ny p r o b l e m s o r q u e r i e s p l e a s e r i n g
                                                   (Ex t. 4302) o r ( E x t .                         4416).
  Hr




                     sJn' C i t y T r e a s u r e r




                               MD1AAC
                                 SPION KOP



Bar   No. of           Barrier No.                             NOTES
196   Sections         PRE 1986


 1                                                             Installed in 86
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19                     111                                     Not able to be
                                                               tested (86)(82)
                       112                 Sept.        June
        c n c o p —I




20
21                     110                 86           82
22                     113                                     Not able to be
                                       v           \r
                                                               tested (86)(82)

                                                               Installed in 86
        vjd




23
        co oo




24
25
        lo




26
                                                               Not able to be
        cn




27                     106
                                                               tested (86)(82)
                                           Sept.        June
        cm




                       107
                                           86           82
        cm




                       108
        cm




                       109
                                  SPION KOP



Ba    No. of                                         Barrier No.
19i   Sections                                       PRE 1986


31      3
32      5
33      6
34      5
35      5
36      5
37      3
38      3                                             93
                           July
39      2                  87                         96
40      4                                 ‘July 81    90
                       v

41      1        A
                                                     102

42      1                                            103
43      2            Sept.                           104
44      1            86                              105
45      3                                             97
46      2                                             98
47      3                                             99
48      3        \k                June              100
                                   82
49      4                                            101


50      4                                             91
51      1            Sept.                            94
52      1            86                               95
53      5        y/                                   92
54      4                                             92



55     2               A                              82
                                          July 81
56     1                   July                       83
57     5                   87                         84


58     4              \k              I July 81       85
59     5           Sept.      T June’                 86
60     3         v 86           82                    87
                                     SPION KOP



Barrier No.   No. of                                         Barrier No.   NOTES
1986 __ >     Sections                                       PRE 1986


61              2                                             88
62              2                                             89           Span 2 not able
                          Sept.           June                             to be tested (86)
63              2         86              82                  78
64              3                                             79
65              2                                             80           Not able to be
                                                                           tested (86)

66                                                            67           Not able to be
                                                                           tested (87) (81)

67                                July                July    68           Spans 2 & 3 not
                                  87                  81                   able to be tested
                                                                           (87) (81)
68              3                                             69
69              5                                             70
70              5                                             71
71              6                                             72
72              2         Sept.           June                73
73              3         86              82                  74
74              2                                             75
75              3                                             76           Span 1 not able to
                                                                           be tested (86)

76                                                            64           Not able to be
                                   July            July                    tested (87) (81)
77              2                  87              81         57
78              2                                iK           58
79              1          Sept.          June                65
80              2        'V86             82                  66
81              2             A                  /\           55
82              4                                             56
83              2                  July               July    59
84              6                  87                 81      60           Span 3 not able to
                                                                           be tested (87)
85              5                                             61
86              6         Sept.           June                62
87             11         86              82                  63
88              3                                             63A          Span 3 of barrier
                                                                           not able to be
                                                                           tested (86)
89              2                 vJuly          t July       47
90              6                  87            ,/81         48

30            101
                                  SPION KOP



Barrier No.   No. of     Barrier No.                                      NOTES
1986 -- }     Sections   FRE 1986


 91              6       49                        July          July
 92              5       50                        1987          1981
 93              6       51
 94              5       52                Sept             June
 95              2       53                1986             1982
 96              3       54            \k                   '   ft        Span 7 not able to
 97             10       40
                                                   July           July    be tested (1987)
 98              6       41                        1987            1981
 99              5       42                                     \k
100              8       43
101              6       44                 Sept            June
102              4       45                 1986            1982
103              4       46            V                                  Installed in 1986
104
105
106
107
108                      34
109              6       35
110              5       36                       I July
111              6       37                       v 1987
112              3       38
                 8       39                                               Spans 1 and 2 not
113
                                                                          able to be tested
                                                                          (1985)
                          30                                              Unable to be tested
114
                                                                          (1985)
115              2        31                June
116              1        32                1985
117              2        33
118              2        23                                              Not able to be
                                                                          tested (1985)
119               6       24
120               6       25                      I July
                                                     1987
"30             129
                                   SPION KOP



Barrier No.   No. of     Barrier No.               NOTES
1986 --->     Sections   PRE 1986


                5         26            \
121
122             6         27
123             9         28
124             2         29
125             1         19
126             1         10
127             5         11
128             6         12
129             5         13
130             6         14
131             2         15
132             1         20
133             2         16
134             2         17                June
135             1         21                1985
136             1         18
137             1          22
138             2           9
139             2           6
140              3          1
 141             6          2
 142             5          3
 143             6          4
 144             5          7
 145             1          8
 146             3          5           t
 26            89
                   WEST TERRACE AND N.W. CORNER



        No. of                                    NOTES
1980    Sections


 121      3                     /N                Installed in 1979
 122      2
 123      2
 124      2
 124^     3                          June 1983    Span 3 installed
                                                  in 1979
 125      3
 126      1                                       Installed in 1979
 127      1
 128      3                                       Span 1 installed
                                                  in 1979
 128'     2
 129      6                                       Span 3 installed
                                                  in 1979
 130      1                                       Installed in 1979
 131      2                                       Span 1 installed
                                                  in 1979
 132      2                                       Installed in 1979
 133      2         July 1988
 134      2
 135      1
 136      6                                       Span 4 installed in
                                                  1979. Span 1
                                                  installed in
 136-     2
 137      2
 138      2
 139      1
 140      2
 141      2
 142      2
 143      2                          June 1983
 144      1
 145      3                                       Installed in 1979
 146      1
 147      3                                       Installed in 1979
                                                      II     II   II
 148      3
                                V
“IT      70
                         WEST TERRACE AND N.W. CORNER



Barrier No.   No. of                                           NOTES
1Q80    >     Sections

                          /                     /\             Installed in 1979
 149            3
                                                                   11     II    II
 150            3             July
                                                                   II     II    II
 151            2             1988
                                                                   II     II    II
 152            3                                       June
                                                                   II     II    II
 153            3                                       1983
                          V                                        II     II    II
 154            2                               \   f
                                     /                         Installed in 1979
 155            1
                                                                   II     II    II
 156            1
                                                                   II     II    II
 157            3
 158            1
 159            1
 160            1
 161            2                                              Could not be
                                                               tested (1984).
                                                               Installed in 1979
 162                                                           Could not be
                                                               tested (1984).
                                                               Installed in 1979
 163                                                           Could not be
                                                               tested (1984).
                                                               Installed in 1979
 164                                                           Installed in 1979
 165            1                        June
 166            2                        1984
 167            2
 167&           1                                              Installed in 1979
                                                                    II     II    II
 168            2
 169            2
 170            4
 171            4
 172            2
 173            1
 174            2
 175            1                                              Installed in 1979
 176            1
 177            2
 178            2                    \
                               WEST TERRACE AND N.W. PDRWro


  Barrier No.   No. o f
  1980 --- 5>   S e ctio n s                                  NOTES



   179            2
   180            4
   181            1                                           Spans 1 & 2 could
                                                              not be tested (1984)
                                                              Could not be tested
                                                              (1984) Installed in
  182             1                                           1979
  183                                         June            Installed in 1979
                  4
                                              1984            Spans 3 & 4 could
  184            1                                            not be tested (1984)
  185            2                                            Installed in 1979
  186
  187
                 1
                 1

                17
                                 $ July
                                   1988
                                                              Could not be tested
                                                              (1984)




KHlADD
JUNE 1989
    R 3 7 19                                                                                            Sch   9 162
                                   C IT Y OF S H E F FIE LD — M E M O R A N D U M

               Acting Head of Department:                          Building Surveyor
From                                                        To
               Administration and Legal                            Land and Planning Dept


               5 June 1989                                         For the Attention of
Date
               DMB/GW                                              Mr A Butler
Ref.
               4690 - Mr Bownes                                    BSD/A/Bu/NP
Tel. Ext.                                                   Ref.




               HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
               I refer   to   your memorandum dated       9 May regarding costs incurred                in
               relation to the above.

               All costs should be notified to Mr T Jennings, City Treasury, stating
               whether those costs are incurred on behalf of the Home OffJ.ce— or_
               on behalf of the City Council.




                                                                         j                  •. Ai S o
                                            ‘f ?
                                                                         L Z _ ’.

                                                                          copy u        i    file* i s c
                                                                          uepliHu T   7) i.,
The Building Surveyor,                      Head of Adainistration and Legal
Department of Land and Planning             Department

24th May, 1989                              For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes
KWGB/KjFH                                                          Uo   ijpl'vlj C^ct+“5
4169 -     I     \



Bfllriwrmwah Tnaiiry

Further to ay memorandum of 16th May in response to yours of 12th May, the
technical report has now been completed and a copy is attached hereto,
together with two folders of copies of related drawings.
'-Pc < £ & £ > ^   iv \&Z2>z>msx<2   {-
                                                                             5 v r-


                                                        A .'SL,,tv^ v t
                                                       ° ^ M - 'Y*M^<urt SV^SUlV
                                                            «vn- ~i ii    ’
                       OFFICERS OF SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
                  INVOLVED IN SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS' MATTKRS


Name          Post Held                   Dates of Involvement:        Which Stadia?
                                          From:           To:


D.M. Bownes   Chief Licensing Officer,    1.4.86            Date        All three
              Administration and Legal
              Department


D. Purchon    Director of Health and      15.4.89          Date
              Consumer Services


J. Rice       Assistant Director of       15.4.89           Date
              Health and Consumer
              Servi ces


M. Ford       Acting Assistant            15.4.89           Date
              Principal Officer,
              Health and Consumer
              Services Department.


C. Reed       Acting Principal                                          SWFC
              Officer, Health and
              Consumer Services
              Department


D. Bird       Acting Assistant                                          Si.’FC
              Director of Health and
              Consumer Services


P. Jackson    Environmental Health        19.5.88           Date
              Officer, Health and
              Consumer Services
              Department


!J. Moors     Environmental Health        J.4.86            20.5.83
              Officer, Health and
              Consumer Services
              Depa rtment


'J. Sheriff   Principal Engineer,           1975          Date        All t h r e e
              Department of Land and
              Planni ng


G.   Swann    Assistant Frincipai          1986           Date        SWFC
              Engineer, Department of                                 SUFC
              Land and Planning
Name                      Post Held                  Dates of Involvement:          Which Stadia?
                                                     From:           To:


A.S. McKenzie             Assistant Principal        1986                            SWFC
(Reti red)                Engineer, Department       1965                            SUFC
                          of Land and Planning

                          A ssistan t Principal
R. Hardcastle             SenltHf- Engineer,         1987                            SUFC
                          Department of Land and
                          Planni ng

                          A ssistant Principal
J.M. Linton               Scnlcm*- Engineer,         1983                            SUFC
                          Department of Land and     1986                            Owlerton
                          Planni ng


G.A. Davison              Engineer, Department       1985            1986            SWFC
(Now left the             of Land and Planning
Department)


A. Butler                 Principal District         J u ly 1986     Date            All t h r e e
                          Surveyor, Department       Aug. 1986       Date
                          of Land and Planning       Aug. 1986       Date


A.S. Roberts              Principal District         Feb. 1981       Ret irement     SWFC
(Now retired)             Surveyor, Departin-snt                     Date           SMFC
                          of Land and Planning                       1985


 C. Green                 District Surveyor,             -           March 1987      SUFC
..(Now retired)           Department of Land arid
                          Planr.i ng


N. Atkinson               Assistant District      Aug. 1982          J u l y 1986    SWFC
                          Surveyor, Department ai
                          Land and Planning


M. Harvey                 Technician                Aug. 1987        Possibly        Owlerton
(Now left the             Department oL Land and                     S e p t.
Department)               Planni ng                                  1988
A'." MTlTs"............                             Dec. 1978        Apri 1          SWFC
                                                                     1980            SUFC
J . Ste n to n            B uildin g               “ Jan .'"'T9 76   R etirement     SWFC
                          Surveyor                                   Date 1982       SUFC
K.W.G. Blount             Bui 1di ng                Dec . 1982       Date            All t h r e e
bH2 3/D295                Surveyor
                                                  •           •                         ,tOf L a n d a Planning                                                         W c .
                                                                           Depa                                       1                                                   ^
                                                                                   r;2CEi:vr.o
-          ''
            •         . V V."'.vh-
                                                                                    1 1 HAY 1989



       City of Sheffiel                 yMa etropolitan
                                            tr > A n A litQ n     Hiel
                                                                  Distri
                                                                            Or"i .

                                            L U U         k   T     A *75?                                   Administration & Legal Department
WOUl'V                   '(CiA       fttL                     bktk. lA              Jn£       JrjP -iM   A**=!o9 e r P e n s a m ' FC IS , M B iM , S o l i c i t o r
                                                                                                            H e a d o fD e p a rtm e n t

                                                                                                             T o w n H all
    Ut$r         ■+        l/vta^r          A atY         Mtit/rrf          irs*0a MfrT>i>~
                                                                                                             S h e f f i e l d S I 2H H

/tl$ £ 7          A 'M                  te ' l / L n * r                     fyn r                           T e le p h o n e 074 2 -7 2 6 4 4 4
                                                                                                             F a c s im ile 0 7 4 2-735003

                p-&*sA T\t>*           TV       W W                l)£ /> M r /y i£ M r                      T e le c o m G o ld 7 6 : LMX 086
                                                                                                             T e l e x 5 4 2 4 3 S H F L IB G o r
    Tu,          ,           /                        \                                  „         ,                  265871 M O N R E F G (q u o te re f LMX 0 86 )
    >” >
       £        L fS T      [ o /v    lU r * * * ,J           L stu ,       ftiL        A z'T Y /tfr

•t         &
       R4602
                                     UQfl        £ £ A -T           TP       ¥£>*   .
                                                                                                             with com plim ents
                                     TVM         10*
                                                                                              ^ 6 * 0 Ik vc$
                                     1 0 MAY 1989
        HOME OFFICE                                                                ■DLPT.

         Queen Anne’s Gate London SW 1H 9AT                                           5     im 1 9 8 9
1                                    Direct line   0 1 -2 7 3     3099
                                    Switchboard    0 1 -2 7 3   3°°°



    Mr M Webster                                                  Your reference
    Administration and Legal Department                           AH/GW
    City of Sheffield Metropolitan                                Our reference
      District Council                                            ENT 77 477-19-32
    Town Hall                                                     Date
    SHEFFIELD    SI 2HH                                           2 May 1989



    Dear Mr Webster

    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM

    Thank you for sending me so promptly a copy of the safety
    certificate for Hillsborough Stadium and for quickly following
    this up with copies of the stadium plans.

    In his statement to the House of Commons on 17 April about the
    Hillsborough Stadium disaster the Home Secretary said that he had
    asked for factual reports from the police and other services, the
    local authority and Football Association.  A copy of the page
    from Hansard which records the Home Secretary's statement is
    attached.

    I have been in touch with you by telephone requesting factual
    information but I thought I should follow up the telephone
    conversations to confirm in writing the request for a factual
    report.

    I am most grateful to you for your help in providing all the
    factual details so far in the form of the safety certificate and
    plans.  I would now welcome any additional information on the
    action taken by your authority.  I stress that we are not seeking
    judgments about the issues arising from the tragedy.  These are
    for Inquiry led by Lord Justice Taylor.  But if there is any
    further factual information which you can provide it will be most
    appreciated.

                                                                  Yours sincerely




                                                                    D J MOULD
                                                                Fire and Emergency
                                                                Planning Department
City of Sheffield                              M e tro p o lita n District

R o g e r P e n s a m , F C IS . M B I M , S o l i c i t o r                                                             A d m in is tra tio n and Legal D e p a rtm en t
H ead o f D e p artm e n t

                                                                                                                         Tow n H a ll.
                                                                                                                         S h e ffield S I 2H H

O u r referen ce                      GP/262/DMB                                                                         T e le p h o n e       0 7 4 2 -2 6 4 4 4
                                                                                                                         F acsim ile            0 7 4 2 -7 3 5 0 0 3
Y our referen ce                                                                                                         T e le c o m G o ld    7 6 :L M X 0 8 6
                                      E N T 7 7 4 7 7 -1 9 -3 2                                                          T elex                 5 4 2 4 3 S H F L IB G
D a te                                                                                                                                     or   265871 M O N R EF G (q u o te re f LMX 086

                                      9th May, 1989




            Mr. D. J. Mould,
            The Home Office,
            Queen Anns Gate,
            London,
            SW1H 9A T .

            Dear Mr. Mould,

            Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
            The Hillsborough Stadium____________

            Thank you for your letter of 2nd May. I must say I had not realised that
            the Home Secretary had in fact requested a factual report from the Council
            on the tragic events at Hillsborough. I am, of course, aware that you spoke
            to my Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Bownes, on a number of occasions but he
            tells me that the conversations involved the supply of copies of the Safety
            Certificate and relevant plans to you. Obviously I am willing -to attempt to
            provide you with such information as you may require but I ask you to bear
            in mind that Council Officers are currently very heavily engaged in
            preparing the Council's submission to the Inquiry.

            I should say that the Council's submission to the Inquiry will, obviously,
            go into considerable detail about the situation at Hillsborough and I would
            hope that in itself it would meet the Home Secretary's requirements for a
            report. In the belief that this is true I will let you have a copy of the
            submission as soon as it is available. If in the meantime you require any
            more factual information please specify exactly what it is you require and I
            will attempt to supply it.

            Moving on to the question of the Council's submission to the Inquiry it
            would assist me greatly if you would let me have your views on the role of
            the Home Office and.a description of your responsibilities as you see them
            in relation to the Safety of Sports Grounds Legislation. It would also be
            of assistance if you could let me have your views on the subject of
            perimeter fencing at football stadia.




                                                                                                                                                     734690 - Mr. Bownes
                                    F o r t e l e p h o n e e n q u i r i e s o n th i s m a t t e r p l e a s e rin g                              (S T D C o d e 07 4 2 )
     Obviously these two issues will be relevant to the Inquiry and your
     Assistance in commenting on them will be most appreciated. If the need
     arises please do not hesitate to contact me again*
0-
     Yours sincerely,




     Acting Head of Department.




                                                                  4*
            28th   A p ril,    1989



                                             HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
                  On 15th April there was an horrendous disaster at Hillsborough.
            95 people died, many were injured.   I have been appointed by the Home
            Secretary to conduct an Inquiry into the disaster.

                  May I convey my deepest sympathy to the bereaved and injured and
            the same from the Inquiry Staff.

                  The terms of reference of the Inquiry are to investigate the events
            at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on 15th April and make
            recommendations in relation to crowd control and safety of sports grounds.

                   I am solely responsible for the Inquiry, representation and
            re commenda ti ons.

                  I am assisted by two assessors; Brian Johnson, Chief Constable of
            Leicestershire and Professor Maunder, a professor in Mechanical
            Engineering at Newcastle University.

                  This is a preliminary hearing to set out the nature of the Inquiry,
            procedures and to hear applications from parties wishing to be
            represented.

                  This is not a law suit where it is a case of winning or losing, it
            is not akin to a criminal trial. No one is on trial.

                    The Inquiry will look at:-

                    (1)       What happened
                    (2)       Why it happened
                    (3)       The lessons to be learned and recommendations.

                  If allegations are made I will consider them and if appropriate make
            a finding.

                  The object is to find the facts with all speed. I do not want this
            constructive purpose spoilt by accusation and counter-accusation .

                  Regarding the scope and length of the Inquiry, because the people
            involved as witnesses run into the 1,000's, West Midlands Police are
            carrying out the exercise of gathering evidence. I welcome letters. All
            relevant evidence should be available but I want the Inquiry to be quick
            and thorough .

                  I want to keep oral evidence within bounds. I will not allow oral
            evidence which does not add to that already given but written statements
            will be considered.

                  The Inquiry will have three Counsels, Andrew Collins Q.C., Alan
            Goldsack and Bernard Phillips. All witnesses who give oral evidence are
            called on my behalf.

                    That witness may also be called by their advisors.




HB 3AA B/P GT/ 1
                      Before any witness is called they have to have first given a written
                statement. The witness may be cross-examined but I will limit
                cross-examinations as I think fit.

                      If an allegation is made against a body or an individual, that body
                or individual must be informed and can call evidence in answer to the
                allegation.

                      The oral hearing will commence on the 15th May at 10.30 a.m. , and
                will concentrate on the events of the 15th April and why it happened. The
                Inquiry will be public.

                      The second part of the Inquiry - relatingto the   future- I will give
                directions later on how this will be conducted.

                       I would like to receive written submissions on recommendations for
                 crowd control and safety at sports grounds as soon as possible.

                       The press will be given proper assistance and save in exceptional
                 circumstances copies of statements made by a witness will be available to
                 the press shortly before that winess is called.

                       There will be no photography or filming or sound recording during
                 the Inquiry. I can and will enforce that rule.

                       I request the press not to interview any witness before they have
                 completed their evidence to the Inquiry. I believe that will only impede
                 a difficult task.

                       I expect parties to be represented by lawyers. Any person or body      -
                 wishing to be represented must show good cause. They must have a direct
                 interest and it must be fair to be represented.

                       If there are several parties covered by the same interest   they.,
                 should join together.

                       Any decision today on representation is not final.

                       If a party does not wish to be represented they can offer to make
                 evidence available through a statement as soon as possible.

                       In relation to costs, there are no statutory provisions. The
                 Secretary of State is able to meet costs and I make recommendations to the
                 Secretary of State.

                       I will consider that at the end.   Costs would be on a common fund
                 basis.

                      I intend to make recommendations to pay the reasonable costs of
                anyone who ought to be represented who may not know if they can afford it.
                Certainly the families of the injured and deceased.

                       I will be sympathetic to football supporters, in particular
                 Liverpool supporters. I will be recommending that Liverpool supporters
                 costs are paid.




HB 3A A B /P GT /2
                REPRESENTATIONS

                Mr,   King                - consortium of solicitors within and outside
                                            Liverpool. Already met. Hillsborough Group of
                                            Solicitors. 74 firms representing 200 families.
                                            Contact through Liverpool Law Society.

                Mr.   Coombes             - representing family of deceased and injured.    May
                                            combine with the consortium subject to
                                            satisfactory Counsel.

                       Lord Justice Taylor - will agree 1 team to represent families.

                Mr. Makin                 - represents 7 deceased, 50 injured - not entirely
                                            happy with what took place at consortium meeting.
                                            Counsel very busy. I represent so many interests
                                            already there may be difficulties in only one
                                            advocate.



                       Lord Justice Taylor - I don't see any difficulty. If for good
                       reason, separate representation is needed, I will consider it, but
                       it will have to be quite extraordinary.

                Mr. Jackson              - instructed by Football Supporters Association.
                                           National Association - strength in Liverpool.
                                           Information about travel to Sheffield, ticket
                                           allocation, crowd control.

                         Lord Justice Taylor - satisfied will represent Liverpool Supporters
                         - work out what part want to play in first stage and what better for
                         second stage.
                                                                                        m
                       Costs - I will probably recommend are paid by the Secretary of
                       State.

                 N.B. If anyone wastes the time of the Inquiry I will consider the matter
                 of costs very carefully.

                 Mr. Glasgow             - Insurers. Sun Alliance, of Club and Football
                                           League. We will provide such assistance as you
                                           need. No application for representation by Club
                                           or respective parts.

                Mr. Purchas              - representation of stewards, turnstile men and
                                           gatemen, casual employees of club. Lack of
                                           consultation by the Club before the match.

                       Lord Justice Taylor - grant representation to the club but not
                       stewards (rep. by club). Dr. Purcell - drove to Sheffield
                       Wednesday - medical position on the day. Independent contractor.       2
                       other doctors, medical defence union for all 3.

                Calaghan (Broomheads)    - Trent Regional Health Authority Ambulance
                                           Service.

                Hallam                     - Sheffield Health Authority 2 hospitals.




HB 3A A B /P GT /3
                 Lord Justice Taylor - nothing to stop watching brief.      No
                 representation.

           Michael Murphy           - Sheffield City Council Licensing Authority.
                                      Assist Inquiry in any way possible.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - responsible for perimeter fencing - grant
                    representation.

           John Dyson                - Football Association. Interest general and
                                       specific. F.A. Cup responsible for selecting
                                       ground, policing, took advice on decision that
                                       Liverpool should be at the Leppings Lane end.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - I am not settling civil claims at this
                    hearing. Will grant representation.

                    Interested parties will receive copies of written statements.

           Wood Q.C.                 - South Yorskhire Police - considerable interest.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - will be represented.

           Robinson                  - Fire Services - Officers at match.   Also involved
                                       Licensing Fire Certificate.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - will be represented.

           Colvin                    - National Council for Civil Liberties - no
                                       appearance.

           Swainson                  - Liverpool City Council, Sefton, Knowsley, Wirral,
                                       St. Helens, Met. District Council. Lancashire and
                                       Cheshire County Councils.

                                       Representation in a collective capacity:-

                                       (1) unlike most disasters - particularly affects
                                       Merseyside. Local Authorities can justifiably
                                       represent the wider people.

                                       (2) Authorities believe by granting
                                       representation can demonstrate awareness of need
                                       for fairness, openness and thoroughness.

                                       Degree of sensitivity and suspicion of
                                       communities represented.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - country aware of loss/grief Liverpool. For
                    the Inquirty representation to contribute to what happened and why.
                    Can't see what representation will add. Want views of football
                    supporters. Don't think need representations from the local
                    authorities to impress on me or the public the need for impartiality
                    and openness. I reject the application - not through a lack of
                    sensitivity but from a sensitivity of the need to get on quickly.   I
                    respect your reason but am not persuaded.

           Wright                    - St. John's Ambulance. Don't want representation,
                                       reserving our position.




HB3AAB/PGT/4
                    NO MORE APPLICATIONS
                          Inquiry achieving purpose - will have to keep good time - tight ship
                    - intend to do. Confine to relevantmatters. Avoid waste of time.

                    King                    - application   to change venue of Inquiry to
                                              Liverpool.

                           Lord Justice Taylor - no good reasons here - ground services - not
                           minded to move part of the Inquiry to Liverpool. Will consider
                           later.

                           - first part - what and why
                           - second part - future.

                King                        - application to give statements direct to the
                                              Inquiry and not through the police.

                           Lord Justice Taylor - don't have to go through the police, but has
                           to be a comparing of information, but can present direct evidence.

                King                        - want assurance statements will only be used for
                                              the Inquiry, not civil claims.


                           Lord Justice Taylor - point will be considered.   All witnesses
                           expenses will be paid. 10.30 Monday 15th May.




HB 3AA B/ PG T/ 5
                       OFFICERS OF SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
                  INVOLVED IN SAFETY OF SPORTS CM OUNDS1 MATTERS


Name          Post Held                  Dates of Involvement:       Which Stadia?
                                         From:           To:


D.M. Bownes   Chief Licensing Officer,   1.4.86           Date       All three
              Administration and Legal
              Department


D. Purchon    Director of Health and     15.4.89          Date
              Consumer Services


J. Rice       Assistant Director of      15.4.89          Date
              Health and Consumer
              Services


M. Ford       Acting Assistant           15.4.89          Date
              Principal Officer,
              Health and Consumer
              Services Department.


C. Reed       Acting Principal                                        SWFC
              Officer, Health and
              Consumer Services
              Department


D. Bird       Acting Assistant                                        Si.'FC
              Director of Health and
              Consumer Services


P. Jackson    Environmental Health       19.5.88          Date
              Officer, Health and
              Consumer Services
              Department


D. Moore      Environmental Health       1.4.86           20.5.88
              Officer, Health and
              Consumer Services
              Department


D. Sheriff    Principal Engineer,          1975         Date        A11 three
              Department of Land and
              Planni ng


G. Swann      Assistant Principal         1986          Date        SWFC
              Engineer, Department of                               SUFC
              Land and Planning
Name               Post Held                               Dates of Involvement:           Which Stadia?
                                                           From:           To:


A.S. McKenzie      Assistant Principal                     1986                              SWFC
(Retired)          Engineer, Department                    1965                              SUFC
                   of Land and Planning

                   ASSlSlSrtt P r i n c i p a l .......
R. Hardcastle      Senior Engineer,                        1987                              SUFC
                   Department of Land and
                   Plannlng

                   A ssistant Principal
J.M. Linton        Senior Engineer,                        1983                              SUFC
                   Department of Land and                  1986                              Owlerton
                   Plannlng


G.A. Davison       Engineer, Department                    1985              1986            SWFC
(Now left the      of Land and Planning
Department)


A. Butler          Principal District                      J u ly 1986       Date            All t h r e e
                   Surveyor, Department                    Aug. 1986         Date
                   of Land and Planning                    Aug. 1986         Date


 A.S. Roberts      Principal District                      Feb. 1981         Retirement      SWFC
 (Now retired)     Surveyor, Department                                      Date           Sl^FC
                   of Land and Planning                                      1985


 C. Green           District Surveyor,                         -             March 1987      SUFC
„.(Now retired)     Department of Land and
                    Plannlng


 H. Atkinson       Assistant District      Aug. 1982                         J u ly 1986     SWFC
                   Surveyor, Department oi
                   Land and Planning


M. Harvey           Technic ian                            Aug. 1987         Possibly        Owlerton
(Now left the       Department of Land and                                   Sept.
Department)         Planni ng                                                1988
 A. Ml 1 1S                                                Dec. 1978         Apri 1          SWFC
                                                                             1980            SUFC
 J . Ste nto n      Bui 1di ng                             Jan. T 976" '     Retirement    ™ 5 WC ’'       '
                    Surveyor                                                 Date 1982       SUFC
 k.W.G. Rlniint-    ftiii1Hi nn                           t e r ™ 1QQo " '                   All 4-l>«t/tS-NS-N '
 UH23/DB95         Surveyor
                              C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD — M EM O R AND UM

From        The Building Surveyor                 To      Acting Head of Admin. & Legal Dept.
            Department of Land and Planning
                                                          F.A.O. Mr D Bownes
Date        16 May 1989
Ref.        BSD/ABu/AW
Tel. Ext.   4162 -                                 Ref.                                9/161 R 3 7 1 9 K




            Hillsborough Enquiry


            I refer to your memorandum of the 12th May regarding the above subject,
            and specifically to the request for a report on the technical aspects of
            the Leppings Lane End of the Stadium from Mr Butler.

            Your Licencing Officer expressed the view that this should include all
            known details of this end of the Stadium, and it will therefore be
            appreciated that the information will take some considerable man hours to
            complete it. In the meantime, I would refer you to observations stemming
            from the recent annual inspection and my memoranda of 12 and 15 May

            A draft of the prepared technical report will be made available to you as
            soon as it is to hand.
 City of Sheffield                              M e tro p o lita n D c.itict

R o g e r P e n s a rn , F C IS , M B 1M . S olicitor                                                      Adm inistration and Legal Departm ent
H ea d of D ep artm e n t
                                                                                                           Town Hail
                                                                                                           Sheffield S1 2HH

O u r reference
                                           GP/262/DMB                                                      T e le p h o n e                    0741! 726444
                                                                                                           F a c sim ile                       0 7 4 2 -7 3 5 0 0 3

 Y our referen ce
                                           WE/JAS/JS/11424                                                 T e le c o m G o ld                 76 LMX 0 8 6
                                                                                                           T elex                              5 4 2 4 3 S H F i IB G
                                           12th May, 1989                                                                         or           2 6 5 8 7 1 M O N R E F G ( q u o te ref LM X 0 8 6 )
 D a te




            Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
            Consulting Engineers,
            St. Andrew*s House,
            23 Kingfield Road,
            SHEFFIELD.
            SI 1 9AS

            For the attention of Mr. J. Strange

            Dear Sirs,

            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club - Temporary Propping
            Along Service Road Wall

            I refer to your recent letters in connection with the
            above proposals.

            I think that the wall problem has now been temporarily
            resolved.  I look forward to receiving an indication
            from you as to permanent solutions to this problem in
            the fairly near future.



t           I have copied this letter to Mr. Mackrell.

           Yours faithfully,                                                                                               Department of Land 8t Planning j
                                                                                                                                             r e c e i v e d                                     I
                                                                                                                            *                 2 4 M A Y IVdy                                     '

           Acting Head of Department                                                                                                               L^     O       f     "
                                                                                                                    I                                                       . m         m**- •




                                                                                                                               n ~ —   I--------
                                                                                                                     C m ff90 -j Mr. Bownes
                                                                                                                           “— -
                                                                                                                                                              :oda 0742)
R4602                                                                   T e le x 6 4 2 4 3 ( A d m i n i s t r a t i o n   ft   L e g a t)
, & iu YQOS r>                                .~I-! ci |>fetlq*jt;» .uox -3J4.-13 9 3or»                                                                A chninlstrationlah^ L e g a lD e p a rtm e n t
    \   I p o g e r    P e n s a m ,   FCIS^ MBIM, Soiicitor_ , |                   - u o - « n l ‘2Q i s d i s Q r r o i
                      of D e p artm e n t-          "      °        "           < r.                 ...     .                        ,,              v T o w n H a fl2         art 3       03       ^ 3 3         h -f.R
        ;ivci. t K&' i                       r,2 i-m i.-tsu .b * 3 < ~ s r i - * - - h o t o f i . j . -
                                                                                                                                                       S h effield S1 2HH
r * , , nr » irn r -- s f ' *s'--r:T                    .e-J r '? r - ; : -                    ■' <- t - ^ r ,-2&"                                     T e le p h o n e             0742 -2 6 4 4 4
                                                                                                                                                       F ac sim ile                 0 742-735003
     ! ? r * Our reference"                  'GP/262/DMB ....                                                                                          T e le c o m G o ld           76 :L M X 0 8 6
                                  */ >*'                   - - -■*-                                              '                                     T oipy                       54243 SHFUB G
          Your reference                                                                                                                                                 or          265871 M ON R EF G (q u o te re f LM X 086)

              Date                             22nd May, 1989


               M      r      .      ■
               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
               Hillsborough,
               SHEFFIELD. >
                                                                                                                                                                         f/v'
                                                                                                                                                                         0              2 4 MAY 1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OA

               S6 1AW

               Dear
                                                                                                                                                                                                      by]
               Annual.            Inspection of Sheffield Wednesday Stadium                                                                                                                                Q ^




                Mr. Bownes.

                \s         ^                . ^'                    ^                    s         ^                 s         l       s         x          b         s         s          s         s             x    s        ^

                                                                                             Certificate Required/Comment
                Certificate
                Condition No.
                                                                                             I am checking with the Fire Service to esJab“ f^ “
                12(2) (At least once In                                                      they are satisfied that the Certificates have been
                each period of 12 months
                the holder shall supply                                                      supplied.
                the Chief Fire Officer a
                report as to the
                condition of the
                emergency power supply
                certified by an
                Independent electrical
                engineer.
                                                                                              I have checked my records and can find no *■-   “
                 24 (The annual Inspection                                                    copies of annual inspection certificates on .he
                 by a suitably qualified
                                                                                              file. On 10th May you provided a copy o ■
                 engineer of the Stadium)
                                                                                              Dr. Eastwood's inspection report a“ ,     * t^e 1987
                                                                                              1988, but I would also appreciate copies tf the !?»/
                                                                                              and 1986 certificates. If your records
                                                                                              these have been supplied please le*.      ~    h %
                                                                                              indication of the date they were supplied so
                                                                                              can further check my records.

                                                                                               Once again I am checking with the Fire
                 26 (The supply of                                                             see whether or not they hay*?  receive  ^ t
                 electrical certificates
                                                                                               note that you have copies of two inspec* “
                 to the Chief Fire                                                             certificates dated April 1988 and February
                 Officer)
                                                                                               Mr. Bownes on 10th May.


                                                                                                                                                       734690 - Mr. Bownes
                                                   F o r t e l e p h o n e e n q u i r i e s o n t h i s m a t t e r p l e a s e r i n g ............................................................. *S T D C(
    R7SC3/1
       ^ j.;-:’,:.„                                                  '•“   V -




                         tisaaa^
       • Certificate-                 Certlf1cate^Require
                                                                                 V
         Condition No.

                                      I note that you supplied to Mr. Bownes a copy of a
■r.-           ® “ ^ S'.-o£> theo,’   computer print-out listing in detail the spectator
         numbers of spectators
         admitted to the Stadium)     admission to the Stadium on 9th May, 1989, by
                                      reference to each turnstile. Tills information seems
                                      to comply with the condition and I wonder if you
                                      would confirm how long these types of records are
                                      kept.

         28(2) (Records of            I note that you said on the day that as far as you
         accidents or Incidents       knew no spectators had been injured within the
         in the Stadium which         Stadium in recent years. Obviously I fully
         cause injury to              appreciate that your comments did not refer to the
         spectators)                  tragic events on 15th April.

         28(3) (Records of the        On 10th May you indicated that annual training and
         training and instruction     instruction was given to stewards at briefings
         given and the exercises      attended by the Police and Fire Service. Would you
         held in respect of           please let me have a note (to the standard required
         stewards)                    by this Condition of the last two annual training
                                      exercises. It would also be helpful if you would
                                      explain further the nature of the "on the job"
                                      training which you intimated was given to stewards.

         28(4) (A record of all       You intimated on 10th May that no significant works
         inspections, tests,          falling within these categories had been carried out
         maintenance, repairs         at the Stadium and I wonder if you would confirm
         and renewals carried         this please,
         out at the Stadium)

         During your conversation with Mr. Bownes you indicated that the turnstiles show
         the numbers of people passing through them by both electronic and manual means.
         You also mentioned that the turnstiles are occasionally serviced and checked.
         Would you please provide details as to when checks were last made on the
         turnstiles and what these checks consisted of.

         Moving on to a slightly different subject I think you are probably aware that
         the Council is, and has for some time, been considering replacing the existing
         Safety Certificate issued in respect of your Stadium. This may be an
         appropriate opportunity for you to make comments on the existing Certificate
         you feel it appropriate to do so. You will, of course, be supplied with a copy
         of the draft new Certificate when it has been prepared.

         I am returning with this letter the book of stewards’ tickets which you lent to
         Mr. Bownes on 10th May - as I understand that they have some monetary value.

         I look forward to hearing from you shortly.

         Yours sincerely,




         Acting Head of Department

         Enc.

         BH30/DMB155
                                  CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEM ORANDUM

From        Councillor D. A. Skinner                   To     SEE BELOW


Date        11th May, 1989
Ref.        DAS/TJH
Tel. Ext.   5376                                       Ref.                              9 /f6 1   R3719K




                                        Hillsborough Investigation

            Liverpool City Council have requested a further presentation on this
            matter for the benefit of their Leader, Keva Coombea/^and^iba-"
            Party they have set up. David Purchon has suggested tkrSt Friday, 19th May
            would be suitable from his point of view and we>lfould eteaact to start
            around 11.00 a.m. (more precise details lateral would be glad if you or a
            representative could be in attendance.

            Although we have met some Liverpool Councillors once, immediately after
            the disaster, the City Council now wi^m to take a more considered and
            detailed look at what happened and rfy understanding is that there is
            nothing to stop us giving them a presentation of wpat we know, although at
            the present time I have made it^clear that npftdgpoments or/the video can
            be handed over to them. Please confirm whetheryou can>rfttend with my
            Secretary,               ( x 5i5 7 6 ) .



            C 11 r •   '

            SENT TO:       Mr.       Webster, Acting Head of Administration & Legal
                                                                         Department
                                  P. O'Neill, Safety Officer
                            lr.   K. Blount, The Building Surveyor
                           Mr.    Councillor C. J. Betts, Leader
                           Mr.    Councillor H. Knight
                           Mr.    D. Purchon, Director of Health and Consumer Services
                                                                     (for information)
    R3719                                                                          S ch 9 1 6 0
                                   CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From        Acting Head of Department               To     See Circulation Below
            Administration and Legal

Date        16 May 1 9 8 9
Ref.        AH/GW
Tel. Ext.   4 0 1 8 - Mr Webster                    Ref.




            re: MEETING WITH LIVERPOOL DELEGATION                                      7T.£

            I write to confirm the discussion which took place today between
            myself, Councillors Skinner and Betts, regarding the above visit
            and the advice which I tendered.

            Basically, both Leading Counsel and Junior Counsel instructed on
            behalf of the City atthe Inquiry felt      it   was not appropriate to
            have a meeting of this    sortat the present time, although there was
            nothing to prevent the City undertaking to     pass on a copy of its
            statement to the Inquiry as soon as it is available, together with
            copies of other documents which it receives as part of the Inquiry
            workings which may be appropriate to Liverpool, subject of course
            to the not inconsiderable costs which this may engender.

            Accordingly, therefore,   the arrangements for  the meeting on Friday
            are now cancelled and I confirm that I will be contacting my opposite
            number at Liverpool (Mr Bill Murray) to discuss the situation with
            him and that in all probability I will inform him that the logistics
            are such that it is not appropriate, in light of everything else
            going on, to have the meeting at this stage from an officer viewpoint.




             Circulation t

             Councillor C J C Betts, Leader
             Councillor D A Skinner
             Councillor H A Knight
             Mr P O'Neill, Safety Officer
             Mr K Blount, The Building Surveyor
             Mr D Purchon, Director of Health and Consumer Services
                                                                                 t<wqe>
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD — M EM ORANDUM

From        The Building Surveyor                 To     Acting Head of Admin. & Legal Dept.
            Department of Land and Planning
                                                         F.A.O. Mr D Bownes
Date        16 May 1989
Ref.        BSD/ABu/AW
Tel. Ext.   4162 -                                Ref.                                 9 /1 6 1   R3719K




            Hillsborough Enquiry


            I refer to your memorandum of the 12th May regarding the above subject,
            and specifically to the request for a report on the technical aspects of
            the Leppings Lane End of the Stadium from Mr Butler.

            Your Licencing Officer expressed the view that this should include all
            known details of this end of the Stadium, and it will therefore be
            appreciated that the information will take some considerable man hours to
            complete it. In the meantime, I would refer you to observations stemming
            from the recent annual inspection and my memoranda of 12 and 15 May

            A draft of the prepared technical report will be made available to you as
            soon as it is to hand.
                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM
            ■* ."                                                          of      Land   and
From        Acting Head of Department                 To      Director
            Administration and Legal                          Planning
                                                                                                1
Date        12 May 1989                                        For the Attention of
Ref.        GP/262/DMB/GW
Tel. Ext.   4690 -                                    Ref.     (Building Surveyors)                 ----




            HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

            As you know, the Council is preparing its statement to the Hillsborough
            Inquiry.   Counsel has requested that the Building Surveyors submit
            a report on the technical aspects of the Leppings Lane end of the
            Stadium. The report should include:-

                  Crush     barriers,   radial   fences,     perimeter   fences,    gangways,
                  etc.

            Obviously, reference should be made to the Green Guide and comparisons
            drawn, where appropriate.   It is apparent that your report can only
            be based on the information which you have to hand at the moment?
            it should contain comments as to its limitations, if appropriate.
            Please bear in mind that you may be required, in due course, to give
            evidence before the Inquiry.   Would you please let me have the first
            draft of your report as soon as possible as Counsel for the Inquiry
            expects to receive the Council's complete statement by Thursday 18
            May 1989.   You should also be aware that I have asked Mr Levers to
            report on his recent involvement at Hillsborough.
b   ia J ~   isJon   ^   io€-
                                   CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

                Acting Head of Department                      Director    of   Land    and
    From                                               To
           ♦    Administration and Legal                       Planning
                                                                                              A
                                                               For the Attention of                        !
    Date        12 May 1989
    Ref.        GP/262/DMB/GW
                4690 H                                 Ref.
                                                                (Buildxna Surveyors#
    Tel. Ext.




                HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

                I refer to the recent works which you          have initiated at Sheffield
                Wednesday Football Club.   As part of         the Council's submission to
                the Public Inquiry I have been advised        to obtain a detailed written
                statement from you about all aspects of        the problems you have dealt
                with.

                Please, therefore, let me have a draft (as soon as possible) of your
                statement, which should include your professional judgement as tos-

                (a)     whether or not any problems with the wall and related          areas J
                        would have been apparent, prior to 15 April 1989; and                 (

                                                                                              ( L*l D
                 (b)    how the defects are likely to have arisen.                                j   *r

                Please bear in mind that you may be required to give evidence before
                the Inquiry at a later date.




#
The Building Surveyor,                         Head of A&ninistration and Legal
Department of Land, and Planning               Department
        rfcxjr
15th Match, 1989                               For the attention of I
KJIGB/DS/KTH
4169 -
                                                Copies t o : A. B u t l e r
                                                             D. S h e r i f f
                                                             F i l e 73C


HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

I refer to your note received today relating to letters from Keeble Bawson,
solicitors and The Treasury Solicitor, both dated 9th May, 1989.

My observations on the submitted listed criticisms by the Treasury
Solicitor are as followst-

Item        Observations

1 & 2      These items raise issues of crowd control which is a matter for
            the police, and means of escape and evacuation procedures which
            is the concern of the Fire Brigade, No doubt you will also
            consult them fear observations.

3          This raises two issues

            (i)   Positioning of crush barriers   This is also a matter of
                   crowd control hut I would observe that the layout of the
                   terriers in the pens does not meet the precise terms of
                   Chapter 9 in the Green Code.

            (ii) Distance between and strength of crush barriers. These were
                  tested last year (July 1988) by the Club's consulting
                  engineers and have been checked by iny office. These met
                  the test load criteria of 6 kN/metre prescribed for
                  existing barriers in a peak viewing area. Horizontal
                  distance between barriers does not exceed 3.8 m.
                 Calculations have been prepared by ray principal Structural
                  Engineer, in respect of the load sustained by the barrier
                 which collapsed under crowd pressure (barrier 124A). These
                  showed a stiffness which gives good correlation with test
                  load figures and an adequate strength safety factor.

4          Tunnel Gradient Our measurements in the tunnel after the
           disaster, show that after a short ramp up from Leppings Lane end
           and a short flat portion, the gradient descends Is 15 increasing
            to 1:6 approaching the terrace. So far as I am aware this has
           not been altered in the life of the safety certificate.

5          Adequacy of turnstiles wall I am not sure what is meant by "adequacy"
            in this respect; perhaps anti-scaling measures are being referred to.
           Certainly we did not regard the wall as a potential danger prior to
           April 15th.

6          I have no observations on these items which are entirely matters
            for others.



                      >
                 City of Sheffield              M etropolitan District
                                                                                                                  fg f
                                                                                                             Adm inistration & Legal Departm ent
                                                                           ibArsr tfit,                      R o g e r P e n s a m , FC IS, M B IM , S o li c it o r
                                                                                                             H ead of D ep artm en t
                                                                                                             T o w n H all
        IsOia w                                    Yeud         v ttk w i           &#,                      S h e f f i e l d S1 2 H H

                                                                                                             T e le p h o n e 2 6 4 4 4
        p tfo fi        U 7/ n / h £ > , /W ?            < ,Q 0 y v    4?           / ( ? } ( If li- t t     T e l e x 5 4 2 4 3 ( A d m i n i s t r a t i o n & L e g a l)

        f l'f e - f r            P fy A h Q        M .p m /1     $    mT   1^*14.         cShv


                                pl/frvit                                                                   with compliments

R4602
                                                    KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                                  SOLICITORS
                                                    Incorporating Branson Bramley & Co.

        A. H. GREGORY           N.   T. HAWSON                                              OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE.
        C. J. PRYCE             G.   CONNELL
        P. A. SEALEY            A.   J. COOMBE
        K. I . WEBSTER          C.   M. M. AYRE                                                     ST. JAMES' ROW,
        M . A. PLATT
                                                                                                             SHEFFIELD.
        Consultant'
        A. H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                      SI 1XA.

                                                                                            TELEPHONE 0742-722061

                         Mr. M. Webster,
                                                                                             MDX NO. 10537
                         Acting Head
                                                                                             FAX NO. 0742 - 700813
                         Legal & Administration Department
                                                                                             FAX NO. 0742 - 750243
                         Town Hall
                         SHEFFIELD 1.
                                                                                            9th May,            1989

                                                                                            WHEN YO'J TELEPHONE OR CALL PLEASE ASK FOR:
        OUR REF:                                  YOUR REF:


    ^HG/AG/HILLSBOROUGH                            AH/DG                                    Mr. Gregory




                         Dear Mr. Webster,

                         Hillsborough Inquiry - Sheffield City Council

                         I enclose a copy letter from the Treasury Solicitor dated
                         the 9th May, 1989 for your information.

                         Yours faithfully,




                         KEEBLE^HAWSON



                                                              ADMWSSTRA
                                                                 d.1e t
                                                                f.m
                                                                HtAI

                                                                   ■43



                                                                                               ,x




I



                               THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
             THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
            Queen Anne’s Chambers '
            28 Broadway London S W 1 H 9JS
            Telephones  Direct Line  01-210 2 1 0 “
                        Switchboard 01-210 3000
            Telex 917564        GTN 210
            Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
            DX No. 2318 Victoria     _______________         .. . .

Messrs Keeble Hawsons                                        Please quote
7 St James R o w                                              LS9/2117
Sheffield                                                    Your reference
SI 1XA
                                                             Date
For the attention of Miss Gregory/Miss Ayre                  9 May 1989



                                   B Y F A X A N D LETTER




H I L L S B O R O U G H INQUIRY - SHEFFIELD CITY C O U N C I L


You will recall that at the pre-inquiry meeting on 28th April Lord Justice Taylor
indicated that any body against w h o m any allegations was to be made wbuld be
informed of it and the substance of the evidence supporting it

You will appreciate that the task of assembling the evidence for the Inquiry is a
formidable one and statements are still being taken. However, it seemed right to let
you have what must be a preliminary indication of criticisms which ma y be levelled at
the City Council, as the local authority responsible for the safety certificates under
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, as soon as possible before the commencement
of the Inquiry.

The following are the main criticisms which so far appear from the evidence available.-

I       The pens on the terraces at the Leppings Lane end of the ground constituted a
       potential danger if crowded. The .uteris vt egress onto xne pnen were
       inadequate and you should have insisted that there were more gates, that they
       were properly signed, that there were means of access laterally between the
       pens, again properly marked, and that all gangways were properly marked.

2.      The directional signs were inadequate, so that those entering were necessarily
       channelled to the tunnel leading to the central two pens.

3.      The crush barriers within the pens were not properly positioned and one at least
       was of insufficient strength.

if.,    The tunnel giving access to the terrace was not of a constant gradient but
       sloped steeply at the terrace end: this was potentially hazardous if a large
       crowd came down the tunnel.
         /
         /

    5.       The wall at the turnstiles was not adequate to prevent persons climbing into the
             ground.

    6.       A ccess by ambulances or fire engines to the playing area and the surround was
             not adequately provided for. Furthermore, the provision of first-aid equipment
             was insufficient.

    Should any further matters deserving of criticism come to our attention, we will of
    course let you know of them.




                                        DAVID BRUMMELL
                                    Assistant Treasury Solicitor




m




                                                 2.




                                                                                   or ■   T   c o —c n —c o c
                                                                      ■jn     ^3 C.

The Building Surveyor,                      Acting Head of Administration and
Department of Land and Planning             Legal Department

12th May, 1989
KmiB/K27ACfe./tCn!
4169 \                                      GP/262/DMB




Hillsborough Disaster - boundary wall running from
South Stand to Lappings Lane end
I refer to your raeoorandum of 8th May, 1989. Might I say at once that the
entreaty contained in your fourth paragraph whilst understood is quite
unnecessary? we are all well aware of our responsibilities in the matter.

'Turning to the matter of the condition of the m i l the short answer is
that its condition had not mused concern to inspecting officers of this
Division prior to April 15th, 1989, nor, so far as I a® aware to the
Club*s consultant engineer advisors. Nevertheless an examination of the
wall by                and srysel£ after the events of April 15th showed
that it was capatue m places of being ’rocked* and was out-of-plumb to
varying degrees along its length.

To give amplification to the above statensent I can state as follows s-

The fact of such a wall being out-of-plumb is not necessarily significant
in the context of performing its function. In this case calculations
indicate and usage proved that the wall was capable of sustaining normal
lateral loads, such as wind, which it is reasonable to suppose that it
would be subjected to. 'The wall acts principally as a boundary m i l
running parallel to and dividing the flow of spectators entering or
leaving the ground and it is certain that its original design would not
have allowed for the high lateral forces which can be created by masses of
people pressing against such a wall from one side or the other.

The fact that the wall could be 'rocked* in places after the ©vents of
April 15th leads one to the probability that it could be due to damage to
the ground bedding courses caused by tensile stresses created by such
excessive lateral pressures, from one side or the other.

The wall, as with other structural elements in the ground, had been
viewed as part of the regular visits to the ground by the forirer S.Y.
Storking Party prior to 1986 and subsequently by your advisory Group team.
So far as I am concerned none of aoy inspecting officers can recall, nor do
the files present any evidence, that the wall had given any cause for
concern as to its stability on these inspections. According to records
the wall has been required to be re-pointed at regular intervals to
preserve its strength and integrity, hut currently there is a clear need
for fresh work in this regard. A f m years ago a former &.R.P. building
was removed adjacent to Gate C, on the advice of the police as I
understand it. This did of of course remove some lateral support to that
part of the wall as a consequence, but the wall is slightly thicker at
that point than elsewhere.
One final point; the action taken by im to deal with this wall as a
potentially dangerous structure was taken under the Building let
1984 sections 77 and 78. This will if necessary be justified on the
grounds of the condition of the wall as found after the disaster and in
view of the then intended re-opening of the exit route from the
South Stand to Leppings Lane a® the Club resured its business.
                                    - 2 -


It is my view that this wall did not fall within the category of a wall
"used to divide spectator accoimodation" as described in paragraph 103 of
the Green Guide which would have caused a designer and/or the licensing
authority to view it as a wall likely to be subjected to high lateral
loading. In this context the wall as it stood, prior to the events of
April 15th, could be described, in ray view, as satisfying the relevant
requirements of the Green Guide, apart frcm the question of preventative
maintenance referred to earlier.




Copies to :
                                                                            Sch 9160
                  CITY OF SH EFFIELD — MEM OR AN D UM

The Acting Head of A d m i n i s t r a t e 1 To    The Building Surveyor,
and Legal Department.                              Department of T.and anri Planning
                                                   f.a.o.
 8th May, 1989
 GIV262/PMB                                            K.
                                            Ref.                ■ ft   \
                                                                  A.              1    J


                                                                 *




Hillsborough Disaster - Unstable Wall running from the
South Stand to the Loppings Lane End of Sheffield Wednesday Stadium

I refer to the wall which, as you know, has recently beensubject           to works
supervised by your Public Safety Unit.

Obviously questions will be asked about this wall at the Inquiry and I suspect
that particular reference will be made as to whether or not the Council was
aware of its condition prior to the disaster.

Would you please therefore ascertain from your staff whether or not any of
them had any knowledge of difficulties with the wall.

It is vitally important that any information obtained during the course of
your enquisj.es is both properly recorded and entirely accurate.

Obviously the Inquiry is shortly to recommence and your urgent attention to
this matter is requested.  I look forward to hearing from you shortly.
                                                                                                                       £ < y
                                                                                        Jj«wwv4^v u / * ^              ^
                                                                      + * t \r   4 *1       ***              ^               *S*
                                                                        £*pp.-y*                  ,   o U m .1   **^    *-*>*•f*
                                                                           A«y/         & $ £> ~ < *S «    — 4




                         &‘> \r ^Qtf




G % s trtA e & £              .



                                    & 6 J S P & & ..

               <■ t4
              -—       rfw
                         —     r^

                                                                    & €& £& &



                             to ^ ^ d e                                                               & & J&       a *

                                                                                                  4&




                                                            >   Z e J £ 2 s O




                                            X % g — /j S 2 *C & & £     &

                              kfefc*^
                                                                                                                                                                        a




  C ifa tJ i& ts & ts                  C 0 H 0 & U 4 > e £ 0 * - .)                                            &     z^     l£




                                                            %    ~         c * ff     f e d . \o           & sd             W ' d t b •........                  ..
                             (2£& & & pL $%»       / & z *c ^          t    s     4    i       w       >           T i^ ts v v & i/

                                               *? C                                                ‘   * 9 .J $ ^ g & >                         C ^2& 0&Cs6 ,         .............




   <& 0            2f&   s



   & S I/          $ *0 3 < 0       & 1& & 0                                          £&

                    r^ u        ^     6 ^ 3 tU          ^ £ &          *        o z< ^ & 6             4 e                                            &   * fe

   £ & t^ & ,Z 0 & £ £                6                 . . . & t . : € * '& * *      -£ £ & € &           ,./& 4 ^ iC 0 p 4 & & 6 ...'.'&<>

  .... 0-^2                  y^ i£ & X & y z> t& o ._                                                                                             &

  £ s l&            & $& >                C O U s t0 & ,                                                           & **£ s z      &>     ^ 2 s Z *? < Z
                    .            ./                .»       ,     ■>                       -           Vv             .      ^        y \


  O t o t & /£



4:Q„„An^iyS^ S


                                           c   a      /a     /^ ^




                                      ftcJk&J?—                                                                                       5 ’4 ^   k iA ^ W i.# H

   a s te a ta c ^ Q                      '] ^ )

S 'O       C c n d v is t e p n c s ...                 _
           _                     Cv 2 £ £      & z< 3

       S       W
                                                                                                           ■   -.#r -:.'-
                                                                                                 &        C g z /c Z ^ -^ S

                 '   f,J   ^                       3     <£*yf*   ^3<3          & tU 4& % 2,                                      & to

    Q 4 /t/€ ^ ^ ^ y A e ^



    & !&        ^ h £ £ ,                                      z£ &     *2 vu

    U t& u tf& t/                         s < & h *^ a                                         /z e ^ c # ? & £ * * ^ /« % > » *&

/   2   ^   w                                *




                           72c               ■■+ /• *    c        ^                                        O'
                           v * z /c * ~ f              **-        ■ * * ■

                               d t* C c s * -f           < ~ ~ S * f.           —    t


                                                             *f             ^            /tTo— t                   ^


                                     C ^ J r ~ **» <d              t*       ^        U A ^{          *4       * ’"v
                                                                                                      fi\o — * /         ^     ■*V^ '
                                'J Z * .           A ^ "                                                  -/tv         £/c»>*' T * "
                                           >
                                 p 4 *r~ + *'*               ^C.
                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                   «/<•>
                                                                                                                              <asC.


                                 /
                                        (X * ~ -
            *2 *




                                      'h        Q   ?   '       .        •




      Q j                     3.                    I               I>               G


       I                      2                 £                   I                &




      2,                          3            O            0*^'/5.              3-S14.

  7    \    * ' : ’;      V'                                                 2   a   ‘E d

f?. i ?*>4             x ’•^i *       USG                           .        3 ^ 0 > .



/ ' o ^ £ 2 £ a-=r 2 - i 7 \ a i t o / h *
      I e o " * .         5                                 '




!• >■ 5 •          =              IJ1 3 3   ^ ) /iv ^ ‘
      A y v c * { y s i s :k                                                         o      \. a n i          fmri

     of               I•2 5 k-Wy4a' = r 4- 5 x s t ^ > .appHeal-
             (^ (3^3/                                                                                           Iv*v y p ,          w<s^t/

                                                                                    ■       \. A r p t y t ^ ; c f a & l i S f a        't & C &   C & jld     ''b &
     K- X- •!>■ f t M i i « «      •   •   )   (   •   *    #     g .■*
                                                                                                                                 ( v & ilm '& h 'Y i*                  $& $& ■
     0STRA'N“BS562a/CP 158 ANALYSES
     W « * «• is W « « « « . *>.),; j,;. .>;.),-..);. . ) , ; . ; , : ¥. # j,;. #   ,
                                                                                    K.

                                                                                                                        K 3 ***e


    1 xEAF                 PANEL
    j*# -K-•)>;•>*«ji;jr.#.),;.V;x

                 H                                                    T .,.                          T£            TEF
             3.000                         6.000                   225.0                              \)
                                                                                                     ■i         225..0-

                                  CHAR STRENGTHS                                                U
    LEAF            1               395/    „ 900                                           ,.439

      CHAR.LOAD LINE                                       LOAD                              G?                     Gir!
                    s.» <3!:h)                             . 00 ij                       .1„.500                3„ 500

                        APP„ f'10i1E^T/F<ES. M O H E N T                                     APP„ STRESS/RES,, S T R E S S                CU-FET        !h 7
         PI O T (■■•*


                                               ■/////'//////-///

    X LEAF PAHEL
    **^^*«******

               w                           L                        Tl                           th       :
           3.000                       s.ooo                     aas.o                           „o
                                CHAR               STRENGTHS                                     U
LEAF 1                            .395/                          .900                      ,4 3 9

    CHAR.LOAD                          LINE            LOAD                                 6r                     GM
                1.250                                       .000                     1.200                     3.500

                    APP.MQMENT/RES. MOMENT APP.STRESS/RES.STRESS                                                                         COF-FT      PAT
—    Mere            ..............................                                                                                                                      "'

                *                      1.97ft/                            £. 170 ■                            .834/             p<- y     a j^p
panel              SATISFACTORY                                                                                            -   -c.ur     . o ^ c




BYE--BYE'-SYE-8YE--BYE-BYE-

9;; 15 s57 Cs\FORSCE>
                                                                                                                     c $JL



                                                                               c.             -*■ £ - .            g r^       e ^ r fr ^ y M .




 lv^tAe/>           t^rv»»vvvj3LvCrt-i^               on.     r v u d ^ * /^        ( T iv iA ^         U         f'L a ^ c s,'^ -n j(^ '-< -^ .                A^<*>-<^* - e L i j m$            ’U i^ i~


JLJLP          <S'^‘                      fitn.


 *I        (\Jt-o*.      e -ib -d lt^ .        'f^ft                                   "{£'*. yMi/jfUlv*«                                                                       Cm. f®|^} ^
I1Y7            euj?            i'TS'^        ^        «j3          i                  "{Cae

                      A j& W ^         /4 «    y tc fv ^ ^                  L o -u ^r*    j       C r v jh j     ct_ ^ J L r t j a . r « ^                           iu c b o   C x xs~ /-L xt$




                                                                                                                      'f^Q      cj/w^J) ^&r t tbaS
                                                                                                                                                                            ,
               la                                 f\jtx^a                                                        cui^                                       ^ CU»< »^ve. cJIM-&A
              Cer»vcja^»v              <!_✓» -to Tto                                          .




   '3«-««e.                             ,(cf2'6 ^                   T       ~^f3^                           jl     Csm-«P±rd}                          fndbr-3              C w « y A^
                                                                        ^      / A.ct>>€ ,-vt)^                fzn.t*'S'X.             fLft^         Cc-vv^.f'MjGLM.fci
                              #-*VEwv t>*r-                 'F'O-                                                                      f^ve        Cc-vuJ^ie*              e ^ n f ^ ’ »o%i2^.




      £? '-*''• v P c w - ^       /v e.t’^ - Ja/'             C ^ tiC -        rtW "                      cx^yicL ^-JrocP .A vtQ ^nS& S*                   a ^n J t€ sj~        ~fc   hcuj-Q_


                                 \{^                           ^ cQu-r^Ttj ~~fbJ' ^a^mjL jd-TC a^                                                     Jt    -




                                                                            / V          i^
                                                                                                                                                      <£)
    y &      w       ?           h z   ?,     hA^

                                P yOyvn,              I                                                                   A I7 Q
    P g .,                        B^vvv^cwy W ^ f e                                        H‘i II




              P z& ccf

ts e rffe s z                                                                             C & 3 *4

                                                                                                    %      a       ^



.   #        J & s            /z a & a & v o .
                                                                                             a 4 s s u j # e J & tZ S t*                     1 3 7 3 ag’
                     ^            - _____                 _                     _           2^*t?          ^           p d td & w   J&

M       e /^ c fa s z e                     a *u d > y & a 4 ^             $ e



          J% 6 f a £ 4 & £                          l& P G + l^ l' .4 * * ...? M * V 0 i>           *

£ n s e & U 4 & ri^                         .0 & f e x > - J p f e          # /&     *&

j^ e &           y           .& * & ...&        . / % € ^ t t 0 t 4 & . . # & & * ? )* * & * £ ' &                        ,                       ,

                                                              ,   -& & ZG <M /2s                                                            -£ & &

                             s *S $ # *L 0 6                      I                                     < & > L & J f a /Z t*                         ^

    mf

                                                  ^                                       e /Z      &     r* £          &
                                                                                                                        ' 2 *& *n < ? C

                                               Jo         & < & to d



    j / £ , & 4 v u s fa z                      '7 0 *Z & &       k&
                                                                                                                                                f& k U Z lL .



                                                                                 ^                                                        * £ . * * * *



    4 /a c       ^                                                         & & & C O J # <2&

.£        J t&           i      £ *v &                                     a *& & *                            ^

    d & U 6 4 **& *< s & 6 t J * *                            “        ‘    ^         -       —
                       '             ‘            c*                   * /£ %*>




                                                                                 tc & 0& £



f         y                                              sU v

                                                                && CS&                                13 8 5 "


                                   Ifr& u S       /& , ^ < 0 /A 0 C J -& 4 U & V L       O ' & &   £& <



                                             O i< , s & Z g J c & ^ C £ *z £ L

      1 2 ^ 4 'A

    £ ,       (2 * .




                                         /

                                                       « *
                           €   K   * i
R   2069 C 817                                          C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD M ETR O PO LITAN DISTRICT
         a
                      ♦
                                                   DEPARTMENT OF P L A N N IN G A N D DESIGN

                                                                     Internal Memo
      To:                                   t4                              From:


                                                                            Date:
                                                                                      fo.




                                       '& 1 — J          k r^ K z j a ^ p ^ f                                   ^




                  J U         * V ^ *->   it                                   /C « J W «        Aj *   - I f n ,/ *%—        J j


                  £                                         ^                                iu s L~^
                  t*                                (J                     + u ~ jr     - *• w /


             I^MWUwlA                  h/'C/'A/                        f                **WW*jy                          ^
                          0    )                                                                  *       ^ U- J ’ J
                               ft* *             f ir           * ,« * !      L+ J     <d* * ~     ■& * >     /G    *    f'         '



                 ■^-                                                                                                                    p

                                                                                                                                        s?
   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP

     Meeting held on Wednesday 10 May 1989


      Messrs M Webster, D Bownes and M Ogl
      F Homewood (Administration and Legal Dep<
      Mr D Purchon (Health and Consumer Sej
      Mr D Perks    (Family and Community Services);
      Mr P O'Neill (Personnel Department); Mr P Dent
      and Ms H Smith      (Publicity Department); and
      Messrs G Levers and K Blount (Department of
      Land and Planning)




                                                               ACTION


MINUTES

The Minutes of the meeting of the     Group    held   on   3
May 1989 were received and noted.

INSPECTION ARRANGEMENTS

Bramall Lane Stadium

The   Group  noted   the   current  position   and the
developments which were taking place in connection
with the inspection of the Bramall Lane Stadium.

Hillsborough Stadium

The Group noted the arrangements which had been made
to enable 'First Division' football matches to resume
at the Hillsborough Stadium on 9 May.     It was stated
that a charge would be made in respect of certain
work carried out by the Authority in this matter.

Attention was also drawn to recent speculation within
the press regarding potential problems which might
arise on Saturday 13 May due to the anticipated influx
of many fans from Middlesborough, without tickets
for the match.

It was agreed to enquire what arrangements the South           M
Yorkshire Police were making to deal with this problem.

INQUIRY UPDATE

It was reported that Lord Justice Taylor had extended
his thanks to the City Council for their co-operation
and assistance in the arrangements for the Inquiry
to commence on 15 May.
Widespread press coverage was anticipated, particularly
during the first few days of the Inquiry although
it might well be possible to release certain elements
of the accommodation    'earmarked' for the Inquiry,
including a part of the Reception Suite, if and when
the level of demand becomes clear.

It was also reported that the Coroner had expressed
the desire for similar arrangements to be provided
for the resumed Inquest.    This was viewed with some
caution by the Group at the present time, pending
clarification of the implications, particularly with
regard to finance and accommodation.

FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF INQUIRY

It was reported that the Home Office had agreed to
meet all reasonable costs arising from the Inquiry
by Lord Justice Taylor.

As costs were being incurred by a number of departments
throughout the Authority, both in respect of the
Inquiry and the wider implications arising from the
disaster, it was agreed that an approach be made
to the City Treasury to establish a structure to
collect and evaluate all the financial data and cost
implications to the Authority, with a view to the
preparation of an appropriate submission to the Home
Office and, if necessary, a report to the Policy
Committee in due course.

With this in mind, officers were reminded of the
need to record details of any action taken and costs       All Members
incurred in connection with the disaster.

LICENSING DOCUMENTATION

It was reported that a meeting would be held this
day with Counsel to consider the Authority's position
as respects the Inquiry.      It was suggested that,
if possible, the Authority should aim to put forward
positive recommendations to the Inquiry.    Attention
was also drawn to the rigid nature of the Authority's
powers in the area of safety/licensing and it was
considered that a greater degree of flexibility might
well be recommended as a way forward.

REPORTS TO POLICY COMMITTEE

The Group were reminded of the need for all reports
relating to aspects     of the Hillsborough Disaster
to be submitted to the Policy Committee via Mr M
Webster.   It was stated that a formal report on the
disaster would be prepared by Mr D Purchon for
submission to the Committee as soon as possible.          ____________
         Discussions were to be held with the Leader and/or       Mr M Webster
         Deputy Leader to obtain their views on the method
         of dealing with the financial/staffing issues arising
         from the disaster.

(7)     OTHER ISSUES

         It was noted that, at the request of the West Midlands
         Police, a copy of the Council's Scheme for Major
         Peacetime Emergencies had been forwarded to their
         Inquiry Team.   Interest had also been shown regarding
         the actions taken by the Council immediately following
         the disaster, although no request for a formal report
         on this action had yet been received.

{8)     FUTURE MEETINGS

         It was agreed that future meetings of the Working
         Group be held on an ad-hoc basis as and when required.




10 May 1989
GW
Tbs Building Surveyor                      The Head of Administration
Department of Land and Plaining            and Legal Department

9th May, 1989                              For the attention of
BSD/A.Bu/NP
4162 -


Hillsborough Inquiry

Tour request for plan printing and document copying were processed through
this department.

A substantial amount of the work had to be carried out by the Department
of Design and Building Services on a recoverable basis.

Please advise me of the expenditure code to which these costs should be
recharged.
  The Building Surveyor                        The Acting Head of Administration
                                               and Legal Department
  9th Hay, 1989
  BSD/KW3B/EHA27ABX
  4169




Safety of Sports Grounds - Sheffield United Football Club

I refer to your memorandum of the 5th May regarding the above subject,
and particularly its last paragraph.

Ply Principal District Surveyor and ray principal Structural Engineer
attended the working party meeting at Sheffield United F.C., on the
27th April for the purposes of carrying out the annual inspection of the
grounds. Their attendance was in response to a telephone request from
your licensing officer and at the tin© of their visit they were both
unaware of your memorandum dated 26th April, which was only received by
them later that day simultaneous with the withdrawal of Health & Consumer
Services staff, your Chief Licensing Officer also left the meeting,
despite the intimation from my staff that he should be present for the
inspection. This therefore left my officers as being the only council
staff to carry out the agreed corporate annual inspection.

Initially they boith were accotrpanied by Dr.Eastwood and the Club
Secretary, whilst the police and fire authority representatives were
accompanied by other club staff.

Whilst on the Bramall Lane terracing Dr. Eastwood made consents
presupposing that the pitch perimeter fence woul$ be taken down, and
continued to make observations as to how he proposed that this would be
achieved, so as to retain an adequate crush barrier on that same line.

The supposition of removal of the pitch perimeter fencing was not
commented on by my staff, however, conreenta of a technical nature were
made regarding the positioning and design of the restraint bracing which
could act as part of integral design of the remaining crush barrier. From
then- onwards for the remainder of the morning, ray staff wora accompanied
almost solely by the Club Secretary, although Dr, Eastwood remained on
site.

As in previous annual inspections certain items of a factual nature were
brought to the attention of the Club's representatives, but X am quite
satisfied that matters of a more contentious nature were oimply noted for
future discussion by the full working party,

JVfter a full day on the site, the club were advised that iny staff had not
carpleted their inspection, and therefore my division will be represented
at the reconvened meeting on the 16th May,




                                            Copy sent to
                                                                     .3 3




                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP

                         Meeting held 3 May 1989


Present:          Messrs M Webster,
                  (Administration and Legal   Department); Mr K
                          (Department of Land and Planning); Mr
                               (Family and   Community   Services
                  Department); Mr D Purchon (Health and Consumer
                  Services) and             (Personnel Department)




                                                                            ACTION

(   1)    MINUTES

          The Minutes of the meeting of the Group held on 28
          April were received and arising therefrom the Group
          noted

          (a)     the arrangements which had   been made for   the
                   Inquiry to begin hearing evidence on 15     May
                   in the Council Chamber; and

           (b)    the problems which these arrangements presented
                   regarding the venue for the Annual Meeting
                   of the City Council on 17 May.

(2)       INSPECTION ARRANGEMENTS

          Bramall Lane Stadium

         \ The  Group were notified of correspondence which had
         j been received from Sheffield United PC following
           the   inspection   of   the   Bramall   Lane  Stadium.
           Consideration was given to the terms of a measured
           response to the points raised in the correspondence              Mr M Webster and
           which would form the basis of a reply to be submitted
         < to Sheffield United within the next 24 hours.

          Hillsborough Stadium

          The Group was informed that the West Midlands Police
          had notified Sheffield Wednesday PC that they had
          no objection to the resumption of football at the
          Hillsborough Stadium on the understanding that the
          West   End   Terrace   remained   closed  and  certain
          unspecified safety measures were carried out.     This
          notification had not been conveyed directly to the
          Local Authority although the Club were now looking
          to make arrangements to hold the match with West
          Ham United on 9 May.    Furthermore, the Club had also
          requested   the  Works  Department   to undertake  the
          necessary remedial work on their behalf in view of
          the shortage of time available.
               The  Group   expressed  considerable  concern   at   the
               circumstances outlined and it was agreed that:-

               (a)              the Works Department should not undertake any
jk   j                safety or remedial repair work at the stadium
                      in view of the Council's role as Licensing         Mr M Webster
                      Authority for the Stadium, and the Director
                      of Works be advised forthwith;

               (b)    the Club be informed that the provision of          Mr M Webster,,
                       the    required   safety  work   remains   the
                       responsibility of the Club and their appointed
                       private contractors;                               ______________

               (c)    arrangements be made to contact the West Midlands
                       Police over the next 24 hours to clarify the       J
                       circumstances under which football may resume                       ^
                       at the Stadium so far as they are concerned;

               (d)    arrangements be made over the next 24 hours
                       to identify any outstanding safety issues at
                       the Stadium and the time-scale for the remedial
                       work required; and

               (e)    a further inspection of the ground be carried
                       out on completion of the required safety work.

         (3)   NEXT MEETING

               It was agreed that the next meeting of the Group
               be held in the Head of Administration and Legal
               Department's office at 8.30 am on Wednesday 10 May
               1989.




         4 May 1989
         GW
                             T c?         h                                                   B u ild < ^ 9       ^

                             ’F V c v v *                                                     V s .



                             S b H r © ^             of                              Gv^'^ol^
                             H j l l^ b o v ' o c ^ h Inoid€2^>'fc                               S 'W F C .
                                  ^      C frS Z ,




     t y c g ^ f fe & l+ L              & <&         t g £ ^ }yO

               & £ z& tsyc & ■ y ^ Z ^ C ^ C 4 y t^ y£c2& i< s£ & }f ‘2 /Z & tcS* /&

^    & Z& C J& &                                           &     £ Z C s & & tS &         0 H 4 4 f£ C ftZ p /

     '& C 2 4 X ? **' '& >          T v L i& tz te                               & &                                      i^ t^ € ^ t& ^ /7 > 0

     S A U                        a * i^ 6                                   /^ tfs       T u rz w ^ z ^         o a t*

          J% U ? ia sl,                 & id c c a ^        o   < $ /&   g   £                                        <

     C c X c tfb tZ *^        &                                                       /lr u s y u ^ /4 & a

    O ih u ^ c c c ^                                                             ■




                             u ric ?     sz6 u b & & Z           £& e

     &SC&          '& I4 ?                       & < Z ^ .&                                    la p    ,.4 H * & ^ S * * < & 4 jf .r -s 4 t<>

    £ 2 to p    C e & Jg       a *u Z 6        i f                       *& £ &           &                                        1& S 0~




                                                                                                  t& tC /Z & 'Z ^ & O                 t& C iX Z Z




                       O rx C & *d i& Z & C C & O
                                                ' ’ ?166* k 4 & Z & < 3 £                      \2 A A        *

                 M & &          a &           t& &                                                               t&   x *

                                                                   O v & f 6 r t£ o z jtf & fe

    J ^ t if t ? & € & * -        */& C 0 -60          '% *& € /'\^ v ^ & & S Z >

                                  /7*& o J>     tZ d * u * v & 6 £                   ? *y f c & v o & t'U *& £ £




                                                                                                                             ,c*» <    /tS     L
                                                                                                                      >
                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP


                               Meeting held 28th April 1989




PRESENT:          Messrs M Webster, ]                                                 ind Mrs E
                  Bashforth (Administration ana Jbegai uepariment;
                  M r D Purchon (Environmental Health and Consumer Services)
                  MrP                                (Publicity Department)
                  M                    (Personnel Department)
                  1 1 1 1 JEST ^ — m t (Department of Land and Planning)

                  Messrs                                    (Family and C o m mu n it y Services
                  Department;




Item 1     MINUTES                                                                         ACTION

           The minutes of the meeting of the Group held on 26th
           April were received and arising therefrom the Group
           noted:-

           (a)   that arrangements were in hand to provide any
                  necessary counselling for bereaved families who
                  may attend the Inquiry;
           (b)   negotiations were currently proceeding regarding
                 the period of the lease to be granted at the Owlerton
                 Stadium; and

           (c)   the West Midlands Police had indicated that they
                  would prepare their own plans in respect of the
                  Hillsborough Stadium, but would be pleased to
                  make use of the Council's model of the Stadium.

Item 2     INSPECTION A R R A N G E M E N T S

           Bramall Lane Stadium

           The Group were informed of matters which had arisen
           during the inspection of the Bramall Lane Stadium on
           27th April 1989. It was agreed that a letter would be
           sent to Sheffield United Football Club setting out clearly
           the City Council's position in relation to future action
           in the circumstances.                                                            Mr M Webster
           Hillsborough Stadium

           It was reported that, with the exception of the West
           end terrace, it might well be possible to re-open the
           Hillsborough Stadium to the public in time for the match
           with Norwich City Football Club on 9th May, providing
           that the prescribed safety work had been carried out
           to the satisfaction of the City Council.
 INQUIRY U P D A T E

 It was understood that the Inquiry would commence the
 hearing of evidence on 15th May 1989, although this
 date had yet to be officially confirmed.

 Regarding the allocation of Committee Rooms, it was
 reported that the Treasury solicitors had been allocated
 Committee Room No 1 whilst the press would be in
 Committee Room No 2. Committee Room No 4 was
 now to be made available for the Inquiry Secretariat.

It was considered necessary to clarify the position
regarding the possible clash with the arrangements for
the Annual meeting of the City Council on 17th May,
as soon as possible.

It was also agreed to pursue as a m atter of urgency,
the receipt of a 'Letter of Authorisation' from the Home
Office.

LICENSING D O C U M E N T A T I O N

The Group were informed that the West Midlands Police
had requested receipt of the files relating to the issue
by 4.00 p.m. today. It was anticipated that the Police
investigation would not only look into the facts of the
case, but would attem pt to examine attitudes towards
safety at sports grounds and individual Departments
may be requested to provide information.
N E W DEVELOPMENTS

(a)   Liverpool Council have requested permission to
      bring another delegation to Sheffield for a briefing
      and to visit the Hillsborough Stadium. This request
      was viewed with some caution by the Group at
      the present time.

(b)   Following discussions between Mr D Purchon and
      Consultants from the Sheffield Health Authority,
      the Consultants are to provide the City Council
      with information on 'disaster packs' which may
      be of use in potential emergency situations.
(c)   No decision to be taken at present regarding the
      venue for the resumed Inquest although the Memorial
      Hall was considered a possible venue.

D A T E OF N E X T MEETING

The next meeting of the Group will be held in the Head
of Administration and Legal Department's office at 8.30
a.m. on Wednesday 3rd May 1989.
                                                         Y C V vxC )          ■ ^ C 'f C ^ & d     ^ h & A '- 4& V         im

    3vppOv'4-u^<^
             V\4^ c                                     **   '
    ^). WiVvtd ,                                 i o u ^ ; l^t^v<svl a i^ d csivhs^ci 'iotcxg,
                  ^                                                                                                        I



    £>)      S / s f e v u            of     S 'U - jp f& A * - —                                  C Z ^ W & d l        ^V T

      y & V '          V ^ l^ jU Z y ^ .
      )         S A M D , 4o                       v * v a k /& c l )y \ ’f W          (^ w s ^ J o ^ fc H a        .



♦                                     L » WkTiy                               to                 J u & ^    7

    S )        Z ^ o k j^ ^ ^ J r                 o k                  A v 4 W i > K ^ 5 > -     f& U & G       ,
           AcivvutZdj&fc,* I S u ^ ^ ^ J t S d 4 i u ^ W^ ^ ^ O f j i d jp ^ /k ^ tjO ^
          C & d ’<ZOcA‘ 'W & & & S C l'S - fn                       Y U ^ V \A ^ ^ 4 i * v k ^ ^           4 ^ 'V r *
          O S p ^ p i& v X Z lh   ■


                                      A^ns*        C lp y & u S & s t ^ M y     ^ I V ^ W   p^Vi^i'^S'kPw.              'fcv
      “H ^        WfcSvto i o         CJO £?uk& c£ldl'


                                           4 o                   yX

®    (A ^ 5 s s c t& ty           h u P fM w J          b & st   £ Z p /M ? V < riJ




                                                                                                     . p.VWT* .
                                                                                                  *
                                         TELEPHONE MESSAGE
            KWGB                                                                       SWFC
FOR                     .....                                             REF.

d a t e .....??/.!/.?.?.............   t i m e . . . 2 . . 2 7 „ p . . m . .......... t a k e n b y ..... Karen,

                                Dr. Eastwood
MESSAGE FROM.

PHONE No.
                            554554




DETAILS:

        . Eastwood had John Strange with him wfien he ‘phoned and he
  n
  WBrS    hoping t o d i s c u s s the f o l l o w i n g v^tth y o u : -

  SWFC have now (within the l a s t haflf hour) been given permission
  to do whatever temporary stabj/Kvsing work n ec es s ar y on the
  wall at the Leppings Lane e p d o f the ground.

  There are two proposal s / f o r t h i s work:-

   1.     S c a f f o l d pole sjroring; or

  2.      A s u b s t a n t i a l timber post and r a i l along the o u t s i d e

  The d e c i s i o n / o n which proposal t o use depends a l i t t l e on
  whether a n y 'o f the wall le ans s u b s t a n t i a l l y outwards.
                  j-'
  Someone'from Dr. Eastwood's o f f i c e w i l l be going down t o check
  the j j ^ l l . BJGL was not in t o be c o n s u l t e d .


A ^O N taken:                    Dr. Eastwood wi l l not be in tomorm^. but
                                 could you p l e a s e ring^JpFn Strange on)the



   \ \ > ° ’]             •'                                                                 A



                                                                                >5^*

                                                                          r                                        R5321
                   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


                     Co-ordinating Meeting




         T o be held at 8.30 a.m. Friday 28 April 1989
    Head of Administration and Legal Department’s Office




Minutes from meeting held on 24 April 1989

Matters arising

Inspection Arrangements -               (i) SUFC Inspection
                                       (ii) SWFC Latest Position


Inquiry update

Licensing Documentation


New Developments

Press Statements


Any other business


Date of next meeting
                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP


                Meeting held on Wednesday 26 April 1989


Present:    Messrs M Webster, I                         Ms E Bashforth
            and                 (Administration and Legal Department);
            Mr   I
                 1            I(Environmental    Health   and Consumer
            Services); _________________ | (Personnel Department); Mr
                      (Family and Community Services Department);
            Mr              (Department of Land and Planning); Mr
                                    (Publicity Department).




                                                                         ACTION

(1)   MINUTES

      The Minutes of the meeting of the Group held on 24th April
      were received with the comment that, regarding the Bramall
      Lane Stadium, the letter requesting feedback on the decision
      to remove the gates in the perimeter fence was to be sent
      to the South Yorkshire Police and not to Sheffield United
      FC.

(2)   PRESS STATEMENTS

      It was reported that following meetings with the South
      Yorkshire Police, it had been agreed that, in view of the
      current situation at Hillsborough, the home matches with
      West Ham United on Saturday 29 April and Bordeaux on Tuesday
      2 May were to be cancelled.    This decision had already been
      report in the press.    It was pointed out that the decision
      did not necessarily apply to reserve matches where much
      smaller crowds were expected.

      Details were also reported of the arrangements for the removal
      and disposal of wreaths and tributes at the Stadium.

(3)   INSPECTION ARRANGEMENTS

      Bramall Lane Stadium

      Inspection of the Bramall Lane Stadium will take place on
      Thursday 27 April.     Arrangements are to be made for all
      the Council's Officers involved to attend at the Stadium           All Members
      at the same time and such Officers should liaise after their
      inspections to ensure that a composite list of work required
      is   prepared  for   submission   to  the Club.    Individual
      Officers/departments should refrain from conducting separate
      negotiations with the Club.

      Officers were requested to inform David Bownes of the names        -----------
      of  those   persons  who  should be  designated  "Authorised
      Officers" in this matter.                                          -----------
Owlerton Stadium

The inspection of Owlerton Stadium will take place on Thursday
4 May.   David Bownes was requested to clarify the current        ]
position regarding the lease of the Stadium.

INQUIRY UPDATE

It was confirmed that the Inquiry would commence on Friday
28 April at 11.00 am.   It was not yet known when the Inquiry
would begin the hearing of evidence but it was hoped that
the Town Hall accommodation would remain available for normal
meetings (except on Friday 28 April) until the end of May.
It was pointed out that the Conference Room was not required
for the Inquiry.

Consideration was given to the question     of the free 'phone
line for persons wishing to comment         on the events at
Hillsborough.    Attention was also drawn    to the "hot line"
installed by the Family and Community       Services Department
to provide counselling and advice to         persons distressed
by the disaster.

It was agreed that details of the two telephone numbers
should be given publicity but that the two telephone lines
and their respective purposes should remain clearly separate
and independent from each other.      Attention was drawn to
the importance of telephone enquirers being correctly advised     r
as to which line/service they required and Phil Dent was
required to investigate how this might best be arranged.

LICENSING DOCUMENTATION

It was   reported that the preparation of the licensing
documentation was progressing smoothly and would be completed
shortly.

A plan of the Hillsborough Stadium as at 15 April would
be completed   today and    numbered  copies would be made        r-
available.  It was agreed that a copy of the plan be forwarded
to the Home Office, and that they be reminded that the Council
was preparing a scale model of the Stadium which could be
used at the Inquiry if required.

NEW DEVELOPMENTS/OTHER ISSUES

  (i) The Fire Service have confirmed that         the BBC have
      offered to make available video tapes of     the disaster   *
      and Pat O'Neill was requested to clarify      whether the
      Council will be granted access to view the    tapes.

 (ii) Family and Community Services Department to liaise
      with Jean Raper (Occupational Health) regarding the
      provision of counselling/care services for bereaved
      families who may attend the Inquiry.
                                      -   3   -




      (iii) ID cards to be prepared for those officers            with
            responsibilities relating to the Inquiry.

       (iv) Memoranda are to be issued (A) instructing all non-
            essential personnel to avoid, wherever possible, the
            area  of the Reception Rooms,      Council Chamber and       Mr M Webster
            Committee Rooms for the duration of the Inquiry and
            (B)   notifying   Chief  Officers   of   the  need   for
            departmental meeting rooms to be made available for
            meetings   of  the Council's   committees/sub-committees
            during the period of the Inquiry.

        (v) Mr P O'Neill to clarify with the Home        Office    the   Mr
            financial arrangements for the Inquiry.

       (vi) It was reported that details of the St John's Ambulance
            Service provision at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15
            April had been published in "The Star" on 25 April.

      (vii) The Memorial Service at Liverpool will be attended
            by a civic delegation from Sheffield, together with
            representatives from Bochum in West Germany.

(7)   NEXT MEETING

      The next meeting of the Group will be held in the Head of
      Administration and Legal Department's office at 8.30 am
      on Friday 28 april.




26 April 1989
GW
                           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                           Co-ordinating Meeting


            To be held at 8.30 am, Wednesday 26 April 1989
         Head of Administration and Legal Department's Office




(1)   Minutes from meeting held on 24 April 1989

(2)   Matters Arising

(3)   Inspection Arrangements - SUFC and Owlerton

(4)   Inquiry Update                    X-

(5)   Licensing Documentation

(6)   New Developments

(7)   Press Statements

(8)   Any Other Business

(9)   Date of Next Meeting
STAFF FROM BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DIVISION OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING WHO HAVE
HAD INVOLVEMENT IN SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUND
ISSUES OVER THE LAST 10 YEARS

Structural Assessment


            e      (retired)
            ;-     1 visit to SUFC to inspect scoreboard
              -    1 visit only
              -    checked South Stand calculations for SUFC   (left Department)
Site Supervision

                   (retired)
                       II




                   (left Department)
Public Safety
None




 BSD/KWGB/KTH
 25th April, 1989
STAFF FROM BUILDING SURVEYOR’S DIVISION OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING WHO HAVE
HAD INVOLVEMENT IN SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUND
ISSUES OVER THE LAST 10 YEARS

Structural Assessment


                s    (retired)
                 -   1 visit to SUFC to inspect scoreboard
                 -   1 visit only
                 -   checked South Stand calculations for SUFC   (left Department)
Site Supervision

            s        (retired)
                         II

_________            (left Department)
Public Safety
None




 BSD/KWGB/KTH
 25th April, 1989
                                                                                  l i e

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP




Meeting held 24 April 1989


Presents    Messrs M Webster,     I                                    Ms
            E Bashforth and                     (Administration and Legal
            Department);                      (Personnel Department); Mr
                                           (Publicity Department); Mr D
             Purchon   (Health   and Consumer Services) and Messrs G
                                    (Department of Land and Planning)




                                                                            ACTION

(1)   Inquiry Arrangements

      It was confirmed that the Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor would
      commence on Friday 28 April in the Town Hall.     It is thought,
      however, that the Inquiry will not begin the hearing of evidence
      from witnesses for several weeks.

      The Inquiry will occupy accommodation in the Reception Rooms,          1
      the Council Chamber, Committee Rooms Nos 1 to 4, and the Ante
      Room.  Up to 30 telephone lines are to be provided in Committee        L_
      Room No 2 with a secure telephone line and FAX machine to
      be provided for Lord Justice Taylor in the Ante Room.   Further
      consideration to be given regarding the layout of the Council
      Chamber and the provision of closed circuit television.      Mr
      C Smedley (Department of Land and Planning) has been identified
      as the contact officer within his Department on issues relating
      to accommodation.

(2)   Operational Issues

      Bramall Lane Stadium

      David Purchon identified several areas which require further
      investigation following his visit to the Bramall Lane Stadium
      at the weekend.   These issues to be taken into account during
      the formal inspection of the Stadium.      It was also agreed Mi
      that a letter be sent to eirSFF±H±d— Gni£e& to obtain feedback
      on the arrangements for the removal jof the gates in the
      perimeter fencing at the Stadium.      I
                                                 '
      Owlerton Stadium

      David Purchon identified areas of concern at the Owlerton
      Stadium which must be considered during a formal inspection Mi
      in the near future.

      It was stressed that the inspection arrangements in respect
      of stadia in the City must be undertaken on a thoroughly
      professional but low-key basis.
      Hillsborough Stadium

      It was stated that the first priority as respects the inspection
      of stadia, must be the arrangements for the football match
      at Hillsborough Stadium between Sheffield Wednesday and West
      Ham United on Saturday 29 April.

      It was agreed that Pat O'Neill would make preliminary contact
      with South Yorkshire Police to clarify whether the match would
      proceed and, on the receipt of confirmation of the event being
      held, a meeting be arranged as soon as possible with all
      interested parties at the Stadium on Tuesday 25 April to agree
      the detailed arrangements for the match.

(3)   Licensing Documentation

      It was reported that the licensing documentation file in respect
      of the Hillsborough Stadium would be ready by tomorrow.

      It was agreed that similar files be established for the other
      stadia in the City.

(4)   New Developments/Other Issues

      (a)       Pat O'Neill to contact the Fire Service regarding access
                to any videos of the incident which are made available
                by the BBC.

      (b)       The Municipal Mutual Insurance Company have appointed
                Keeble, Hawson   (Solicitors) to act on their behalf
                in respect of the incident.

                The Group was given a clear instruction that they must     All Members
                not, in any circumstances, discuss the nature of the
                events relating to the incident with any person outside
                the Group without first obtaining clearance through
                the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department.

      (c)       The Group were requested to supply Liz Bashforth with
                the names of all officers, both past and present, who
                had been involved with matters relating to the Safety
                of Sports Grounds Act since the designation of the
                Stadia in the City.

(5)   Future Meetings                                               ^

      It was agreed that future meetings of this Co-ordinating Group
      be held on alternate days,     at 8.30 am in the Head of
      Administration and Legal Department's office, commencing on
      Wednesday 26 April.




24 April 1989
                 CO-ORDINATING GROUP MEETING

          To be held at 9.00 a.m. Monday, 24th April, 1989




                          A G E N D A


1. ^   Minutes of meeting held on 21st April

2. ^   Matters Arising

, ^
3.     t          .,
       Inquiry update:     ,,
                           Venue           ,
                                 arrangements           ' C U 'iv                         ,. ■
                                                                                             1>

4. ✓   Operational Matters - Bramall Lane —
       */ — Ot^leVh>* —                                                                  gj/
5. J   Licensing documentation      ^7           h>^j        '0 &=^ 'fcw-soVitbo ^ }

6.     New Developments*

7. /   ANY OTHER BUSINESS s
                                                 f^H£,     ^\cs^Q
8.     Date and Time of Next Meeting                        ^&JLA- f ^Yc-'k
                                                                        y^j2^-€S&.a —


                                                              No
                                                                                        4cJ^t

                                                                    £s2-&^-




                                             \J^‘
                                                !
                                                    ^ C U s ^


                                                 ildkUU^l ■
                                                  ( N ^
                                 0 J U A -   -
    R 371 9                                                                                    Sch 9 1 6 0
                                  C IT Y OF SHE FFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From          Acting Head of Department:                To      See CirculaCiorT^erow
              Administration and Legal                                            n a a t of Land & P a n n in g

                                                                                 RECEIVED
Date          12 May 1989
Ref.          AH/GW                                                               16MAY 1989 CD
Tel. Ext.     4018 - Mr Webster                          Ref.




              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP - DON VALLEY STAbtUli

              With reference to the communication of 24 April from the Building
              Surveyor and to subsequent communication from the---B±reTrtOT?--o£Health
              and Consumer Services, which X^now copy to those previously
              receiving the same, I believe the paramount issue here is for someone a T'y
              to be able to say totally unequivocably that the design of the new ' ^                               - i— _
              Stadium will meet both current and anticipated requirements regarding
              Stadium safety and in particular, as it will almost certainly bev
              designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act and any amendment
              thereof, all the best recommendations which currently exist pursuant
              to such legislation.

              In this regard I understand that a meeting has now taken place of
              relevant officers and I am pleased that the opportunity has been
              taken to ensure that such consultation proceed, notwithstanding the
              fact that I understand it is currently the intention to bring in,
              as Consultants on the Stadium, certain of the better known experts
              on Sports Ground Design and Stadia Safety in this country and
              elsewhere.

              However, it is clearly still necessary to make use of all the expertise
              within the Authority relating to the Safety of Sports and I would
              assume that the recent meeting was the first stage of such a process.




              Circulations

              Director of Health and Consumer Services (Reference DWP/PAF)
              Building Surveyors Section (Department of Land and Planning)
              Director of Design and Building Services (For the Attention               of   Mr
              T Wood)
UMos\e^s
                                C IT Y OF S H E F F IE L D   -   MEMORANDUM
                                                                                          D spartm

     rom     D. W. Purchon                                   To      M. Webster
            Director of Health and Consumer                          Head of Adit
                                   Services
    Date    28 April 1989
/   Ref     DWP/PAF
    Tel Ext 4614                                             Ref


                                                                                      ICOPY TO
                                                                                       REPLIED TO BY

            HILLSBOROUGH CO-ORDINATING GROUP - NEW ATHLETICS STADIUM

            I have been copied Ken Blount's memo of 24 April 1989 in which he
            apparently raises a demarcation dispute or stands on his and others
            dignity.

            It appears to me that this is a matter for corporate concern and it is
            hardly a matter of "if" the new stadium is to be designated under the
            legislation.

            I have no argument as to whose responsibility anything is in the first
            instance. The Head of Admin, and Legal is responsible for licensing and
            signing certificates and my only concern is to help the corporate cause at
            a difficult time and in particular to assist you.

            I have no objection to being excluded from the review of the design of the
            new stadium but suggest that the members will want an unequivocal
            assurance that the new stadium meets every possible recommended safety and
            safety management standard. I accept that others can give that assurance
            and recommend that they should do so in more positive terms than
            Ken Blount's memo.




            D. W. Purchon
            Director of Health and Consumer Services




                                                                    j ADMINISTRATION fit LEGAL
                                                                          .. m?l, SHEFFIELD,
                                                                     A     HEAD OP    ASUiafANT L .S.
                                                                                     1    .HBAD

                                                                     B 2 8 APR 1989 PAA
                                                                          O-S-M.i   LIB   | ELN8     1*80

                                                                     9s
The Building Surveyor,                       Head of Actaiioistration and legal
Department o£ land and Planning              Department
24tli April, 1989
KWGO/KTH
4169




Hillsborough Disaster Co-ordinating Group                           '

Re. meeting held Thursday, 20th April,
Item 4, minute (part) states:-

    "David Purchon to be fully informed of the
    comparison between the requirements of the
    'Green Code' and the specification of the
    new Don Valley Stadium".                   - Action K, Blount

Whilst I fully appreciate the need for the Council to ensure that this
stadium, being designed and built under its control, should not be found
deficient if used for a purpose designated under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act, I cannot respond to this minute in the manner envisaged.

The responsibility for ensuring compliance in this first instance rests of
course with the Director of Design and Building Services, whose officers
and mine have had discussions related to these matters in connection with
the plans submitted for building regulation purposes. At this stage I can
only state that the "requirements" of the 'Green Code' have been examined
as part of that process, which is ongoing. The stadium is being designed
for athletics purposes primarily and I believe that Mr. Wood made it quite
clear in a TV interview (Monday, 17th April) that the design would be
reviewed if the Inquiry caine up with new reocranendation3 and/or the use of
the stadium was widened.




Copies to: Mr. D. Purchon,
           Director of Environmental Health and Consumer Services

          Mr. A. Wood,
          Director of Design and Building Services

           Mr. A. Bagley
           Mr. A. Butler
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


MEETING HELD ON FRIDAY 21 APRIL 1989 AT 8.30 AM




Present *

Mr     H    M     Webster,         Mrs            E    Bashforth,
( Admi n i s t r a t i r>n   and   T. o r r a l
                                        1             npnarf-m on)-'
                                                        (Chief Safety
Adviser);                             (Building Surveyors Division);
           (Publicity Department);            (Conference Organiser);
             1 (Police Liaison Officer); Mr D W Purchon (Director
of Health and Consumer Services).

(1)        Minutes of Previous Meeting

           The Minutes of the last meeting were agreed.

(2)        Matters Arising

           It was noted that the detailed site plan of the Hillsborough
           Stadium would be available for the meeting 6tt Monday.   The
           Director of Design and Building Services has offered model
           making facilities for the Inquiry.

           Reference was made to the pressure which was being exerted
           by the Press. The Group re-iterated the view that as a Judicial
           Inquiry was shortly to begin no further comment should be
           made at this time.

(3)        Minute Silence

           It is intended that the buses will be stopped in the City
           Centre at 3.05 tomorrow afternoon, the traffic signals be
           put at red in Barker's Pool and the Cathedral Bells would
           be likely to toll at the same time. Appropriate arrangements
           will also be held in Nottingham and Liverpool and at soccer
           matches.

(4)        Inquiry Venue

           Following meetings with Home Office representatives regarding
           the venue for the Inquiry a provisional start date of 28 April
           was suggested and it was confirmed during the course of the
           meeting that the venue would be the Town Hall.      The Group
           considered the possibility of closed circuit television and
           the necessity for stewarding to be provided and rooms for
           Counsel.  The official estimate for the length of the Inquiry
           was six to eight weeks but it was possible that it would last
           considerably   longer.  Many outstanding questions   remained,
           including how to charge for the accommodation, 'phones, etc.
           Mr Dent was requested to investigate any offer of facilities
           for the Inquiry.

                        L announced that, with effect from today,      he was    ,/
           r u n — time employed in relation to the Inquiry.    All    contact
           from the West Midlands Police should go through him.
(5)    Letter to Sheffield United/Press Release

       These copies were available and                circulated   press
       releases to date and an example of the cutting service.

(6)    Licensing Documentation

      Mrs Bashforth said that the Home Office had been sent copies
      of the Safety Certificate Plans.     The Home Office has briefed
      Counsel,  possibly because Hillsborough is regarded as one
      of the safest stadia in*the country.

      Mrs E Bashforth also stated that she was preparing an annotated
      Safety of Sports Ground Act and that a memorandum to Chief
      Officers had been prepared, indicating that they would not
      release information unless it was publicly accessible.         If
      the   release   of   information   was   appropriate  in    given
      circumstances, records must be made of the disclosures and
      sent to this Department.      There was some discussion about
      the release of planning information and                explained
      that planning applications are public but building regulation
      applications are not.     Following problems in the Land and
      Planning Department yesterday staff are now instructed to
      take notes of the person requiring the information.       It was
      sgreed it would be right to err on the side of caution in
      the release of information area.       It was pointed out that
      building regulation applications can only be shown to another
      person with the consent of the Architect.

(7)   New Developments

                  mentioned that Sheffield United would be playing
      at Bramall Lane on 25 April (Mansfield), 1 May (Aldershot)
      and 6 May (Swansea).    It was agreed that a further meeting
      be held at 3.30 pm today to consider issues relating to the
      Bramall Lane Stadium.

      Mr Purchon questioned the position if the police do not make
      available the Operational Plan today as    promised. Mr Purchon
      was of the opinion that we should check that the plan was
      satisfactory.   Mrs Bashforth explained that crowd control,
      policing, etc, was really the prerogative of the Police and
      that the Council would be hard pressed to criticise the police
      plan unless they had particular expertise in that area.      Mr
      Purchon emphasised that the plans were required for Sheffield
      United, Sheffield Wednesday and Owlerton stadia.

      Mr Sewell reported that Liverpool City Council's Solicitors'
      Office  had   offered  local  statement   taking  facilities in
      Liverpool for fans but it was not known whether Lord Justice
      Taylor and the investigating police officers knew about this
      offer.   It was stat&d that the Fire Service has been promised
      nine hours of BBC videos and Mr Purchon queried whether the
      Council could have access to the same facilities.

      Mr Purchon said that he had been contacted by the Casualty
      Consultants at the Northern General and the Hallamshire, who
      indicated that lessons on First Aid and medical facilities
      could be learned from a disaster.  They specifically mentioned
"Disaster Packs" and had asked for a meeting on this subject.
Mr Purchon wondered whether it was worth the Council having
Disaster Packs and the Peacetime Emergency Plan'was mentioned.
Mrs Bashforth said it would be useful to receive the advice
but the Council could not discuss the arrangements actually
at Hillsborough on Saturday or arrangements at any other ground,
obviously owing to the on-going Inquiry.

D a te and T im e o f N e x t M e e tin g

The next meeting will be held on Monday 24 April at 9.00 am
in the Head of Department's office.
                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP

                              Meeting to be held on Friday 21st April 1989




                                               A G E N D A




       1 .y Minutes from previous meeting

       2.‘/ / / Matters arising


       3*,/ Minute silence
b*'H

       4. ^ Venue for Inquiry update           _.


       5. ^     Letters to Sheffield United

              Press release


       6. </ Licensing documentation update


       7.     New developments


       8.     Any other business


       9.     Next meeting        ^   oO 2-4
                        DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING


                              INTERNAL MEMORANDUM




TO:     Members of D.M.T.



FROM:   Director                             DATE:   21st April,   1989




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I have been asked by the Chief Executive to remind all members of staff that
only two officers of the Council are currently authorised to speak to the
press or any other third party regarding the Hillsborough Disaster. These
are David Purchon, Director of Health and Consumer Services, and Mark
Webster, Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department.

I am sure everyone will appreciate the importance of controlling the
information which is being supplied, and I   will be grateful if youcanmake
sure that members of staff are reminded of   this as soon as possible.

Any questions or information requested by the press or any other third
party, which is not already publicly available, should be referred toeither
of the two officers mentioned above.




RDJ/CT3ABL
                               C IT Y OF S H E FFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M    Sch 9/163


From   Director,                                          Chief Executive
       Department of Land and Planning
                                                          Copies to: :^Mr.
         21st April, 1989                                             Mr.
Ref-     RDJ/CMT                       (2jb)
Tel. Ext 1J201                                         Ref.                                N137m



       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

       Regarding your memorandum of the 18th April, it goes without saying that the
       services o      f      a     n      d       indeed any officers required are
       freely available to the officers working on the Hillsborough Disaster.

       For your information, I have also made arrangements this morning for officers
       from Property Services to be available to           |
                                                           l in order to undertake
       the preparation of the Town Hall for the Inquiry.
         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP


              M eeting held on Thursday 20th April, 1989




PRESENT:        Messrs M Webster, D Bownes and M Ogle
                (Administration and Legal Department)

                (Personnel Department)
                Messrs D Purchon and 1_____ 1
                (Environment Health      and Consumer          Services
                Department)_________________

                (Publicity Department)

                (Department o f Land and Planning)
                          ~h
                (Family and Community Services Department)


Item 1     TERMS OF REFERENCE OF CO-ORDINATING GROUP                       ACTION

           It was agreed that the Co-ordinating Group would have
           wide terms of reference to provide an up-to-date exchange
           of information on matters relating to the Hillsborough
           disaster, including media relations, the investigation
           situation and deployment, implications for other stadia
           within the City, the venue for the Inquiry to be conducted
           by Lord Justice Taylor and the liaison with Inquiry
           personnel, the briefing of Members and Officers, licensing      All Members
           documentation, and issues relating to the Inquest on
           individual log of information and action taken.

Item 2     MEDIA RELATIONS

           Media relations will form an increasingly important aspect
           of the Authority's actions in response to the disaster.
           It was agreed that all responses to media enquiries for         All Members
           information would be drafted in the form of a press release
           or statement, and must be cleared by Mark Webster
           and David Purchon, prior to release (normally through
           the Press Office).

                            to be the spokesperson on all operational

                             I to be the spokesperson on issues relating
           to the Appeal.

           A memorandum to be sent from the Chief Executive's
           office to all appropriate officers containing details of
           these arrangements.

Item 3     CURRENT INVESTIGATIONS              AND    LIAISON     WITH
           PERSONNEL

           Concern was expressed regarding the confusion which
           had arisen in connection with the request for a full site
           plan of the Hillsborough stadium showing all relevant
           details, including barriers, improvements, amendments
           etc., as at 15th April 1989.
                                    -   2   -



                                                                                 ACTION

              It was recognised that Lord Justice Taylor had now ordered
              that all the Council's investigators should withdraw from
              the site, but it was still considered essential that the
              plan be prepared as soon as possible.

              Arrangements to be made for liaison with Inquiry personnel
              and West Midlands Police to establish level and nature
              of assistance required.

              List of bereaved families and occupations to be prepared
              for Rod Sewell.

Item 4        IMPLICATION FOR OTHER STADIA

              Inspection has taken place at Bramall Lane Stadium
              on 19th April 1989. Perimeter fence to remain, but
              safety gates to be removed. Sheffield United to be
              informed.

              West end terrace at Hillsborough Stadium to remain
              closed at least until the end of the season.

              Task teams established for Bramall Lane, Hillsborough
     y       >and Owlerton Stadia.

     Jr
         V
             David Purchon to be fully informed of the comparisons
             between the requirements of the 'Green Code' and the
                                                                                                \
              specification of the new Don-Vallev'Stadium.----------- --------

Item 5        VENUE FOR INQUIRY

              Possible use of Council Chambers with other rooms as
              required, plus office equipment, telephones etc.

Item 6        MEMBER AND OFFICER BRIEFINGS

              All Member and Officer briefings to be carried out by
              Mark Webster in consultation with DAvid Purchon, Pat                All Members
              O'Neill and David Bownes, as appropriate.

              All reports to programme committees on this issue to
              be submitted first to Policy Committee.                             All Members

Item 7        LICENSING DOCUMENTATION

              The need was emphasised for a thorough, efficient and
              professional presentation of all licensing documentation.
              Work on the preparation of this documentation to                    ______________
              commence immediately by David Bownes to include
              index with cross references, precis and summaries together
              with detailed information and plans. Shirley Lanstone
              to advise and assist regarding the presentation of the
              documentation package.

              Liz Bashforth will be requested to assist with the review           Ms E Bashforth
              and presentation of all legal work including on-site issues.

             Mark Webster to pursue issues relating to the need to                   ^ Webster
             brief Counsel on aspects of the disaster.
                                                                        ACTION

Item 8    INQUEST

          The Coroner's investigations have ceased at present
          on the instruction of Lard Justice Taylor and will probably
          not resume until after the Inquiry has closed.*

Item 9    OTHER ISSUES

          Local Authority to assist Sheffield Wednesdy Football
          Club with cleaning of the Hillsborough gymnasium.

Item 10   FUTURE MEETINGS

          Meetings to be held initially on alternative          days
          commencing Friday 21st April at jMKCa.m.
                                            <?'X>

“^Consideration to be given on whether same venue facilities as for
Inquiry should be used.
                                   CO-ORDINATING GROUP MEETING

                         TO BE HELD AT 9.00 A.M. - 20TH APRIL. 1989 -

                  CHIEF OFFICER’S SUITE. ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARIMENT


                                               A G E N D A

          x                             .
1.            Terms of reference
                                                                  ‘* V ’     ( ******           h<
2.        ^   Media relations
                                                                                         ;- o     ■
3. v' Investigation position and deployment
4.            Sheffield United                 f,go
5. */ Venue for Enquiry                 I U_                                        io

6.    /       Liaison with Inquiry Personnel
                                                                 v' -       . ...        .
7. < Member, Chief Executive Briefings
                                                                        Xcg®'(
8. ^ Licensing documentation £                                   ■v
                                     ____                *3
9. ✓ Inquest                 ^,3". le^Urr
                                            "T— -
10. ✓ Frequency of meetings
11.           Any othet business                                                             //Uf
                                                                                              -■f w» T
                                                                                                     ^n
                                                                                 k/S-
12.           Date of next meeting




P/PO’N/JAH
April, 1989
    R3719                                                                               Sch 9 1 6 0
                                 C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From         I                                         y0     Mr. H. M. Webster, Acting Head
              C                                                  Departme
                                                              c.c. Mr. P. O'Neill, Assistant
Date          19th April, 1989                                      Chief Personnel Officer           S
Ref.
Tel. Ext.     4016                                     Ref.                         £*t1 v>


            Hillsborough Disaster - Coroner's Inquest

            As requested I attended with              :he first day of the Coroner's
            Inquest held at the Sheffield Medico-Legal Centre on the 17th April. Further
            to our preliminary informal discussion I record some of the main points
            which arose.

            Although a number of families were present and there was heavy press
            representation we were able to undertake a low profile watching brief.
            The only legal representatives present at the opening of the inquest were
            Sir Harry Livermore and Mr. Fraser and it would appear from examination
            of the Solicitors' Diary that they are both from the same Liverpool firm,
            Silverman Livermore and Co. and appeared to be representing the families
            of the first six cases dealt with at the inquest together with two further
            cases which would be dealt with the following day.

            The Coroner opened the proceedings with expressions of sympathy and offered
            thanks to a range of parties who had assisted in the hectic arrangements
            which allowed the inquest to open as early as it had. He made reference
            to the judicial inquiry into the case and the resumption of the inquest
            at a later date.  Sir Harry Livermore made some opening remarks on behalf
            of his clients expressing thanks for the Coroner's remarks and extending
            his own thanks to various officers who had dealt with the identification
            stage and then made some brief reference to Liverpool not only being a
            heart broken City but also an angry one particularly in relation to recent
            insensitive remarks made by a UEFA official regarding the behaviour of
            Liverpool supporters.

            The Coroner went on to explain that the inquests were to be opened by documentary
            evidence and that in relation to a file for each case there would be a
            signed statement which he would read dealing with basic particulars including
            the identification of the deceased and broad particulars of the date and
            place of death. He explained that on a case by case basis he would issue
            a burial order and adjourn each particular inquest.

            Sir Harry Livermore and Mr. Fraser withdrew after the first six cases were
            dealt with in this way but following a further exchange regarding the nature
            of the adjournment.   The Coroner explained that it would have to be explained
            to the families that some delay was inevitable and that he would issue
            interim certificates of the fact of death but not be able to issue a final
            certificate until the cause was proved at a later stage.  It was clarified
            that the bodies would be free for disposal following his preliminary burial
            orders. He stated that it was not determined when the inquest would be
            able to be resumed but this would almost certainly be after the inquiry
            being conducted by Lord Justice Taylor.

            A further seven cases were similarly dealt with on an individual case by
            case basis and the proceedings were adjourned for a break after the thirteenth
            case.  It was the intention to deal with virtually half the cases on the
            first day and then resume to deal with the others on the following day
            at the same time.


                                                              Cont'd .
                                    -   2   -




            and I saw no reason to continue for the case by case procedure
as by this stage all the legal representatives and press had withdrawn.
I did mention t<|    [that it may be useful to obtain in a convenient form
the detailed particulars of each case to assist the proposed trust in contacting
the individual families when dealing with the preliminaries to individual
claims for financial assistance from the trust.




JD
                   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989


Key to Photographs


Film 1 - 15.4.8S

1/1    Bent post on barrier 124A
1/2    Rail from barrier 124A
1/3    Bent post on barrier 124A
1/4    Bent spikes to top of perimeter fence in front ofbarrier 124A
1/5    Gate release catch gate 3 of perimeter fence
1/6     Bent back section of perimeter fence wire in front of barrier 125
1/7    Bent section of crush barrier -barrier 128
1/8    Bent up section of perimeter fence wire in front of barrier 128
1/9     Bent back section of perimeter fence wire in front of barrier 128
1/10   Bent section of crush barrier - barrier 137
1/11   Torn off advertisement boards on face of upper stand, above tunnel
        entry
1/12   General view of right hand area
1/13   General view of right hand area
1/14   Barriers 136 and 124A
1/15   View through tunnel entry towards pitch
1/16   Entry to tunnel from rear yard
1/17   General view of right hand area from upper stand
1/18   Bent advertisement holding down strap - upper stand level
1/19   View of control box from West Stand
1/20   Obstruction to gate in brick wall in yard by programme caravan
1/21   Obstruction to gate in brick wall by programne caravan
1/22   Crowd control gates in brick wall in yard


Film 2 - 16.4.89

2/1    Barrier 124A - Sections 1 and 2
2/2    Barrier 124A - Sections 1,2 and 3
2/3    Testing rig on barrier 136 sections 4 and 5
2/4    Pump of test rig - testing barrier 136
2/5    Testing rig on barrier 136 sections 4 and 5
2/6    Barrier 124A end of section 3
2/7    Post of barrier 124A between sections 2 and 1
2/8    End of rail - Barrier 124A , Section 2
2/9    Barrier 124A - Post between sections 2 and 1
2/10   Barrier 124A - End of rail - Section 1
2/11   Barrier 124A - Section 1
2/12   General view of right hand area from pitch
2/13   General view of right hand area from pitch
2/14   Entry to tunnel from rear yard
2/15   Obstruction to gate in brick wall in yard by programme caravan
2/16   Crowd control gates in brick wall in yard
2/17   Entry gate A and turnstiles
2/18   Steel fence in rear yard
2/19   View of tunnel exit - pitch end
2/20   General view of right hand area
2/21   Base of post - section 1, barrier 124A
2/22   Barrier 124A - head of post - section 1
2/23   Barrier 124A - base of post - section 1
2/24   Barrier 124A - head of post - section 22
2/25   Bent spikes to top of perimeter fencing in front of barrier 124A
2/26   Gate release catch - gate 3
                                    - 2 -



Film 3 - 16.4.89

3/1     Entry to upper stand from rear yard
3/2     View through tunnel towards Gate C
3/3     View through tunnel towards pitch
3/4     View through tunnel towards pitch
3/5     General view of left hand area from tunnel exit
3/6      Bent back sections of perimeter fencing in front of barrier 128
3/7      Bent advertisement holding down strap - upper stand level
3/8     Barrier test rig on barrier 136, sections 4 to 6
3/9     Advertisement holding down strap - external face of upper level
3/10    General view of right hand area
3/11    General view of right and left hand sections from upper level
3/12     Radial fencing adjacent to tunnel exit
3/13    Gate release catch - gate 4 in perimeter fence
3/14    Gate 3 in perimeter fence
3/15    Perimeter fence/radial fence in front of barrier     125
3/16     Bent section of barrier - Barrier 128
 3/17    Bent section of barrier - Barrier 137
 3/18    Bent back section of perimeter fencing in front of barrier 128
 3/19    Bent back perimeter fencing in front of barrier 128
 3/20    View to right of central radial fence towards South stand
 3/21     South stand clock
 3/22    West stand - right hand end
 3/23    West stand - left hand end
 3/24    West stand - central section
 3/25     Floral tribute adjacent to post on barrier 125
 3/26     Floral tribute on perimeter fencing in front of barrier128


Film 4 - 16.4.89

4/1      Area to right of tunnel exit
4/2      Removed barrier to right of tunnel exit
4/3      Radial barrier at tunnel exit
4/4      Removed barrier to right of tunnel exit
4/5      Area between tunnel exit and barrier 136A
4/6      Failure of head of support leg to barrier 137 due to testing
4/7      Arrival of Prime Minister and Heme Secretary
4/8      Hone Secretary inspecting terracing
4/9      Prime Minister and Heme Secretary in right hand area
4/10     Bolt from perimeter fence base fastening
4/11     Upstand wall below perimeter fencing showing bolthole

           18.4.89

 4/12    Rear yard looking towards entry to South West pen of west stand
 4/13    Gate C from rear yard
 4/14    Gate B from rear yard
 4/15    Broken ironwork to top of wall adjacent to Gate B
 4/16    Emergency escape from upper levelof West Stand atSouth End
 4/17    Gate fastening to emergency escapefromupper level   ofWest Stand




 ABu/AW
 19.4.89
 KHlADA
                                                                                                   2,0 «4~ °
                         S H E F FIE LD WEDNESDAY



                            WEST TERRACING

                             Comments

    23rd January, 1985       Meeting of the Officer Working Partyand
                             Sheffield Wednesday - there was a
      1-17                   discussion at this meeting about the west
                             stand and terrace "The Club recalled the
                             practice followed in consultation with the
                             South Yorkshire Police of separating home
                             and visiting supporters at the rear of the
                             stand at certain matches (such as with
                             Liverpool) by erecting temporary barriers).
                             This worked well but on all other normal
                             occasions it was the policy of the Police
                             to aim for exclusive use by visiting
                             supporters of the west stand and terrace.
                             On those occasions when the number of
                             visiting supporters were small and the
                             weather was inclement, it was obviously
                             desirable to allow home supporters access
                             to a sheltered area.

                              IT WAS AGREED - (i) that the Club would
                              consider at some future date a scheme for
                              permanent barriers at the rear of the
                              Stand, subject to any proposals being
                              submitted for prior approval by the Officer
                              Working Party in the usual way. ..."

                              There was no comment on the north west
                              terrace.


    9th April, 1985           The next entry on the file is a letter of
                              this date from Eastwood and Partners
         U 1                  indicating that SWFC is anxious to
                              segregate visiting team supporters as they
                              enter the ground and also to enable the
                              police to control their exit at the end of
                              the game (drawing 6705/2 is referred to).


    12th April, 1985          Letters/memos of notification were sent out
                              in respect of an Officer Working Party
                              meeting on Thursday 18th April, 1985 at
                              Niagara.


    18th April, 1985          The Officer Working Party exclusively
    3.83                      considered the matters raised in Eastwood's
                              letter of 9th April and also the question
                              of dividing the terrace itself. It appears
                              t ha t , t h e   d i s c u s s i o n wa s q u i t e   wi de r a n g i n g
                              in-:: k--v                 of the d e c i s i o n     a r e set n u t : -




4
                   C om m ents


                   The proposals now outlined by the Club were
                   generally acceptable to the Police
                   Representative, subject to:-

                   (a) additional gate being provided between
                   the turnstile number 16 and the wall of the
                   inner access road;

                   (b) the central area of the terrace
                   (indicated as a neutral area or visiting
                   supporters terrace being divided in half by
                   new central radial fence running from the
                   tunnel entrance to the pitch side security
                   fence with the gates erected so as to
                   permit entry to be diverted to either half
                   as appropriate (the proposed new secondary
                   radial fence adjacent to the existing fence
                   indicated on the plan to be abandoned);

                   (c) the right hand area of the terrace
                   (indicated as the home supporters terrace)
                   also to be divided in half by a new central
                   radial fence running from back to front
                   with two gates (the existing radial fence
                   dividing the present two terraced areas -
                   neutral area and home supporters - to have
                   a second gate installed;

                   (d) existing pitch perimeter fence to have
                   additional exit gates installed, one in the
                   neutral area and one in the home supporters
                   area."

                   The note goes on to say that both County
                   Fire Service and the Building Authority do
                   not object to the proposals subject to more
                   detailed investigations.

                   Paragraphs 3 of the note indicates that the
                   fire service would assess the means of
                   escape and subject to that clearance the
                   outline proposals submitted by Eastwoods be
                   agreed as amended by the suggestions of the
                   South Yorkshire Police subject to necessary
                   consents.


30th April, 1985   This is a letter from the County Fire
3.84               Service which refers to a drawing 6705/2.
                   The letter gives approval to the scheme
                   subject to minimum width of gates which are
                   indicated on the plan and that these gates
                  Com m ents

2nd May, 1985     This is a carbon copy of the formal letter
3.85              from the County Council to Eastwoods
                  conveying the Officer Working Party's
                  comments on the issue.


8th May, 1985     This is a letter from Eastwoods in response
3.87              to the county letter of 2nd May. It is
                  relevant to quote the second paragraph:-

                  "In the interim period several of the
                  points which you raise had already been
                  incorporated in our later scheme which is
                  yet to be considered by the Club Board.
                  However, I would ask that further
                  consideration should be given to the
                  request in paragraph (c) of your letter for
                  a second gate to be installed in the radial
                  barrier and for the new radial barrier
                  which you have asked for to have two gates.
                  If these gates are meant for use in
                  emergency it will mean having a steward in
                  attendance on each occasion, the expense of
                  which would hardly be justified. It is our
                  view that in the event of emergency,
                  spectators can be evacuated quickly enough
                  by the gates onto the pitch and by normal
                  exit gates at the rear. We will of course
                  be prepared to discuss the matter with the
                  Fire Officer's staff should you so wish."

                  The (c) referred to is contained in the
                  County Council letter of 2nd May.


10th May, 1985    This is a carbon copy of a letter from the
3.88              County to Eastwoods which says "in reply to
                  your letter of 8th May the extra gates
                  referred to in paragraph (c) of my letter
                  ... were included primarily at the request
                  of the South Yorkshire Police.

                  Provided that the remainder of the points
                  raised by the Officer Working Party are
                  incorporated ... the Police are prepared to
                  concede the request for two gates per
                  radial fence in the right hand area of the
                  Leppings Lane end t e r r a c e 11


25th July, 1985   Letter from Eastwoods about the segregation
3.102             visiting supporters at the Leppings Lane
                  end enclosing 6 copies of each of 14
                  documents about segregation.  Plans
                  6 7 0 5 / 1 , 6, 8 a ,   12, 13, 14a and 17 a r e
                  perhaps      t h e most    relevant   here.
29th July
3.103
                   Working Party agreed subject to the
                   necessary consents with the proposals drawn
                   up by Eastwoods that made specific comments
                   as follows
                   Plan 6705/6 (details of the new central
                   fence on the west terrace) the Working
                   Party wanted "... for both security access
                   and emergency egress purposes a pitch
                   perimeter fence gate to be provided ..."

                   Plan 6705/14A New brickwork wall - Leppings
                   Lane end - approved "... so long as
                   increased thickness is achieved by steep
                   slopes as indicated on the plan and not by
                   step arrangements to give foothold
                   proposals are satisfactory but the possible
                   need to take measures on top of the wall to
                   discourage persons from attempting to climb
                   over will have to be borne in mind ..."

                   Plan 6705/17 (details of new radial fence
                   on west terrace) " ___ for both security
                   access and emergency egress a pitch
                   perimeter fence gate to be provided ..."
                   "Stewarding and new gates - as mentioned in
                   my letter of 2nd May, 1985 it is essential
                   that all the new gates are fully supervised
                   by stewards who must be fit, able and
                   properly trained".


30th July, 1985    Letter from SYCC to Eastwoods setting out
3.104              the Working Party's comments.


1st August, 1985   Letter from Eastwoods to the SYCC -
3.109              comments on Council's letter of 30th July.
                   It should be noted that an inspection
                   visit had been arranged for 7th August to
                   the ground. Eastwood expressed some doubt
                   about the location of the proposed extra
                   security gate in the west terrace. The
                   suggestion is that this be clarified at the
                   visit on 7th August.  "????? Mr. Chester
                   says that the Club will certainly not
                   object to the provision of another gate at
                   this point and the precise location can be
                   discussed on 7th August". Mr. Chester was
                   the Club Secretary at that time. Eastwoods
                   also say that in relation to a pitch
                   perimeter fence gate they are not sure what
                   is intended and propose the matter to be
                   discussed on 7th August.  The letter also
                   savs "(j) your comment regarding the
                   stewarding will no doubt, be taken care of
                       r - .vri;'        n;JBMrf&i■           : .-V   :   '   ■ ■ . ..   ■■   ■....



■



                                                                                         .
    7th August, 1985                Working Party Meeting and inspection of
    3.111                           Hillsborough on 7th August.  The meeting
                                    included the usual Council Officers plus
                                    Dr. Eastwood and a Mr. Hough, Deputy
                                    Secretary of the Club. There is fairly
                                    long discussion about the works on
                                    Leppings Lane end which apparently were in
                                    progress at the date of inspection.   The
                                    Building Surveyor expressed concern about
                                    the allegedly poor standard of workmanship
                                    in the construction of the new dividing
                                    wall being built behind the wall.   The
                                    position of the police personal access
                                    gate and the stepping of the face of the
                                    wall by 45 degree chamfers were
                                    acceptable. "On the terrace itself, it was
                                    noted that there was an existing gate in
                                    the new two metre wide gap from the new
                                    radial fence for use by the police. This
                                    gate would still be available for the use
                                    of spectators in an emergency as the gates
                                    at the top of the terrace under the
                                    control of the police would enable
                                    spectators to be directed down the two
                                    metre wide gap. However, it was agreed
                                    that steps or longer gate would be
                                    required. It was also agreed that a new
                                    gate would be required from the new south
                                    central terrace pen".

                                    "IT WAS AGREED

                                    ... (b) that the existing gate in the
                                    pitch perimeter fence should either be
                                    extended or have steps to provide easier
                                    access from the new two metre wide gap
                                    formed by the new radial fence;

                                    (c) that a new gate in the pitch perimeter
                                    fence should be provided from the new
                                    south central terrace pen;"



    12th August, 198                A letter from Eastwoods about the Building
    3.113                           Surveyor's comments in connection with the
                                    alleged poor workmanship on the wall at
                                    the rear of the stand.


22nd August, 1985                   Letter from SYCC to Eastwoods setting out
3.118                               the Building Surveyor's response to Dr.
                                    Eastwood's comments on 12th August.


27th Augus t , 1985                 A f u r t h e r l e t t e r from Ea s t woods a b o u t t he
3. 119                              a l l e g e d poor wor kmans hi p i n t he w a l l .
                                 I..:,:-'- S .:   ■   ■   ;;-c.   ’■:   J"



28th August, 1985
3.120               Surveyor's Division attaching a copy of
                    Eastwood's last letter.




PGT/HSBAAL
i „   '




                                     V-*
I         ^ SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
          >v;.         /.       .'                                              -V '
            FILE NO.        L\-                                                   lS> •*


            PAGE NO.        I




            SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


            DOCUMENT DATE                  SUMMARY OF CONTENTS      REFERENCE


            5th January, 1987              Memo from Health and     4.1
                                           Consumer Services
                                           __________ ) Vehicular
                                           and Pedestrian
                                           Movement on Match
                                           Days

            6th January, 1987              South Yorkshire          4.2
                                           Police letter -
                                           Requirements
                                           Under 1975
                                           Legislation

            13th January, 1987             Head of Administration   4.3
                                           and Legal Department
                                           memo to Land and
                                           Planning (Building
                                           Surveyor) Spion
                                           Cop Development -
                                           Request Views on
                                           Eastwood and
                                           Partners letter
                                           dated 21st October
                                           copy of Health and
                                           Consumer Services
                                           memo on Development
                                           dated 10th November,
                                           1986 sent with
                                           memo

            13th January, 1987             Head of Administration   4.4
                                           and Legal Department
                                           memo to Land and
                                           Planning (Building
                                           Surveyor) - South
                                           Stand Roof refers to
                                           letter sent to
                                           Sheffield Wednesday
                                           re South St and Roof
                                                                                                        YU

                      ■ ■ ; . ■ ■ 5 V . ' - ; . J o S r ? : r y s S 7 - r :' ^ : ‘ s / c ;. v ■




                                                                       4 -.

SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


DOCUMENT DATE                                        SUMMARY OF CONTENTS                          REFERENCE


13th January, 1987                                   South Yorkshire                              4.5
                                                     Police letter -
                                                     Penistone Road
                                                     Entrance Gate 0
                                                     Problems - refers
                                                     to Head of
                                                     Administration
                                                     and Legal Department
                                                     letter dated 30th
                                                     December, 1986

13th January, 1987                                   Head of Administration                       4.6
                                                     and Legal Department
                                                     letter to Mr. H. E.
                                                     McGee - South Stand
                                                     Roof informing of
                                                     General Purposes
                                                     Panel resolution 5th
                                                     January, 1987

2nd February, 1987                                  Copy of M.E.G.S. minute                       4.7
                                                    re - Sheffield Wednesday
                                                    Football Club

18th February, 1987                                 South Yorkshire County                        4.8
                                                    Fire Service letter
                                                    in response to our
                                                    letter dated 3rd
                                                    November, 1986 - 6 page
                                                    letter which refers to
                                                    an inspection on 17th
                                                    November, 1986 refers
                                                    to the whole ground

27th February, 1987                                 Head of A. & L. letter                        4.9
                                                    to Mr. H. E. McGee -
                                                    South Stand Roof
                                                    enclosing copy of
                                                    General Purposes Panel
                                                    minutes for meeting
                                                    2nd Fefcruarv, !3f>‘
     page no.        3




     SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


     DOCUMENT DATE               SUMMARY OF CONTENTS             REFERENCE


     27th February, 1987         Memo from Head of               4.10
                                 A. & L. to Land and
                                 Planning (Building
                                 Surveyor) South Stand
•                                Roof enclose minutes
                                 for G.P. Panel meeting
                                 on 2nd February ask to
                                 be kept informed of
                                 developments in respect
                                 of the roof

     2nd March, 1987             Eastwood and Partners           4.11
                                 letter - Facilities
                                 for the Disabled letter
                                 encloses plans drawing
                                 No. 7771/2A showing
                                 proposed arrangement

     3rd March, 1987            Memo from Head of A. & L.        4.12
                                to Land and Planning
                                (Building Surveyor) Spion
                                Cop Development asks

•                               for views on Eastwood
                                letter dated 21st
                                October and Health and
                                Consumer Services memo
                                dated 10th November by
                                23rd March

     11th March, 1987           South Yorkshire County           4.13
                                Fire Service letter -
                                New Entrance on Penistone
                                Road confirms no objection
                                to proposal as detailed
                                in letter dated 18th
                                December, 1986

     11th March,   1987    j    South Yorkshire County           4.14
                                Fire Service letter -
                                Facilities for the
                                Disabled ~o:— >^-t'




                                                             1



•4
SHEFFIELD


                I



                                                                   ■■•:5-.;'■•■■■•



SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


DOCUMENT DATE               SUMMARY OF CONTENTS        REFERENCE


12th March, 1987            South Yorkshire Police     4.15
                            letter - Facilities for
                            the Disabled comments on
                            proposal

16th March, 1987            Head of A. & L. letter     4.16
                            to Messrs. Eastwood and
                            Partners - New Entrance
                            on Penistone Road
                            informing of possible
                            Building Regulations
                            application and Notice
                            of Demolition Order
                            requirement under the
                            Building Act

16th March, 1987           Hand written internal       4.17
                           memo from the Building
                           Surveyor (Land and
                           Planning) to the Head
                           of A. & L. refers to
                           New Entrance on Penistone
                           Road and some work at
                           Sheffield United confirms
                           no observations to make
                           on proposed new entrance

19th March, 1987           Copy of letter sent to      4.18
                           the Secretary, Sheffield
                           Wednesday Football Club
                           copy from South Yorkshire
                           County Fire Service
                           bottom of letter hand
                           written note showing
                           alterations to Fire
                           Service letter of 18th
                           February
                          C r 'i--'-:'   -               ■ ::- ^ = '   ' v - . " - ' V ‘; -U-. ■■‘■ ■■ ■"' rZ-.r ••<-   • '■■■.>■          ■   .   -   -   '   -V- ■
PILE NO.        if-


PAGE NO.        S ’
 ■               Z;-1:V-'. T.: ■■                     - •;■■■■■■, >;.:yv,-:.'


SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


DOCUMENT DATE                                SUMMARY OF CONTENTS                                                                    REFERENCE


26th March, 1987                             Copy Complement Slip                                                                   4.19
                                             and letter from Eastwood
                                             and Partners dated 20th
                                             March, 1987 re New
                                             Entrance on Penistone Road
                                             asking for Arthur Butler
                                             to deal with this direct

9th April, 1987                              Letter from Eastwood                                                                   4.20
                                             and Partners - North
                                             Stand Roof Resheeting
                                             of Roof

14th April, 1987                             Memo from Health and                                                                   4.21
                                             Consumer Services to
                                             Head of A. & L. -
                                             Facilities for the
                                             Disabled - no objections
                                             to proposal put forward

22nd April, 1987                             2 page letter and attached                                                             4.22
                                             sketch of a locking
                                             mechanism to a sliding
                                             door letter to the
                                             Secretary, Sheffield
                                             Wednesday Football Club
                                             letter details comments
                                             on certain safety works
                                             and also point out that
                                             Fire Service will request
                                             that the sliding gates
                                             incorporated at the ground
                                             be removed at the end of
                                             their useful life and
                                             replaced by outward
                                             opening exit doors -
                                             attached drawing from
                                             Fire Service shows
                                             method of securing sliding
                                             gates against forced
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C   - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


DOCUMENT DATE                SUMMARY OF CONTENTS           REFERENCE


22nd April, 1987            Head of A. & L. letter to      4.23
                            Messrs. Eastwood and
                            Partners - North Stand
                            Roof - request for
                            information of the type
                            of new sheeting to be used
                            on the roof

28th April, 1987             Letter from Messrs.           4.24
                             Eastwood and Partners -
                             North Stand Roof - re type
                             of sheeting to be used

20th May, 1987               Head of A. & L. letter        4.25
                             to Messrs. Eastwood and
                             Partners - Facilities
                             for the Disabled - informs
                             proposals agreed by Police
                             and Health and Consumer
                             Services, Fire Service
                             comments attached -
                             awaiting Building Surveyors
                             comments

21st May, 1987               Head of A. & L. memo          4.26
                             to Land and Planning
                             (Building Surveyor) -
                             Facilities for the
                             Disabled - requesting
                             comments

2nd June, 1987               Letter from Messrs.           4.27
                             Eastwood and Partners -
                             Hillsborough Tavern
                             Entrance Lobby - encloses
                             6 drawings Nod. 9070/1
                             and 2 shows plans and
                             elevations of new glazed
                             entrance lobby
    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


    DOCUMENT DATE              SUMMARY OF CONTENTS                REFERENCE


    3rd Jane, 1987             Letter from Messrs.                4.28



•
                               Eastwood and Partners -
                               Facilities for the
                               Disabled Re Recommended
                               Access Width for Disabled

    3rd June, 1987              Notice of Proposal in             4.29
                                Relation to a Designated
                                Stadium to Chief Fire
                                Officer - copies to
                                Building Surveyor, Police,                        ■
                                Health and Consumer
                                Services - refers to
                                Eastwood's letter 2nd
                                June and plans 9070/1 and 2

    3rd June, 1987              Letter from Messrs.               4.30
                                Eastwood and Partners -
                                Facilities for the
                                Disabled and on reverse



•
                                Notice of a Proposal in
                                                                              X
                                Relation to a Designated
                                Stadium dated 4th June,
                                1987, Notice to Health
                                and Consumer Services,
                                Chief Fire Officer and
                                Building Surveyor asking
                                for comments by 23rd
                                June

    4th June, 1987              Head of A. & L. letter to         4.31
                                Messrs. Eastwood and
                                Partners - Hillsborough
                                Tavern - Entrance Lobby
                                informs circulated copies
                                of proposal to all
                                Safety Advisers
                                                              i
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


DOCUMENT DATE               SUMMARY OF CONTENTS          REFERENCE


15th June, 1987            South Yorkshire Police        4.32
                           letter - Alterations to
                           Tavern Bar - no objection
                           to structural alterations -
                           informs Section 20
                           (Licensing Act 1964)
                           application may be required

15th June, 1987            South Yorkshire County        4.33
                           Fire Service letter -
                           Hillsborough Tavern
                           Entrance Lobby - details
                           works required

22nd June, 1987            South Yorkshire County        4.34
                           Fire Service letter -
                           Facilities for the
                           Disabled - comments on
                           Eastwood's letter and
                           proposal to relax British
                           Standard

24th June, 1987            Memo from Building Surveyor   4.35
                           to Head of A. & L. -
                           informs unable to supply
                           officer time at moment
                           for full survey of the
                           ground - will send a
                           report when complete
                           inspection undertaken

24th June, 1987            Memo from Building            4.36
                           Surveyor to Head of
                           A. & L. - Entrance Lobby
                           to Hillsborough Tavern -
                           informs Building Regulation
                           Application required -
                           unable to accept scheme
                           until application submitted
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


DOCUMENT DATE               SUMMARY OF CONTENTS          REFERENCE


24th June, 1987            Memo from Building            4.37
                           Surveyor to Head of
                           A. & L. - Facilities for
                           the Disabled - comments
                           on Fire Authority viewpoint
                           re British Standard 5810
                           and proposed timber
                           construction of wheelchair
                           facility

6th July, 1987             Head of A. & L. letter to     4.38
                           Messrs. Eastwood and
                           Partners - Facilities for
                           the Disabled - informs
                           of Fire Service and
                           Building Surveyor comments
                           and asks for further
                           comments from Eastwoods

9th July, 1987             Head of A. & L. letter to     4.39
                           Messrs. Eastwood and
                           Partners - Hillsborough
                           Tavern Entrance Lobby -
                           informs of Section 20
                           Application Public
                           Entertainment Licence
                           Condition 13 Application
                           and comments obtained
                           from Fire Service and
                           Building Surveyor

17th July, 1987            Letter from Messrs.           4.40
                           Eastwood and Partners -
                           Hillsborough Tavern
                           Entrance Lobby - informs
                           Applications for Section 20
                           Consent applied for and
                           Building Regulations
                           approval obtained also
                           conments or. er^rgency
                                                                                                 0

                              £ A f = r

         SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


         FILE NO.


         PAGE NO.        \0


         SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


         DOCUMENT DATE               SUMMARY OF CONTENTS          REFERENCE


         17th July, 1987             Letter from Messrs.           4.41
                                     Eastwood and Partners -
                                     Facilities for the
                                     Disabled - response to
                                     objection to build
                                     structure in timber

         27th July, 1987             Memo from Building            4.42
                                     Surveyor to Head of
                                     A. & L. - Facilities for
                                     the Disabled - comments
                                     from Building Surveyor
                                     on Eastwood and Partners
                                     letter dated 17th July,
                                     1987

         12th August, 1987           Head of A. & L. letter        4.43
                                     to Messrs. Eastwood and
                                     Partners - Facilities
                                     for the Disabled and
                                     Hillsborough Tavern
                                     Entrance Lobby - details
                                     fully Building Surveyor
                                     correspondence, asks
                                     Eastwood to liaise with
                                     Mr. Butler direct also
                                     points out no application
                                     for Consent under Public
                                     Entertainment Licence
                                     Condition 13 applied for

         13th August, 1987           Memo from Building            4.44
                                     Surveyor to Head of
                                     A. & L. - Annual Visit -
                                     Sheffield Wednesday
                                     Football Club - details
                                     work
                                                                              V. - y     f'r ■


         18th August, 1987           Memo from Health and          4.45
                                     Consumer Services to
                                     Head of A. & L. - Safety
•   "■
     .
                                     Certification Inspection
         . . . • ...
                                     6th August, 1987 - ; \
                                     details works required          m
                                                                     I
                                                                 1 ’ -ei               qt'
                                             (2a rr
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


FILE NO.


PAGE NO.         1!



SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


DOCUMENT DATE                                 SUMMARY OF CONTENTS                  REFERENCE


18th August,/ 1987                            Letter from Messrs.                  4.46
                                              Eastwood and Partners -
                                              Barrier Testing 1987 -
                                              letter attached to drawing
                                              No. 833411 - details
                                              barriers tested under    >
                                              five year cycle

15th October, 1987                            Head of A. & L. letter               4.47
                                              to Secretary, Sheffield
                                              Wednesday Football Club -
                                              Guide to Safety at
                                              Sports Grounds - 1986
                                              Edition - draws attention
                                              to Chapter 2 of Revised
                                              Guide - Management
                                              Responsibility

23rd October, 1987                            Letter from Sheffield                4.48
                                              Wednesday Football Club -
                                              confirms that in receipt
                                              of a copy of the Guide
                                              and points out that a
                                              Mr. MacKrell is the
                                              Management appointed
                                              Safety Officer

3rd November, 1987                            Hand written note -                  4.49
                                              Station Officer Roger
                                              Woodhouse rang - No work
                                              has been completed re
                                              their letter - has been
                                              informed that Mr. Strange
                                              says he is waiting for a
                                              requirement from the
                                              Committee

17th November, 1987                           Letter from Messrs.                  4.50
                                              Eastwood and Partners -
                                              Facilities for the
                                              Disabled - encloses
            V-   ' V - r ':       ■' y'-'y

                              ■
                                              drawing Nod. 9648/1
                                              detailing latest proposals




                                  '                                   ■
                                                                      ;y.U.i:-t4
               SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


               FILE NO.


               PAGE NO.        IZ




               SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


               DOCUMENT DATE               SUMMARY OF CONTENTS          REFERENCE


               2nd December, 1987          Notice of Proposal in        4.51
                                           Relation to a Designated
                                           Stadium to Building
                                           Surveyor, Fire Service,
                                           Police, Health and
                                           Consumer Services -
                                           Facilities for the
                                           Disabled - refers to
                                           plans No. 94481 - asks
                                           for comments by 17th
                                           December, 1987

               2nd December, 1987          South Yorkshire Police       4.52
                                           letter with a copy of
                                           their letter to Mr. G.
                                           Mackrell re Public Address
                                           System - asks for
                                           appropriate work to be
                                           undertaken to remedy
                                           deficiencies

               4th December, 1987         Head of A. & L. letter        4.53
                                          to Mr. G. Mackrell -
                                          Annual Inspection of
                                          Sheffield Wednesday
                                          Stadium - 6th August -
                                          asks for comments on works
                                          requested

               4th December, 1987         Copy of Schedule attached     4.54
                                          to 4th December letter to
                                          Mr. Mackrell

               15th December, 1987        South Yorkshire County        4.55
                                          Fire Service letter -
                 • \                      Facilities for the
                                          Disabled - comments on
                                          new proposals
                                                                                    I-



                                           .yy ■~yyy:''':
•■■ v .   .,     —


                                                            '
                              t X ' A              f'T

         SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


         FILE NO.


         PAGE NO.        |3




         SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


         DOCUMENT DATE                         SUMMARY OF CONTENTS                         REFERENCE


         22nd December, 1987                   Memo from Health and                        4.56
                                               Consumer Services to
                                               Head of A. & L. -
                                               Facilities for the
                                               Disabled - comments on
                                               proposed open mesh flooring
                                               in proposal

         8th January, 1988                     Head of A. & L. letter                      4.57
                                               to Mr. Mackrell - Annual
                                               Inspection - 6th August,
                                               1987 - asking for a
                                               reply to letters of 4th
                                               December and 22nd April,
                                               1987

         13th January, 1988                    Head of A. & L. letter                      4.58
                                               to Mr. G. Mackrell -
                                               Facilities for the
                                               Disabled - refers to
                                               meeting between Mr. Strange
                                               of Eastwood and Partners
                                               and Council Safety
                                               Adviser - proposed
                                               facilities generally
                                               accepted however asks for
                                               some balastrading to be
                                               erected

         15th January, 1988                    Letter from Messrs.                         4.59
                                               Eastwood and Partners
                                               marked Copy - North Stand -
                                               Facilities for the
                                               Disabled Re Proposed
                                               Guarding - attaches plan
                                               No. 9648/2

■vW:vj




                                               -
                                        Snr:       ^... .....
                         ■        • -                    >;     'V   K'.'-' S 1*- "': .-
              SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


              FILE NO.             Lf-


              PAGE NO.             f




              SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


              DOCUMENT DATE               SUMMARY OF CONTENTS          REFERENCE


              15th January, 1988          Letter from Messrs.          4.60
                                          Eastwood and Partners -
                                          refers to Head of A. & L.
                                          letter dated 8th January
                                          to Sheffield Wednesday -
                                          informs some works being
                                          undertaken or completed -
                                          will inform when ready

              20th January, 1988          Memo from Head of A. & L.    4.61
                                          to Land and Planning -
                                          Road Works on Penistone
                                          Road - refers to
                                          penultimate paragraph of
                                          Eastwood and Partners
                                          letter dated 15th January,
                                          1988

                                          Memo from Head of A. & L.    4.62
                                          to Director of Design and
                                          Building Services - refers
                                          to road works on Penistone
                                          Road - encloses letter
                                          from Eastwood and Partners
                                          dated 15th January

              2nd February, 1988         Memo from Building            4.63
                                         Surveyor to Head of
                                         A. & L. re Stewarding of
                                         Radial Gangways on the
                                         Spion Cop

              2nd February, 1988         Memo from the Building        4.64
                                         Surveyor to the Head of
                                         A. & L. - Facilities for
                                         the Disabled at North
                                         Stand - memo comments on                  I
                                         proposals in detail




J                          -
    > ys;."   ,.:v- .. •"■-■■■ ■
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


FILE NO.    Lr

PAGE NO.




SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


DOCUMENT DATE                     SUMMARY OF CONTENTS           REFERENCE


3rd February, 1988                Letter from Messrs.           4.65
                                  Eastwood and Partners -
                                  Means of Escape in Case of
                                  Fire - refers to our
                                  letters dated 8th January,
                                  1988 and 22nd April, 1987 -
                                  note 7 page letter

8th February, 1988                Head of A. & L. letter to     4.66
                                  Chief Fire Officer -
                                  encloses copy of letter
                                  dated 3rd February, 1988
                                  from Messrs. Eastwood
                                  and Partners - point out
                                  last paragraph of
                                  Eastwood letter which
                                  apparently criticises the
                                  Fire Service - point out
                                  may like to respond
                                  directly, if so please
                                  forward copy of your
                                  letter

10th February, 1988               Memo from Director of         4.67
                                  Health and Consumer
                                  Services to Head of
                                  A. & L. - refers to
                                  Eastwood letter dated
                                  3rd February, 1988 -
                                  comments on items raised
                                  by Messrs. Eastwood and
                                  Partners

7th March, 1988                   Head of A. & L. letter        4.68
                                  to Messrs. Eastwood and
                                  Partners - Facilities for
                                  the Disabled - gives                 v.%::n::   3
                                  Building Surveyor's
                                  comments on proposals -
                                  asks for consideration
                                  and report to.next
                                  Working Party meeting



                         ■:.i v
    SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


    FILE NO.


    PAGE NO.   l(p




    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


    DOCUMENT DATE                  SUMMARY OF CONTENTS         REFERENCE


    22nd April, 1988               South Yorkshire County      4.69
                                   Fire Service letter -
                                   Emergency Lighting -
                                   Simulated Mains Failure
                                   comments on recent test

    9th May, 1988                  Head of A. & L. letter      4.70
                                   to t|               |-
                                   Annual Inspection of
                                   Stadium - confirms
                                   inspection on 19th May,
                                   1988, at 10.00 a.m.

    20th May, 1988                 Letter from Messrs.         4.71
                                   Eastwood and Partners -
                                   North Stand Facilities
                                   for the Disabled - refers
                                   to Head of A. & L.
                                   letter dated 7th March,
                                   1988 also attached is a
                                   second copy letter from
                                   Messrs. Eastwood and
                                   Partners dated 18th May -
                                   informs that facility
                                   for the disabled to be
                                   constructed in close
                                   season and ready for
                                   5th August use

    25th May, 1988                 South Yorkshire County      4.72
                                   Fire Service letter -
                                   Works Required as a
                                   Result of Inspection on
                                   19th May

    3rd June, 1988                  Memo from Director of      4.73
                                    Health and Consumer
                                    Services to Head of
                                    A. & L. - Works Required
                                    as a Result of Recent
■   V.sV'i:                        ■''Inspection



                     .   mp&'.Mi

                                                  ■ '
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


FILE NO.
                Cr
PAGE NO.    (7


SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


DOCUMENT DATE               SUMMARY OF CONTENTS          REFERENCE


2nd August, 1988            Letter from Messrs.          4.74
                            Eastwood and Partners -
                            Barrier Testing 1988 -
                            letter details barriers
                            tested in accordance with
                            five yearly cycle -
                            attached to letter is a
                            front sheet which
                            indicates that this
                            letter was faxed to the
                            Home Office on 17th April,
                            1989

10th August, 1988           Memo from Building           4.75
                            Surveyor to Head of
                            A. & L. - Disabled Ramp
                            to North Stand - confirm
                            drawing now acceptable
                            as proposed slope of ramp
                            has been revised

8th March, 1989            Letter from Messrs.           4.76
                           Eastwood and Partners -
                           Disabled Toilet and
                           Refurbishment of Toilets
                           in the South Stand -
                           encloses 6 prints of
                           drawing 10889/1 showing
                           proposals - ask for
                           Working Party comments

13th March, 1989           Notice of a Proposal in       4.77
                           Relation to a Designated
                           Stadium to Chief
                           Constable, Fire Officer,
                           Building Surveyor and
                           Health and Consumer     >
                           Services - Disabled Toilets
                           etc. - comments by 14th
                           April, 1989
    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C   - DOCUMENT SUMMARY SHEET


    DOCUMENT DATE                SUMMARY OF CONTENTS        REFERENCE


    21st March, 1989             South Yorkshire Police     4.78
                                 letter - Disabled Toilet
                                 and Refurbishment of
                                 Toilets in South Stand -
                                 no objections to
                                 alterations




*
                       THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION                                                    iux i
                                                    LIMITED
                                                    LTMTTED                                        '
                                                    Founded 1863
                                     Patron: Her M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n                         eM > * * *   (C^ (
                                   President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t                 J
                                         Chairman: F. A .. M i l l i c h i p

    ChiefExecutive:                                                                    Phone: 01-4027151/2624542
                                                                                              Telex: 261110
R. H . G. K e l l y   fcis
                                                                                         Facsimile: 01-4020486


                             16LANCASTER GATE, L O N D O N W 2 3LW
  OurRef:      RHGK/MD/PFS/80 .                  -YourRef:                       17th April 1989.



  To:       All Member Clubs




  Dear Sirs,

                                              Re: Ground Safety

       Following the tragic events at Sheffield Wednesday F. C. last
  Saturday, you are instructed to undertake, in conjunction with
  your Local Licensing Authority, an immediate review of ground
  safety.   This should include the perimeter fencing installed, the
  agreed capacity levels of all standing areas and the routes to and
  from the ground.

       A report should then be forwarded to The Football
  Association, stating any immediate action taken to implement
  changes and any longer term measures that you have initiated.
  You should also advise us if no changes have been found necessary.

                                              Yours faithfully




  c. c.        County Football As
                               Associate
               All Senior Leagues




                                  Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W23LW
                                  Incorporated in London Registration Number 17797
                                                                      k w s    e>




                      m m s m m of land m > w m m m

                            m m m mmmsm


FROM:    The Building Surveyor                      REF*   KWGE/AW

TO:                                                DATEs   19 April 1989




Safety of Sports Grounds act - Hillsborough

Will you checic your personal filsss- and extract any relevant material which
shou.ld be within general office file 73 (Sheffield Wednesday), e.g. details
of .barrier tests. . .

toy faat&rial which it "ay be necessary to collect for "the purpose,' of the
public enquiry should be given to. I              *?ho will collate it.




K27ABI
AD-HOC MEETING BETWEEN LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL AND SHEFFIELD CITY CSCTCIL AT
10.00 a.m. - 19TH APRIL 1989 IN COMMITTEE ROOM 2, TOWN HALL, SHEFFIELD




LIVERPOOL'S DELEGATION                          SHEFFIELD'S DELEGATION
            JtW*    */L
Cllr. K Coombs - Leader                         Cllr. Clive Betts - Leader
Cllr. Harry Chase     /                         Cllr. Howard Knight
Cllr. Steve Ledwick '                         ^ Cllr. Mrs Pat Midrgtey    -
Cllr. Jakie Smith                               Cllr. David Skinner
Cllr. IwTempleman                               Mr David Purchon, Director of
Mr Norman Bush - Chief Building                 Health & Consumer Services
                  Surveyor                      Mr Mark Webster, City Solicitor
                                                Mr Pat O'Neill, Asst. Director
                                                                Personnel
                                                Mr Ken Blount - Chief Building
                                                                Surveyor


ITINERARY


10.00   LIVERPOOL'S DELEGATION ARRIVE

10.30   BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE SIGNING CEREMONY -SHEFFIELD UNITED      PLAYERS

11.00   VISIT TO SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY (SUBJECT TO AGREEMENT BYMERVYN        JONES,
        THE ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE, WEST MIDLANDS POLICE)

12.30   BUFFET LUNCH     -   COMMITTEE ROOM




NOTE:       In the event of the Sheffield Wednesday Site Visit not being
            possible, the meeting will re-convene in Committee Room 2.
                                                                                               (Wight learn from -w - , .




                                                                                                                                         --
                                turning home.




                                                                                                                                         £
                   injuries



                 ive ofthe
                iow good
                  situation
               ite simply

               jorses and
               o that are

              fthebehav- IN Q U IR Y boss Lord
             i that it was J u s tic e T a y l o r tod ay              By Bob Westerdale, John Spencer, Linsey
                          promised that fans would
                                                                       McNeill, Claire Trevena and Nigel Morris
             1out a story have their say in the inves­
             .me causing                                                                             was ju s t one o f several
                          tigation into the carnage                                                  major developments in the
                                                                                                     afterm ath o f the tragedy
           ieir normally of Leppings Lane.                                                           which claimed 94 lives.
           i of Liverpool           A ll views a n d factual
                                 comments from Liverpool                                               Inquests on the victims
                                 supporters at the semi-final                                        were due to be opened and
           / some Liver-                                                                             adjourned this afternoon by
           arly as 10am,         would be analysed in detail
                                 by counsel.                                                         South Yorkshire coroner Dr
                                                                                                     Stefan Popper.
          ie side o f our           The inquiry, which could
                                 result in the drafting in o f                                              S afety e x p e rts b egan
                                 150 West Midlands officers,                                             examining the crowd-con-
         aid most o f the        would home in on:                                                       trol barriers at the Hills­
         sed no trouble,                                                                                 borough ground.
                                    • the effect alcohol had
        m was that the           on behaviour,                       .Lord Justice Taylor: will             A nd th e b o a r d o f
        ound until 2.30,            • policing arrangements,                        listen               Sheffield United were meet­
                                    • w hv so m anv fa n s                           they are central ing to discuss the possibility
                                                                           Because iney
         i w fans arriving                                                the issue    and tthere
                                 arrived l.le   a t Hillsborough.                            i S Jare    of removing perimeter fenc­
                                                             . , doubts so far Tunresolved,
        re kick-off.                                                 “         t T   V             ? ing
                                            .,                                                                a t B ram all L ane as
         r will be a major          © a n d how many arnved c h i e f C o n s ta b l e P e te r D e rb y C o u ty — w h ere
         der way today.          without tickets.                    Wright quite properly stood Sheffield Wednesday play
                                           rnpffiriA nt             back from that and asked on Saturday— began to dis-
         Taylor said he                    iiK .uu.K iu             for another force to come mantJsAeif'ftBEinf*—
                                   W est M id la n d s C h ie f in.”                                                 -       '■
                              ■                            5 f r r’    " South Yorkshire, there- / C ru sh b a rrie rs a t th e
      iihute
      t officers who per-
                                rwrr said
                                cover,    Ua L    he held notvm
                                in te rv ie w e d a n y S o u th
                                                                yet jnQuirv
                                                                       H             .
                                                                                                      ''Leppings Lane end of Hills­
                                                                    fore’ ta”ke no Part in ‘VI borough are to be dug up
                                                                                                   > a n d tr a n s p o rte d ac ro ss
     fying the dead after       Yorkshire ofTicer and that it                  Computer                 Sheffield for testing.
     M by South York-                                                K A computer back-up «                T he city council team
 iermxm.                                                                                                leading the investigation
m k s o f SO o f the 94         5n! | f hn t                  .     rn q iiry l which0 w o lfd ^        into the circumstances o f the
                                                                                                        tragedy are to take the bar­
ajm dor officers who           mark  5         th f s ^ th "     runningwithintwo            days'      riers to the H ealth and
■*
                               shire police, they would be                      Justice- Taylor t nd Safety Executive’s labs in
*g a id releasing for          p re p a rin g evidence, a n d M r dear are expected to v                Broad Street, where they
m and Sarah'Louise             putting,)! through to this Hillsborough later today.\                    can be tested to breaking
Middlesex.                     inquiry** he said.                      Their arrival in Shefftel        point          • -      ”• •
-SNOOKER                   The city's traders hope to benefit to the tune of over-TOURISM
& TOURISTS                 £1 million from the forthcoming World Snooker Championships.
LPB 89/850                 (Star 14.4.89)




-WORLD STUDENT GAMES       Both Brightside MP David Blunkett and Councillor Betts have
-RACE RELATIONS:           defended the Council's involvement with the French bank,
 DISCRIMINATION            Banque Paribas.
 AGAINST                   (Star. 14.4.89)
LPB 89/0851




                           HILLSBOROUGH
                           LGIS will retain copies of all reports relating to the tragedy
                           in a special file. Please contact us if you wish to consult i


Please supply me with copies of the following item(s):-


+



NAME ...................................................

ADDRESS OR DEPT .......................................




For urgent items, please phone    73   4750

Return to;-                L.G.I.S
                           Central Library
                           Surrey Street
 Sheffield City Libraries, Surrey Street, Sheffield S1 1XZ                    Telephone: (0742) 734 750

                                                               Local Government Information S e rv ic e ^




                                                             Local Press Bulletin
       17.4.89                                                      Issue No. 70
                                                                                                      R7102

-DISASTERS                    Reports of the tragedy at Hillsborough on Saturday, in which
-FOOTBALL                     at least 94 people have lost their lives.
LPB 89/0843                   (Yorkshire Post 17.4.89 - see footnote)




-COAL                         Attercliffe MP Pat Duffy has strongly criticised British Coal
-DARNALL                      for seeking to delay the start of their opencast mining at
LPB 89/0844                   Tinsley Park.
                              (Star 14.4.89)




-HEALTH                       Rotherham Health Authority has compiled a report, "A Health
LPB 89/0845                   Profile of Rotherham" which shows a clear link between
                              unemployment and a higher mortality rate.
                              (Rotherham and South Yorkshire Advertiser 14.4.89)




-HEATING: COMMUNAL            Tenants of the Norfolk Park estate are to fight plans to
 & DISTRICT                   increase heating charges by 40%.
-HOUSING: TENANTS             (Star 14.4.89)
-PARK
LPB 89/0846




-HOUSING: FLATS               It is hoped that the Environment Minister David Trippier can b|
-CASTLE                       persuaded during today's visit to the city to agree to allow
LPB 89/0847                   the Council to borrow up to £20 million to refurbish Hyde Park
                              flats.
                              (Star 14.4.89)




-POLITICS                     Nine action groups in Rotherham have formed an alliance, and
-ELECTIONS:                   may field their own candidates in the next Council elections.
 LOCAL GOVERNMENT             (Rotherham and South Yorkshire Advertiser 14.4.89)
LPB 89/0848




-SHOPS & SHOPPING             A "retail academy" is to be set up in conjunction with the
-LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT          Meadowhall Centre to train people to work in the retail trade.
 TRAINING                     The news was announced at the Centre's "tipping-out" ceremony
-DARNALL                      attended by Environment Minister David Trippier.
LPB 89/0849                   (Star 14.4.89)
onemeia Wednesday F. £.
  Hillsborough Ground                             First-Aid Room''

                                                                                     : W \
                                                                                     \\***&
                                                                                      \ ^ tP'' '
                                                                                      \ \



                                             NORTH STAND




                                                                                                                   49-54
                    1-16
                                                                                                                   43-40

                   A/G     ■+»
                  St.,


                                                                                I*




                                                                      *» *" J            3 7 « - / i |g
                                 23-28        A                 29-32 33*36 !>>?>.l ..
                                                                     c»          . —dnnnmr
  Tun n^rti r s                  Dfr#cfor» Fnfr*ne*

                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                          r"
