         MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

                                Meeting held 19th February, 1990

Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore (Chair), Baker, Butler, Crowder, Godber, Moore, Mrs.
Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Pye, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.

1 Exclusion of the Public and Press
reso lv ed: That (a) Items 10,11 and 12 on the agenda under the heading Financial Regulation 25B,
Publicity Department and Administration and Legal Department, be taken at the beginning of the
meeting; and
  (b)    the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on such items
on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in Schedule
12A to the Local Government Act, 1972 as amended, as follows—
Item              Paragraph        Reason
10                8                Relating to expenditure proposed for the supply of goods and
                                   services.
11 and 12         1                Relating to particular employees.

2 Financial Regulation 25B
  The Committee received and noted a report of the Director of Design and Building Services
submitted under Financial Regulation 25B in respect of the replacement of windows and other
remedial works at Castle Market Office Block.

3 Publicity Department
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

4 Administration and Legal Department
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the proposed early
retirement of 1




  At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were readmitted to the meeting.

5 Magistrates’ Court
  With reference to the decision made by the Committee at its meeting held on 15th January,
1990 (page 1084 of the printed minutes), the City Treasurer submitted a report on revised
proposals of the Magistrates’ Courts Committee to improve security and the efficiency of heating
and lighting at the Magistrates’ Court and to appoint additional staff with a view to improving
service delivery. The Clerk to the Justices attended the meeting to speak on the proposals.
r e s o l v e d : That, subject to the approval of the Home Office and the inclusion of the necessary
financial provision in this Committee’s revenue budget for the financial year 1990/91, the revised
proposals of the Magistrates’ Courts Committee as outlined in the report now submitted for
improvements in facilities and service delivery at the Magistrates’ Court at an estimated
additional cost to the Council of £10,800 in the financial year 1990/91, be approved.
( n o t e : Councillors Butler and Mrs. Walton declared an interest in the above item and did not
speak or vote thereon.)

6 International and Anti-Apartheid Panel
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes which incorporate the alteration now made at this meeting
be approved—
 Meeting of the International and Anti-Apartheid Panel held 26th January, 1990. Present—
Councillors Pye (Chair), Mrs. Askham, Chadwick and Crowder; Mr. P. Blomfield and Mrs. F.
Deria.
( 1 ) DELEGATION TO BOCH UM , WEST GERM ANY
   The Principal International Officer submitted a report on an invitation to the Lord Mayor to
visit Bochum, West Germany, during that City’s Annual Festival, to which a Sheffield musical
group is also to be invited.
  Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal contained in the report now submitted for
the Lord Mayor, the Mace Bearer and the Chair of this Panel (or his nominee) to visit Bochum
during that City’s Annual Festival which will be held from 25th-29th April, 1990;
  (b) the costs of the visit, other than those being met by the Bochum authorities, be met from
the budget of the International Unit; and
  (c) in view of the substantial saving in time, authority be given for the outward and return
journeys to be made by air.
(2) SH EFFIELD — BOCHUM ECONOM IC CONFERENCE
   With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 24th November, 1989,
(page 944 of the printed minutes), the Principal International Officer submitted a report on
progress in making the arrangements for the proposed Sheffield—Bochum Economic Conference
to be held in Sheffield from 20th-25th March, 1990. The report included a revised programme for
the Conference and revised arrangements for its location and the accommodation of the
delegates.
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
  (b) the revised arrangements contained in the report for the holding of the Conference be
approved.
(3) SOUTHERN AFRICA RESOURCES CENTRE
  Resolved: That (a) the Chair of this Panel (or his nominee) be appointed as the Council’s
representative on the Southern Africa Resources Centre; and
  (b) attendance by a member of the City Council at meetings of the Southern Africa Resources
Centre be recognised as an approved duty for the purpose of the payment of allowances under
Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act, 1972.
(4) LOCAL AUTH ORITIES AGAINST APARTHEID
  The Panel received the minutes of a meeting of the National Steering Committee of Local
Authorities Against Apartheid held on 15th December, 1989, and, arising therefrom—
 Resolved: That (a) a contribution of £750 be made to the funds of the Local Authorities
Resource Unit on Apartheid for the year 1990;
  (b) an all-party delegation of not more than 8 members of the City Council to be nominated by
the Chair of this Panel together with 2 officers be appointed to attend a national lobby of
Parliament to be held on 27th February, 1990, in connection with the Southern Africa Coalition’s
proposed week of action;
  (c) attendance by members of the City Council at the national lobby be recognised as an
approved duty for the purposes of the payment of allowances under the provisions of Section
l77(2)(b) of the Local Government Act, 1972;
  (d) attendance at the national lobby by up to 10 representatives of the black community and
appropriate sports organisations be sponsored by the City Council;
  (e) arrangements be made for a “sign in” event condemning apartheid to be held on the Town
Hall steps on Wednesday, 21st February, 1990, and the Lord Mayor be requested to consider
inviting prominent persons including sports personalities to participate in the event; and
  (f) arrangements be made for an exhibition mounted by the Anti-Apartheid Movement to be
held on Council premises during the Southern Africa Coalition’s week of action in February,
1990.
(5) NELSON M ANDELA RECEPTION COM M ITTEE— BRITAIN
  The Panel received papers on the proposed establishment of a Nelson Mandela National
Reception Committee—Britain and the representative of the Anti-Apartheid Movement
reported on the Movement’s proposals for local activities to mark the occasion in the expected
event of Nelson Mandela’s release from detention.
  Resolved: That (a) the Lord Mayor be requested to convene a Sheffield Reception Committee
to organise events in connection with the release of Nelson Mandela;
  (b) authority be given for a celebration to be held on the Town Hall steps and for the flag of the
African National Congress to be flown on the Town Hall at the time of Nelson Mandela’s release;
and
   (c) Nelson Mandela be invited to visit Sheffield to see the buildings and places, etc. named in
his honour.
( 6 ) COUNCIL A ID
  The Panel received an invitation for the City Council to affiliate to Council Aid, an
organisation of local authorities whose objective is to encourage the provision of informatory and
educational services on issues affecting developing countries and participation in linking and
campaigning activities with a view to securing greater equity in international relationships.
  Resolved: That the City Council take up membership of the organisation Council Aid at the
current annual membership fee of £50.
(7) SEMINAR ON TR A D E LINKS W ITH TO E SOVIET UNION
  The Panel considered an invitation for the appointment of delegates to a Seminar to be held in
Glasgow on 12th and 13th March, 1990, on the development of trade links with the Soviet Union
through town twinning.
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      Resolved: That (a) the Chair of this Panel and an International Officer be appointed as
    delegates to attend the Seminar now mentioned; and
       (b) authority be given for the Council to meet the reasonable expenses to be incurred in
    attending the Seminar by                     the Researcher/Interpreter who is carrying out a
    study for the Sheffield Chamber of Commerce into trading opportunities in the Donbas area of
    the Ukraine.
    (n o te:In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act,
    1972, as amended, the Chair of the Panel (Councillor Pye) decided that the above item should be
    considered as a matter of urgency in view of the need to book places and accommodation before
    the next meeting of the Panel.)
    (8 )   REQUESTS FO R FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
       The Principal International Officer reported on applications for financial assistance.
     Resolved: That (a) a grant of £210 be made towards the cost of a visit to Bochum, West
    Germany, from 14th-21st April, 1990, by 11 students and 3 staff of All Saints School, Granville
    Road;
      (b) a grant of £180 be made towards the cost of a visit to Bochum, West Germany, from
    5th-10th March, 1990, by 12 members of Wincobank Young Women’s Group; and
      (c) a grant of £100 be made towards the cost of a visit from 11th March-19th May, 1990, by a
    member of the Sheffield Esteli Society to Esteli, Nicaragua to participate in a project studying
    infant epidemiolgy.

7 General Purposes Panel
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes be approved—


      Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 5th February, 1990. Present— Councillors Butler
    (Chair), Hussain, Lamb, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.
    Also in attendance— Councillors Cromar, Walayat and Whitfield.
★    ( 1 ) SAFETY O F SPORTS GRO UND S
    Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
      The Panel received and noted the minutes of a meeting of the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Advisory Group held on 6th December, 1989.
    Responses o f the Police to Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Recommendations
      Further to his report to the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd January, 1990, the Head of
    Administration and Legal Department submitted a further report on responses of the Police to
    Lord Justice Taylor’s interim recommendations arising from the Hillsborough Disaster.
      As the South Yorkshire Police had not found it possible to be represented at the meeting, the
    Panel deferred to their next monthly meeting consideration of the report now submitted.
    Visits by Members o f the Panel to Sports Grounds
      Further to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd January, 1990 (page 1089
    of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a further
    report on proposed arrangements for the members of the Panel to attend football matches at
    Hillsborough (Sheffield Wednesday) and Bramall Lane (Sheffield United) Sports Grounds.
      Resolved: That approval be given for the proposed arrangements contained in the report now
    submitted for members of the Panel to attend football matches at the Hillsborough and Bramall
    Lane Sports Grounds.
    Hillsborough Sports Ground—Cracks to West Stand
       The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing copies of a
    letter from the South Yorkshire Police drawing attention to the existence of cracks in the
    concrete structure at the West Stand at Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday), a
    copy of a memorandum from the Building Surveyor indicating that the cracking did not present
    any problem from the structural safety aspect and arrangements had been put in hand for
    appropriate maintenance work in the area, and a copy of a letter to the South Yorkshire Police
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

confirming a procedure for reporting to the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group or the
General Purposes Panel observations of defects at Sports Grounds such as those referred to in the
letter from the South Yorkshire Police.
  The Panel noted the contents of the report now submitted.
Hillsborough Sports Ground—Proposed New Wheelchair Ramp
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal of
Sheffield Wednesday Football G ub to provide a new access ramp for the disabled at the
Hillsborough Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of a memorandum from the Building
Surveyor, a letter from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service and letters to the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club and their consultants regarding the proposal.
  Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration
and Legal Department, in consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in approving the proposal for
the provision of a new wheelchair ramp at Hillsborough Sports Ground as detailed in Plan No.
12186/1, subject to the carrying out also of the works requested by the Building Surveyor in his
memorandum to the Head of Administration and Legal Department now submitted of 6th
December, 1989; and
   (b) the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be required to produce details of their proposed
stewarding arrangements for the accommodation of disabled persons.
Hillsborough Sports Ground—Inspection o f South Stand Roof
   With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd February, 1987
(page 1180 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
a report enclosing a copy of the half-yearly report from the Consulting Engineer to the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club on the condition of the South Stand roof at the Hillsborough Sports
Ground. The report also enclosed copies of letters to the Club and the Consultants.
  Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted of the Consulting Engineers to the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on the condition of the South Stand roof at Hillsborough
Sports Ground be noted; and
  (b) the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be required—
     (i) under the terms of the General Safety Certificate for the Ground to carry out by 30th
     April, 1990, the works detailed in items 2, 3 and 7 of the summary to the report of the
     Consulting Engineers;
     (ii) to adjust by 28th February, 1990, the guy ropes to the commentary boxes on the South
     Stand roof; and
     (iii) to undertake by 30th April, 1990, appropriate repairs to or the removal of the
     commentary boxes.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground—Amendment o f General Safety Certificate
   The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on action taken
to amend the General Safety Certificate issued to the Sheffield United Football Club to
allow 12,960 spectators on the Spion Kop at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground, an increase
in spectator capacity of 1,920. The report enclosed a copy of a notice of amendment of the
General Safety Certificate and a copy of a letter to the Sheffield United Football Club
drawing attention to work required to be carried out to barriers at the Ground.
  Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of
Administration and Legal Department, in consultation with Councillor Mrs. Nelson, in
amending the General Safety Certificate issued in respect of the Bramall Lane Sports
G round;and
  (b) the remedial works to barriers mentioned in the letter to the Sheffield United
Football Club now submitted be required to be carried out by 28th February, 1990.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground—Storage o f Liquified Petroleum Gas
  With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November,
1989 (page 946 of the printed minutes) to approve, subject to the agreement of the Director
of Health and Consumer Services and the Chief Fire Officer, proposals for the construction
of a storage compound for liquified petroleum gas at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

(Sheffield United), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report
enclosing copies of letters from the Sheffield United Football Club indicating that, in the
interests of safety, the Club proposed to replace the use of liquified petroleum gas by that of
electrical power and that, in the meantime, the Club would ensure that the caterers
removed all liquified petroleum gas cylinders from the Ground immediately after every
home game.
 Resolved: That the following recommendations of the Safety of Sports Grounds
Advisory Group, set out in the report now submitted, be implemented by the Sheffield
United Football Club—
  (a) liquified petroleum gas should not be allowed onto the premises of the Bramall Lane
Sports Ground after the end of the current football season; and
  (b) the Sheffield United Football Club be required, under the terms of their General
Safety Certificate to record—
      (i) the number of liquified petroleum gas cylinders brought into the Bramall Lane Sports
      Ground each day and the number removed from the Ground each day; and
      (ii) that an independent person has checked that all liquified petroleum gas cylinders have
      been removed from the Ground after each football match.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground—Emergency Lighting
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing a copy of a
letter from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service which made recommendations for
improvements to the emergency lighting system at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield
United).
   Resolved: That the Sheffield United Football Club be required under Condition 41 of the
General Safety Certificate issued in respect of the Bramall Lane Sports Ground to submit to the
City Council, by 30th April, 1990, schemes for improvements and extensions to the emergency
lighting system at the Ground which take full account of the comments made by the Fire Service
in their letter to the Council dated 21st December, 1989.
Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton)—Works to Greyhound Terrace
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing a letter from
the Consulting Engineers to Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited giving details of proposed
upgrading works to the Greyhound Terrace at the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton).
  Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposals for the carrying out of upgrading works
to the Greyhound Terrace at Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) as detailed by the Company’s
Consulting Engineers, Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, in their letter to the Council of 15th
December, 1989, subject to any requirements of the Building Surveyor in the matter; and
  (b)    the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to consult with Mr.
Strange of Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on the requirements for inspection and survey of the
Greyhound Terrace Bar.
( n o t e : At this point in the proceedings, the Panel expressed their concern at the poor attendance
of members of the opposition parties at meetings of the Panel when important items relating to
the safety of sports grounds were being considered.)
(2) W ORLD STUDENT GAMES
  The Panel received and noted a report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department
on safety certification and safety licensing requirements for the facilities in the city which were to
be used for the World Student Games in 1991.
(3) CITY HALL
  With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 30th October, 1989
(page 808/809 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department
reported further on the situation regarding the structural safety of the City Hall roof and that a
ceiling certificate had now been issued in respect of the building.
  The Panel noted the information now reported.
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

★    (4) GAM ING A C T , 1968— AMUSEMENTS W ITH PRIZES
    Council policy relating to gaming machines
       The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on Council policy in
    relation to the provision of gaming machines in premises other than amusement arcades in the
    City. The report indicated that the effect of the Panel’s resolution of 5th September, 1988 was to
    permit the provision of gaming machines only in premises which are used wholly or mainly for the
    sale of food and drink and have reasonable facilities set aside for their consumption on the
    premises.
      Resolved: That (a) so much of the resolution passed by this Panel at its meeting held on 5th
    September, 1988 (page 521 of the printed minutes) as relates to the granting of permits under
    Section 16 of the Lotteries and Amusements Act, 1976 and Section 34 of the Gaming Act, 1968,
    be rescinded;
      (b) for a trial period of six months, individual applications for the granting of such permits be
    considered by this Panel; and
      (c) any permit granted or renewed in respect of premises other than amusement arcades under
    Section 34 of the Gaming Act, 1968 during such trial period shall contain a condition limiting to
    one the number of machines which may be made available for gaming on the premises concerned.
    Tinsley Transcafe, Shepcote Lane, Sheffield
      The Panel considered an application for the grant of a permit for the provision of amusements
    with prizes at the Tinsley Transcafe, 1A Shepcote Lane, Sheffield, consideration of which
    application had been deferred by the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd January, 1990. The
    applicant attended the meeting to support his application.
      At this stage in the proceedings, the Panel
       Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before a decision is made on
    the application now under consideration on the grounds that, in view of the business to be
    transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
    information as described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act,
    1972, as amended, relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons and legal matters
    and advice.
      The Panel then considered the application for the grant of a permit for the provision of
    amusements with prizes at the Tinsley Transcafe, 1A Shepcote Lane, Sheffield.
      Resolved: That the application now submitted be granted for a period of three years in respect
    of one gaming machine only.
      At this stage in the proceedings the public and press were readmitted to the meeting.
    (5) PUBLIC ENTERTAINM ENT
      The Panel deferred, at the request of the applicants, consideration of an application to renew
    the public entertainment licence issued in respect of The Locarno Nightclub, London Road,
    Sheffield.
    ( 6 ) SMALL LOTTERY
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application for
    registration under Section 5 of the Lotteries and Amusements Act, 1976 in respect of the
    organisation Children’s Leukaemia Appeal. The meeting was attended by representatives of the
    organisation and their Solicitor.
      Resolved: That consideration of the application now submitted be deferred pending the receipt
    of further information regarding the nature of the organisation concerned.
      At this stage in the proceedings, the Panel
      Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting during consideration of the
    next item of business which relates to individual applications connected with hackney carriage
    and private hire licensing, on the grounds that, in view of the business to be transacted, if the
    public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as
    described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as
    amended, relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons and legal matters and
    advice.
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

★ (7) HACKNEY CA RRIA G E AN D PRIV ATE H IR E LICENSING
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on six individual cases
  relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing. All the applicants concerned attended the
  meeting to speak on their cases.




       A t this stage in the proceedings the public and press were readmitted to the meeting.
    ( 8 ) SHEFFIELD H EA LTH AU TH ORITY
      Resolved: That Councillors Ms. Robinson and Steinke be re-appointed to serve on the
    Sheffield Health Authority for the four year period commencing 1st April, 1990 when their
    existing appointments expire, or until such time as the new appointments are terminated by
    legislation currently passing through Parliament.
    (9) JOHN M OLLOY CHARITY
      Resolved: That Councillor Mrs. Mulheam and Mr. C. B. Macdonald be re-appointed as
    representative trustees of the John Molloy Charity for a period of four years with effect from 7th
    March, 1990.
★     (10) FILM CERTIFICATION
       Resolved: That the requests contained in the report of the Senior Film Officer, now submitted,
    to exhibit the following films in the categories indicated be granted—
    Film                                         Former Category             Proposed Category
    The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari                        “A ”                    “Sheffield 12”
    Nosferatu                                      Uncertificated              “Sheffield 12”
    Diamonds in Brown Paper                        Uncertificated              “Sheffield U ”

8 Trading Services Panel
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes be approved—


     Meeting of the Trading Services Panel held 6th February, 1990. Present— Councillors
    Ms. Fiore (Chair), Butler, Crowder, Lamb, Moore and Mrs. Nelson.
    (1 )   CENTRAL SUPPLIES ORGANISATION
    Staff Training and Development
       The Principal Training and Development Officer submitted a report on the proposed staff
    training and development plan for the Central Supplies Organisation for the financial year
    1990/91.
      MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Resolved: That the staff training and development plan for the Central Supplies Organisation
  for the financial year 1990/91 as set out in the report now submitted be approved.
★ Tenders for Supplies
    The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted reports on tenders received for the
  supply of frozen meals (4 tenders) and sweets, chocolate, crisps, nuts, etc., (2 tenders) for the
  Council Departments.
    Resolved: That (a) the tender now submitted by Deep Freeze Supplies (Flow Food Limited) of
  Manchester for the supply of frozen meals to the Council Departments be accepted for a period
  of one year commencing 1st March, 1990; and
    (b)   the tenders now submitted of Jacobs Bakery (Nabisco) Limited of Reading and P. J. Shaw
  and Son Limited of Sheffield for the supply of sweets, chocolates, crisps and nuts, etc., to the
  Council Departments for the two year period commencing 1st March, 1990, be accepted.
  Conference
    The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on a Conference on “The
  Purchasing Challenge” which was to be held in London on Tuesday, 13th March, 1990, and to be
  organised jointly by the Association of Metropolitan Authorities, the Association of County
  Councils, the Association of District Councils and the Institute of Purchasing and Supply.
   Resolved: That the Chair, or her nominee, be appointed as a delegate to attend the
  Conference now mentioned.
     At this stage in the proceedings, the Panel—
     Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
  place on the following item of business relating to the retirement, in the interest of the efficiency
  of the service, of an employee on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
  transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
  information as described in paragraph 1 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as
  amended, relating to a particular employee.
  Staff Retirement
    Resolved: That in the circumstances outlined in the report of the Chief Purchasing and
  Supplies Officer now submitted, approval be given to the granting to the officer now reported of
  early retirement in the interest of the efficiency of the service with the maximum permitted added
  years and payments appropriate to his case in accordance with the Local Government
  Superannuation (Compensation for Premature Retirement) Act, 1982.
    At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were readmitted to the meeting.
  Retirement o f \
    The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on the forthcoming retirement,
  with effect from 30th March, 1990, of ^
    Resolved: That this Panel places on record its appreciation of the valuable services rendered to
  the present and former City Councils bv
  over a period of 30 years, extends to Iv        its best wishes for a long and happy retirement and
  directs that a copy of this resolution under the Common Seal be presented to him
  Monitoring o f the Revenue Budget
    The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on the monitoring of the revenue
  budget for the Central Supplies Organisation.
    Resolved: That (a) the details contained in the report now submitted be noted; and
    (b)     the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be requested to report back to this Panel at its
  next meeting on the situation regarding the budget for the Municipal Laundry and on the likely
  future financial position of the Laundry up to the financial year 1992/93.
  (2) CENTRAL TRANSPORT SERVICE
    The Transport Manager submitted a report on the monitoring of the revenue budget for the
  Central Transport Service. He also reported on the situation regarding the development of the
  Service.
     MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  The Chair pointed out that this would be the last meeting of the Panel to be attended by the
present Transport Manager before he left the Council’s employment to take up a post in the
private sector.
   BftsfilvftH- That fal thp rnntftnts <vf tVi«» r*»nnrts now submitted be noted; and
                                                 be thanked for his work for the City Council and
be offered this Panel’s best wishes for success in his future career.
(3) DESIGN AN D PRINT
  The Panel received and noted a report of the Manager of Design and Print on the monitoring
of the revenue budget for his Trading Service.
  At this stage in the proceedings, the Panel—
  Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
place on two items of business relating to a grant of leases of sales units at Parkway Wholesale
Market and the report of the Director of Land and Planning on land and property transactions on
the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in
paragraph 9 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as amended, relating to terms
proposed for the disposal of property.
(4) MARKETS
Parkway Wholesale Market
  Resolved: That approval be given to the terms contained in the report now submitted of the
General Manager, Markets, for the grant of leases of warehouses 38/39 and fruit and vegetables
sales unit 60 at Parkway Wholesale Market.
Land and Property
  Resolved: That approval be given to the terms contained in the report of the Director of Land
and Planning now submitted, for the renewal of a lease of 2b and 3 North Gallery, Castle Market
and a rent review of 24 Exchange Street adjoining Sheaf Market.
  At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were readmitted to the meeting.
Staff Training and Development
   The Principal Training and Development Officer submitted a report on a proposed staff
training and development plan for the Markets Undertaking for the financial year 1990/91.
  Resolved: That the staff training and development plan contained in the report of the Principal
Training and Development Officer now submitted, be approved.
Report on Action Taken
  The Panel received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, on action taken
under delegated powers.
Revenue Budget
  The Panel received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, on the monitoring of
the Revenue Budget for the Markets Undertaking.
Parkway Wholesale Market—Abandoned Vehicles
  The General Manager, Markets, submitted a report on problems which arose from vehicles
abandoned on Markets’ premises, particularly at Parkway Wholesale Market.
  Resolved: That authority be delegated to the General Manager, Markets, to take all necessary
action including the serving of all appropriate notices to secure the removal from Markets’
premises of abandoned vehicles and other property.
Review o f Charges
  Resolved: That the proposed revised charges contained in the report of the General Manager,
Markets, now submitted for stalls in the retail open markets, car parking and hand truck spaces at
the Markets to be levied with effect from 1st April, 1990, be approved.
( n o t e : A copy of the report of the General Manager, Markets, will be sent to each member of the
City Council with the printed minutes.)
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

   (5) VULCAN CATERING
   Revenue Budget
     The Assistant Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the
   monitoring of the Revenue Budget for Vulcan Catering.
     Resolved: That the appropriate officers—
      (a) be authorised to commence negotiations with the in-house trade unions on proposals to
   close the bar in the Vulcan Restaurant;
     (b) be requested to report back on the financial position of the vending service;
    (c) introduce as from 12th February, 1990, price increases averaging 10% in the Vulcan
   Restaurant and the adjoining Waitress Service Restaurant; and
     (d) be requested to consider the price increases to be applied to the remaining catering
   activities with effect from 1st April, 1990.
     A t this stage in the proceedings, the Panel—
     Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
   place on the remaining item of business on the agenda on the grounds that, in view of the nature
   of the business to be transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure
   to them of exempt information as described in paragraph 1 of Schedule 12A to the Local
   Government Act, 1972, as amended, relating to a particular employee.
   Regrading and Redesignation o f Post
     Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the report of the Assistant Head
   of Administration and Legal Department, now submitted, for the redesignation and regrading of
   a post of Shorthand/Audio Typist (Scale 2) in the Catering Service to Word Processor/Clerical
   Officer (Scale 2/3) with effect from Monday, 5th February, 1990.

9 Land and Property
r e s o l v e d : That approval be given to the terms contained in the report of the Director of Land and
Planning now submitted, for the use of accommodation provided by the Planning and
Transportation Programme Committee at Trafalgar Works, Trafalgar Street, for the storage of
ballot equipment.

10 Enforced Tendering—Catering other than School and Welfare Catering
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the proposed timetable
for the letting of the contract for “Catering other than School or Welfare Catering” in accordance
with the requirements of the Local Government Act, 1988. The report indicated that it was
proposed that the Policy Committee at its meeting to be held on 27th February, 1990, would
delegate to the various Programme Committees concerned, powers to approve the relevant parts of
the specification.
reso lv ed: That the timetable contained in the report now submitted for the letting of the above
contract be approved so far as this Committee is concerned.

11 Central Transport Fleet—Replacement of Vehicles
  The Transport Manager submitted a report on six quotations which he had received for the
replacement of vehicles in the Central Transport Fleet.
reso lv ed : That (a) subject to the approval by the Finance Sub-Committee (Policy) of the Project
Report Form CP3 in respect of the scheme, authority be given for the placing of orders for the
supply of seven welfare vehicles with T. C. Harrison of Sheffield (chassis) and Mellors of Rochdale
(bodywork) at a total estimated cost of £183,780 to replace old vehicles in the Central Transport
Fleet, in accordance with the details contained in the report now submitted;
  (b) in the circumstances now reported, the provisions of Standing Order 40(1) be excepted in this
case; and
  (c) the Project Report Form CP3 now submitted in respect of the financing of the purchase be
approved for submission to the Policy Committee.
