       S H E F F I E L D    C I T Y    C O U N C I L

     MEETING OF THE POLICE AND COMMUNITY SAFETY PANEL
                         (POLICY)

                held 11th September,   1989


PRESENT:   Councillors Cromar (Chair), T. A. Bower, Chadwick,
           Crowder, George and Whitfield.




MINUTES OF LAST MEETING
           The Panel received the minutes of its meeting held on 10th
July, 1989 and, arising therefrom, it was noted that:-
           (a) the report on racial harassment referred to in Item
(1) of such minutes would be available for the next meeting of the
Panel; and
           (b) with regard to Item (2) of the minutes, further racial
attacks had taken place, the police had given an assurance that firm
action would be taken in respect of such attacks and investigations
were being carried out into what action could be taken by the City
Council.

ADVISERS TO THE PANEL
          The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
reported on the resignation of Ms. J. Khan as adviser to the Panel.
RESOLVED: That (a) the appreciation of this Panel be extended to Ms.
Khan for her contribution to the work of the Panel; and
          (b) the Probation Service be invited to nominate another
black member of the Service to replace Ms. Khan as adviser to this
Panel.

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
          Members of the Panel who were also members of the South
Yorkshire Police Authority reported on meetings of the Authority
held on 14th and 18th August, 1989 and it was stated that:-
          (a) the meeting on 14th August had been called to consider
(i) the interim report by Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillsborough
Disaster and (ii) the offer of resignation by the Chief Constable;
          (b) in relation to item (i), it had been agreed to note
the recommendations and to request that a detailed report on the
implications on the responsibilities of' the Police Authority be
submitted within one month;
          (c) in relation to item (ii), following the disaster, the
Chief Constable had accepted full responsibility for police action
in connection with Hillsborough and, therefore, he felt he had to
offer his resignation.  The Taylor Report said that the main reason
for the disaster was failure of police control.   Of the three City
Council members present at the meeting, Councillor George voted not
to accept the offer of resignation and Councillors Cromar and
Whitfield had abstained; and
          (d) at the meeting held on 18th August, the Chief
Constable outlined recent documents in relation to the Taylor
Inquiry and reported that a Criminal Inquiry would now take place.
          The Panel noted the information reported.
      Meeting of the Police and Community Safety Panel             Page 2
      (Policy) 11 .9.89



(4)   COMMUNITY SAFETY - DISCUSSION PAPER
                The Panel received and noted a paper which had been
      presented by the Police and Community Safety Unit to the Association
      of Metropolitan Authorities Working Party on Crime Prevention and
      which, it was understood, would be included as part of the
      Associations’ discussions with the Home Office on a new Circular
      relating to this matter which was to be produced some time during
      1990.

(5)   SUMMER MOTOR CYCLE PROJECT
                The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
      submitted a report (a) on a second Motor Cycle Project which had
      recently been completed to provide biking activity and training for
      young people in a safe environment and (b) containing suggestions
      for the further development of such work.
      RESOLVED: That (i) the information contained in the report now
      submitted be noted; and
                (ii) this Panel supports the further development of
      multi-agency working on the lines indicated in the report to provide
      long-term alternatives to illegal motor cycling, particularly in
      relation to young women, black people and young people in socially
      deprived areas.

(6)   EDUCATIONAL SUPPORT GRANT PROJECT ON SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
                The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
      submitted a report on a pilot project being carried out at a number
      of schools in Sheffield to promote social responsibility among young
      people with funding provided jointly by the Department of
      Education and Science and Education Programme Committee.
      RESOLVED: That (a) the information contained in the report now
      submitted be welcomed;
                (b) support be given to the future monitoring and
      evaluation of the Project through the Police and Community Safety
      Unit, in conjunction with project workers and the Steering Group;
      and
                (c) the report be referred to the Education Programme
      Committee with:-
            (i) an expression of the concern felt by this Panel at the
                criteria used for the selection of the Project area in
                terms of the social and economic conditions and the racial
                composition of the area; and
           (ii) recommendations that (A) funding for the Project be
                extended for a further three years and (B) in the event of
                such extended funding being received specific attention be
                paid to anti-racist training within the Project.

(7)   DOMESTIC VIOLENCE WORKING GROUP
                The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
      submitted a report on progress made by the Domestic Violence Working
      Group in the production of a training programme and materials on
      domestic violence for use with statutory agencies.
      RESOLVED: That (a) the progress made on the production of the
      Training and Information Pack on Domestic Violence, as detailed in
      the report now submitted, be noted; and
                (b)            the organisation of the pilot multi-agency training on
      domestic violence be endorsed and approval be given to the making of
      a contribution of £500.00 towards the cost of its completion, such
      contribution to be met from within the existing Revenue Budget.
       Meeting of the Police and Community Safety Panel              Page 3
       (Policy) 11.9.89




 (8)   COMMUNITY SAFETY TRAINING FOR CLEANSING OPERATIVES
                 The Panel received and noted a verbal report of the
       Director of Cleansing Services on the progress of the development of
       a project to provide (a) community safety training for refuse
       collectors in Sheffield and (b) the necessary equipment to enable
       collectors to carry out such activity.

 (9)   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - DIVISIONAL REVIEW PANEL
                   The Panel received and noted the minutes of the meeting of
           tipti (Sheffield North) Divisional Review Panel of the South
       Yorkshire Police Authority held on 13th July, 1989.

(10)   EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
       RESOLVED: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting
       before discussion takes place on the remaining items of business on
       the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
       transacted, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
       information described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 12A to the Local
       Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to
       Information) Act 1985, relating to a particular applicant for
       financial assistance.

(11)   STUDENT PLACEMENT - BURSARY
       RESOLVED: That approval be given to the arrangements detailed in the
       report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department now
       submitted for the making of a bursary payment of £1,500.00 to the
       student named in the report from the Public Administration Course at
       Sheffield Polytechnic who is working for one year in the Police and
       Community Safety Unit.
