         FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

         10TH MAY 1989


         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER/INVOLVEMENT OF F. & C.S. STAFF/PROPOSALS FOR FUTURE
         ACTION


         1. INVOLVEMENT OF F. & C.S. STAFF

           In the afternoon and evening of Saturday, 15th April and on Sunday,      16th
           April over 150 F. & C.S. staff were active in giving support and
           assistance to victims and relatives of the Hillsborough Disaster.

            Help given during this period included:-

                Counselling relatives and friends of bereaved and injured people.

            -   Assisting Police in organising reception and support of relatives
                coming to Sheffield to identify people in hospital or who had died.

                provision of transport and food in support of the above.


            Since the weekend of the disaster there has also been substantial ongoing
            involvement s-

                Support and counselling to people in Sheffield who have been severely
                shocked by their experience of the disaster, including people who were
                close witnesses of the events or involved in helping.

                Support and counselling to people from Merseyside and other Local
                Authorities coming to Sheffield to visit relatives or friends in
                hospital or visit the football ground again.

                Follow up work and liaison with other Local Authorities over continued
                help to people who had been in Sheffield and who had been helped by or
                in contact with Sheffield F. & C.S.

            This ongoing staff work has been co-ordinated by a task team set up and
            based in the Hillsborough F. & C.S. Divisional Office.  A review of the
            Department’s contribution to emergency services in major disasters has
            also been initiated and reports consequent on this review, will be
            presented in due course.

         2. PROPOSALS FOR FUTURE ACTION

            From their experience over the past three weeks it is the recommendation
            of the temporary task team that a task team needs to operate for a longer
            period; some months, and if necessary up to a year.

            This recommendation takes account of the advice we have received from the
            Kent Staff involved in the Zeebrugge Ferry disaster and Bradford Staff
            involved in Bradford City Football Club fire.




RPTABP
The prime focus of such a team would be ongoing work with people from
Sheffield.  There is a secondary focus of work, which is to support
Liverpool Social Services Department in anyway possible in their work
with bereaved families, or families of those injured (physically or
emotionally). The only possible exceptions to this would be families
from outside Liverpool whose choice it was to work directly with
Sheffield.

We know that there will be key times in the future when support to
Liverpool Social Services Department will be more intense;- e.g. when the
enquiry findings are made public;  at the C o r o n e r ’s Inquest or on
Anniversaries.  To some extent this work can be planned for in advance
because dates will be known.

All such work is as a support to Liverpool and secondary to the primary
focus.

The Task Team are of the opinion that the primary focus needs to
concentrate on Sheffield residents.  There are considerable numbers
involved:-

   Sheffield Wednesday F. C. Staff - 600

   Sheffield Wednesday supporters at the game - 1000

   Local Residents who offered help;          cannot be estimated at this moment.

   Red Cross staff - not known as yet.

   St. J o h n ’s Ambulance Staff - 3 5 + 2   ambulances.

   South Yorkshire Police - 1111 (257 inside the ground) and unspecified
   number of special constables.

   Staff from F. & C.S.  and other helping professions, including clergy
   estimated conservatively at 300 plus environmental health/mortuary
   staff.
   (Some of these agencies will probably prefer to provide counselling
    within their own organisations)

The impact on such numbers, because of the sudden violent way in which it
happened, will have an effect on the Mental Health of-the Community.

The Task Team believed that the on-going work following the disaster
should be seen in Mental Health Prevention terms.   If this does not
happen it seems certain that some of the people in the groups above will
go into crisis at some future date.  We are informed that research shows
that some people can become chronic depressives if not helped in a
pro-active way.

One of the impressive features since the disaster is the amount of work
being done by Voluntary Organisations, the Churches, Area Health Staff,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the Local Authority.  There is so
much being done that one of the problems is co-ordinating, because
sometimes it is being done by individual organisations or sometimes in
pairs.
         The temporary Task Team are convinced that there is a need to consider
         the setting up of a longer term Task Team initially for six months, to be
         extended as required if proved to be necessary, to establish a Mental
         Health Prevention Service to Sheffield residents affected by the
         Hillsborough Disaster, and to act as a support service to Liverpool
         Social services Department and other Local Authority Social Services
         Departments affected by the events at Hillsborough on the 15th April 1989

         However the Temporary Task Team would want to ensure the ongoing
         commitment of Voluntary Organisations, the Churches, Area Health and
         Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

         The following is therefore proposed:-

         1.   The setting up of a Steering/Advisory Group with representatives of
              Voluntary Organisations;  the Churches; A.H.A;   Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club;  The Local Authority and the South Yorkshire Police if
              they wish to participate.

              This Group’s remit would bes-

              "To advise the Manager and Task Team Leader about important issues in
              order to co-ordinate the range of services needed".


         2.   The setting up of a permanent Task Team for one initial period of six
              months comprising of:-

              1 Team Leader (preferably with Mental Health
              Training) POld/e                                       £17,267)
                                                                             )
              3 - Level 3 Social Workers equivalent but able to                  )
              offer group work and community work skills             £45,349).
                                                                             )
              1 Admin Officer scale 6                                £12,852)
                                                                             )
              3 Clerks Scale 2/3                                     £27,000)
                                                                             )
              Printing,   stationery, postages and telephones         £5,000)
                                                                             )
              Computer costs                                          £3,000)

                                          TOTAL including on-costs   £110.468 full
                                                                              year
                                                                              costs

                                                 six months costs     £55,234




         It is also proposed that the District Health Authority should be asked to
         second a psychologist to work with the team.  Where possible existing
         staff would be seconded to these posts and replaced by temporary
         appointments

         A further sum of money needs to be identified for running costs and some
         initial training in Stress De-briefing Techniques.




RPTABP
          A review of the work, remit and composition of the Task Team should be
         conducted at quarterly intervals so that the Staffing levels and suppport
         costs can be adjusted as necessary.




         3.   This team should be based in Hillsborough (possibly at the Library in
              the rooms currently occupied by Helpline) and accountable to the
              Divisional Officer, Division 2, through to Assistant Director
              (Operations).




         RECOMMENDATION

         That approval in principle is given to establish  a task team and that
         the Director of Social Services be asked to bring forward detailed
         proposals at the earliest opportunity and to initiate discussions with
         the City Treasurer to advise on appropriate means of financing these
         proposals.




         NVK/SMJ
         3.5.89




RPTABP
