H lU S b lA c fU C rfl   V liA s T b Y Z   C c ^ lflg ifO   ^ O   e ^ a j'



Pice (3)
                                                     r^ M .     I V c




 T H E   H I L L S B O R O U G H   S T A D I U M   D I S A S T E R

                         15th April, 1989




Recommendations to the Inquiry on behalf of Sheffield City Council
                           I N T R 0 D U C T I 0 N




These recommendations and suggestions have been drawn together from

representatives with various interests within Sheffield City Council.


They are submitted having taken time to assess the effect of the

Hillsborough Disaster, the Inquiry and the Interim Recommendations of Lord

Justice Taylor which are being implemented in Sheffield.
Clarification and Codification of Legislation

If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the
existing legislation then the opportunity could be taken to codify and
clarify the legislation.

The provisions, which are currently contained in the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975, the Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987,
various Regulations and statutory guidance could be remodelled to create one
Act and Regulations (with functional statements) requiring certain standards
to be achieved.

Improvement/Prohibition Notices

The 1975 legislation (as amended) makes provision for the issue of a
Prohibition Notice to the holder of a certificate.  It is suggested that
consideration should be given to including an intermediate course of action.
The Health and Safety at Work, Etc. Act 1974 makes provision of the issue of
Improvement Notices and Prohibition Notices. An Improvement Notice requires
the employer to carry out certain works within a given time.  If the
employer fails to comply with the Notice, they are guilty of an offence.

The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a useful intermediate step
where a Prohibition Notice is not appropriate, but where some formal Notice
is required.

Periodic Certificates and Inspections

The Popplewell Report recommended (at paragraph 3.68) that there should be
(i) annual renewal of safety certificates issued under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975; (ii) a duty on the local authority annually to inspect the
premises prior to re-issuing the certificate; and (iii) power for the local
authority to revoke the certificate.

The interim recommendations compliment the first proposal; the second
recommendation was implemented in statutory guidance after the Popplewell
Report; the third recommendation has not been acted upon.

With regard to the fit'st recommendation, annual certificates focus the
parties1 minds on the whole situation and not on a particular application or
inspection.  It tends to promote an overall review of the circumstances
surrounding the re-issue of a certificate.

With regard to the second recommendation, it is suggested that prior to
re-issuing the certificate there should be an inspection, but that there
should also be inspections on a half-yearly or quarterly basis with guidance
given as to timing, e.g., prior to renewal, end of season, start of season,
during season (obviously this is less relevant to multi-use stadia where
"seasons" are not as clear cut.)

Visits to the ground should be carried out whilst it is empty and during use
but the limitations on "during use" inspections by their very nature must be
recognised.

Model Safety Certificate Conditions

The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety
certificate conditions should be drawn up. A standardised form of
conditions could form the nucleus of all certificates.   Additional
conditions could be added to cover local conditions.   This would enable some
degree of national uniformity of application of conditions.  It would seem
appropriate, that the Home Office draw up the standard conditions as it has
done in respect of byelaws for example.

Resource Implications - Fees

At present it is suggested in Circular No. 72/1987 that the statutory
inspection should not result in significant resource implications but that
in general inspections are not expected to take more than about two man days
per ground. This point is made in the context of emphasising the scope of
inspections, together with associated report work and are not intended to be
as detailed or extensive as that often required by the holder of the
certificate.

Clearly, more time is spent on safety of sports grounds than the Home Office
anticipates.  The resource implications involved for local authorities and
their advisers from other services to implement the existing provisions and
the new recommendations must be recognised.

Although the certificating authority is allowed to charge fees for dealing
with applications for the issue or amendment of a certificate (by virtue of
the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) there is no express provision
for fees for the ongoing work of enforcing the provisions of the Act and
dealing with inspections that have to be carried out at least once a year.
The Inquiry may wish to consider whether express provisions should be made
to allow a certificating authority to make some reasonable charge.  There
are many examples of legislation where local authorities are empowered to
charge a reasonable fee to cover the cost of administering and enforcing a
particular licensing function.

Definition of Roles

The Popplewell Report recommended that there should be urgent consultation
between the Health and Safety Executive and the Fire Authorities and Local
Authorities as how best to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and
reports (paragraph 3.95).

It has again become clear during the Inquiry that a lack of clarity in the
definition of roles, 5s well as a lack of communication, can cause problems.
This is particularly relevant in relation to the Police who are involved in
the safety.of sports grounds in a number of roles, e.g. a member of the
Advisory Group, upholders of law and order and their role inside and outside
the Ground.  It is also relevant to consider if and at what point in an
emergency the role of the safety officer is subsumed by the emergency
services.

Clarification, following consultation, is needed of the different roles
Authorities are required to fulfil and the means of communication between
them.

The Advisory Group

The Police and the Building Authority and, for metropolitan districts
subsequent to local government reorganisation, the Police and the Fire
Authority, have to be consulted by the certificating authority by virtue of
the legislation.  Sheffield City Council have included officers from the
Building Authority and Health and Consumer Services in their Advisory Group
prior to this Inquiry.
The legislation therefore, provides the basis of expert opinion on which the
Local Authority makes decisions.

The decision making process can take a number of forms, but perhaps the two
extremes are:-

(a) where all the experts are in agreement that decision is delegated to an
officer of the Council, where one or more experts differ - that decision is
delegated to an appropriate committee of the Council;

(b) the appropriate committee considers all matters relating to works
carried out at the sports ground.

Further guidance could be given over and above that contained in the interim
recommendations as to the preferred course of action.

In addition to the statutory consultees, together with those recommended in
the Interim Report, i.e., the Ambulance Service, the Club and the recognised
Supporters' Club, consideration should be given as to whether any other
bodies should be involved in the wider Advisory Group, e.g., Health and
Safety Executive.

It may also be necessary to have a consultation group consisting of Police,
Fire, Building Authority, Environmental Health, Ambulance Service in
addition to the wider Advisory Group.

Members should be able to have professional advice from officers.

Pooling of Information

Some consideration should be given to pooling information on a national
basis to improve the flow of that information.

Information should be available to all certificating Authorities and their
statutory consultees.  This would assist to achieve a degree of uniformity
throughout the country and enable all Authorities to learn from each others
experiences.

This is particularly relevant to regional level where the emergency services
will cover a number of District Authorities.

Safety Management and Safety Planning

Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as essential
aspects of their business and not an adjunct to it.   It is essential for
safety responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of
accountability.to be included.   Any regulations or the "Green Guide" could
usefully develop this theme.   The term safety planning is preferable to that
of emergency planning in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should
promote better safety standards.   All relevant agencies should be included
in the planning process.  Safety planning is aimed to prevent disasters as
well as providing contingency plans to ensure emergencies and disasters can
be coped with.

Status and Content of the "Green Guide"

A comprehensive review of the status and content of the Green Guide is
required.  The present guide to safety of sports grounds is predominantly
written for football single use stadia. Multi use stadia are becoming more
popular and it is suggested that the guide be expanded to cover spectator
safety requirements pertaining to a wider variety of sports, e.g., speedway,
stock car racing, hockey, archery, shooting, etc. and other potentially
dangerous activities.

In addition, either by expansion of the guide or by the creation of a
similar document, requirements for spectator safety of fully enclosed stadia
should be created.

"Flexibility"

The 1986 edition of the Green Guide, paragraph 6, states as follows:-

"Deviations from individual guidelines are possible without necessarily
detracting from the overall safety of the ground.  The variety of type,
function and layout of sports grounds means that a flexible approach should
be maintained to take account of the particular circumstances at individual
grounds".

And paragraph 8 states:-

"It should be borne in mind when using the guide to assess whether existing
circumstances provide adequately for the safety of spectators the criteria
to be aimed for is that of a reasonable degree of safety.  It would be
unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the absolute safety of
everyone attending a ground".

And, again in paragraph 11:-

"The principles referred to in paragraphs 4-10 above should be kept in mind
by both ground management and, where applicable, by the local authority when
applying the guide to an individual ground.   The guide is an aid to, not a
substitute for, professional judgment and common sense".

There is a problem in affording the Green Guide this kind of status. What
is "flexibility" to one mind may be slap-dash permissiveness to another.
Clearly, emphasis on flexibility was and is well intentioned, but the effect
is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where non-compliance
can be justified as falling within the scope of some flexible discretion
allowed to the relevant authority.

For the future perhaps the Inquiry would wish to consider recommending that
the approach of the Green Guide should move away from that of "flexibility"
to, for example, an approach of the following kind:-

"That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the club itself,
should always seek to establish whether there is some reasonable cause why a
relevant guideline is not complied with, and that in the absence of some
such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the guideline should be
achieved or insisted upon".  A recommendation not to comply with a relevant
guideline should be in writing and approved by the certificating authority.
If such a decision is considered by the relevant committee of the Council
then the public will have access to that information.

Parts of the existing guide could become regulatory and other parts
re-issued (in a revised form) as a guide cf. the majority of the Approved
Documents to the Building Regulations or an "Approved Code of Practice" cf.
status of an approved code of practice under the Health and Safety at Work,
Etc., Act 1974.  In the case of documents similar to the Building
Regulations compliance would therefore not be necessary, yet failure to
                                        Page 6


      comply with the Guide could be taken as being evidence tending to show that
      the requirements had not been met, unless it could be demonstrated by the
      party concerned, using other means, that the requirements of the legislation
      had been satisfied.

11.   Specific Recommendations in relation to the Structure and Design
      Requirements for a Sports Ground

      General Fabric

      It is recommended that the headroom for tunnels be increased from 2.4 metres
      to at least 3 metres to facilitate overhead viewing of any crushing or other
      problems occuring along its length.

      Due to the possible risk of explosion, it is suggested that gas
      installations should not be permitted in any building in the stadia used for
      spectator accommodation,  cf. tower blocks.

      To cater for different speeds of travel through tunnels or restricted
      passageways longer than, say, 5 metres, a minimum of 4 units of exit width
      should be provided.

      Ingress

      Segregation of entrances for supporters of opposing teams is recommended as
      a permanent design criteria.

      Permanent unobstructed access to the pitch area for emergency vehicles to be
      provided in at least two positions, and these being at opposite ends of the
      ground (whenever possible).

      The "guide" states a maximum notional rate of 750 persons per turnstile per
      hour, however it does not state the design time, i.e., the time within which
      all spectators are capable of being admitted.  It is suggested that a
      revised code should state a maximum ingress design time of say, 45 minutes.
      For multi use stadia, in particular, investigation of the flow rate should
      be carried out as rates may differ, e.g., for families with young children.

      Terraces

      Where terraces are to be sub-divided so as to avoid major migration and
      sideways surge, each section should be formed by inserting radial barriers.
      Radial fences should be avoided.

      It is considered that spectator accommodation should not be lower than the
      pitch level or pitch perimeter path level (whichever is the higher), so that
      spectators do not have to step up from the spectator accommodation.
      In the present "guide", it states "gradients steeper than 1:2 (26°, 34')
      could be dangerous" (paragraph 94).   In Table 1 barrier requirements are
      specified for terrace gradients of up to 30° or 1:1.7, therefore
      contradicting the previous statement. From a graphical interpolation and
      extrapolation of all the relevant data the maximum gradient should be 31°,
      30'.  This equates to approximately 1:1.63.

      Crush Barriers - Design

      To avoid rusting in unseen and non-maintainable places, overclipped barrier
      rail supports Should no longer be acceptable. All parts of barriers should
      be capable of direct inspection and maintenance.
Welding of all joints would achieve the aims set out in the above paragraph
and will create a structural continuity where the failure of an individual
element would minimise the risk of collapse.

Consideration should be given to the application of horizontal, (in addition
to lateral) forces.  This could be taken as 5% of the horizontal force thus
resisting torsional and secondary effects.

The recommended heights of the barrier rails should be re-assessed.
Clarification is also required (preferably by sketch) to show where this
measurement should be taken from.  The present "guide" appears to make an
assumption that the barrier rail is in the same vertical plane as the
terrace riser.  When these vertical planes differ, the method of height
measurement may also differ.  The acid test being at what level a normal
person would stand who was comfortable, immediately behind the barrier.

The opportunity should be taken to re-appraise the required test and design
loads. An increase would achieve a greater resistance to collapse but may
increase the risk of injury due to resisting greater crowd pressures.  A
decrease, however, may result in earlier collapse, yet may prevent fatal
injury.

Crush Barriers - Testing

It is suggested that each barrier span should be tested separately (for rail
strength) and then adjacent spans be tested together to determine rail and
support strength.

The specification of the test should be modified to clearly state how
recovery deflection is to be calculated.  Such a modification should be in
accordance with the testing procedures in BS 5950 and other similar British
Standard documents.

To avoid any further doubt, a standardised test specification and procedure
is now required.  This should include a specification of a standardised
testing rig and a standardised test result sheet.

Stands with seated accommodation

Although steeper gradients can create better forward viewing for the
spectators, very steep gradients will have the effect of creating equally
steep radial gangways and may create a domino effect during an evacuation
where all persons may be stood - instead of being seated.  No maximum
gradient is directly stated in the present guide for seated areas; the only
tenuous reference being to the maximum calculated gradient for stairways in
paragraph 73 as being 34°,9'.  It is considered that seated accommodation
greater than 30° should have intermediate crush barriers at approximately 5
metre centres.

Pitch Perimeter Fences

The Popplewell Report (paragraph 4.136 to 4.138 and also Appendix 'E1,
paragraph E29) recommended that consideration should be given to the design
of a standard efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.

As a direct result of the Hillsborough disaster it has been suggested that
spectators may feel reassured by the possibility of forward escape onto the
pitch from all sides of the ground.
If pitch perimeter fences are to remain, it is suggested that at least 50%
of its linear length is openable and such openings are evenly spaced so as
to provide maximum benefit for spectators' safety.

Where pitch side police or stewards require access into the spectator area
through relatively small doors or gates, these may be provided as additional
openings or as wicket gates in the large opening panels.

So as to avoid sudden forward movement, all such gates should be vertically
multi-hinged and open towards the pitch. Collapsible panels should not be
acceptable.  It is a further pre-requisite that the release mechanism should
b e :-

a) capable of being operational remotely in tandem with others;

b) capable of independent opening whilst under crowd pressure, by the
   operation of a quick release, manually operated catch;

c) all opening devices must be capable of use under crowd loading
   conditions.

In order to simplify any new designs of catch for pitch perimeter gates and
bearing in mind the fact that there should be no spectators on the pitch
side of the opening sections of the perimeter fencing, test loading on
perimeter fences could be reduced to, say 3 KN/m.

Estimation of Space Capacity - Terraces

Under the present "guide", terraces in good condition can be calculated as
capable of holding a maximum of 54 persons per 10 m^, throughout the
available terraced area.  It is, however, accepted that some parts of that
area are "peak viewing areas" and as such will achieve in  practice a greater
population density due to their popularity.  The figure of 54/10 m^ is
therefore an average, without the peak viewing parts being given a maximum
packing density.

It is considered that the 54/10 m^ should be treated as being the maximum
and therefore only be applied to the areas of peak viewing.  Other areas of
the terrace should be’calculated as having a lower packing density, say
40/10 m2.

In order to practically achieve the consideration set out in the above
paragraph, it would be necessary to:-

(a)   Define the size and position of "peak viewing areas".

(b)   Surround the areas of "peak viewing" using radial barriers as opposed
      to radial fences.

(c)   Determine by effective stewarding or policing that the crowd density
      of each "peak viewing area" is at a satisfactory, safe and comfortable
      level.

Flow Rates

Throughout the Inquiry, the flow rate of 40 and 60 persons per minute per
unit of exit width have been heavily criticised asbeing based on
inconclusive research. A practical lesson that has been learned is that
                                        Page 9


      when people are very tightly packed, their ability to flow through exits is
      dramatically reduced. Until the outcome of further research is known, it is
      suggested that flow rates are reduced to the following:-

      (a)   "Peak viewing area" of terraces - 30 persons per minute per unit of
            exit width.

      (b)   All other areas - 40 persons per minute per unit of exit width.

      It is considered that the emergency evacuation time should remain at 2 i
      minutes.

12.   Stewards

      Training of Stewards should be carried out by people who have experience in
      training and safety. Training should be regular to remind existing Stewards
      of procedures and ensure that new Stewards receive appropriate training.

      The acceptable age range for Stewards should be specified as being between
      eighteen and sixty five years, in addition to the current requirements
      relating to fitness etc.

      A Steward (or a police officer) carrying out isolated tasks, e.g. external
      gate duty, should be provided with an efficient means of communication with
      the Safety Officer.

13.   National First Aid Guidelines

      There is the need for national first aid guidelines which are drawn up with
      particular reference to occasions when large numbers of people are likely to
      be present, e.g.  football matches, pop concerts etc.

      It is also important for the individuals expected to provide first aid to
      receive appropriate training.

14.   Counselling and Support for Victims

      Substantial knowledge and experience now exists about the services the
      public and those directly affected by a disaster need afterwards.    These
      responses are informed by an understanding of the potentially long-term
      needs of victims.  Initiatives must be taken immediately after the disaster
      without waiting for requests for help and be available for a period of at
      least two years. Their establishment and co-ordination with the voluntary
      sector and between statutory organisations needs to be undertaken on the
      basis of an agreed general plan. The services have to be carefully
      provided, managed and last appropriate lengths of time, if the bereaved,
      survivors and rescue staff are not to suffer lasting damage.   These
      co-ordinated services are expensive to provide and outside of the normal
      provision made by local authorities.  Therefore their establishment and
      continuance is dependent on new and additional resources being made
      available.  Such separate funding needs to be made available.

15.   Public Appeals

      The legal issues surrounding public appeals are complicated, e.g. charitable
      status, tax etc. Guidelines are required on the establishment,
      administration and termination of disaster appeals to ensure that funds are
      distributed as fairly, quickly and effectively as possible.
16.    Pre-Match Entertainment

       Further to recommendation 25 in the Interim Report, consideration should be
       given as to whether pre-match entertainment and associated activities can
       influence the type of crowd attending football matches (in particular) and
       for example can therefore be used to encourage family attendance.  Such
       entertainment may also result in staggered entry times.

17 .   Day and Time

       Consideration should also be given to what effect changing the day and/or
       time of kick off of football matches, in particular, may have on crowd
       behaviour and therefore crowd safety.

18.    Football Membership Schemes - I.D. Cards

       The Popplewell Report recommends (at paragraph 4.128) that consideration
       should be given to some form of membership scheme for football league clubs
       in England and Wales.

       However, in view of the experiences at Hillsborough, careful consideration
       needs to be given to any national football membership scheme. It would
       clearly be undesirable if any such scheme resulted in significant delays at
       turnstiles.

       There are other practical considerations which must be taken into account,
       e.g., patterns of attendance, different method of entry, space required for
       a complex admission system, i.e., two turnstile systems, number of
       turnstiles required, additional policing/stewarding required to control the
       crowd and eject individuals, where to eject individuals from and how and
       reducing further the ground capacity.

19.    All Ticket Entry

       In order to increase the speed of ingress of spectators, consideration could
       be given to requiring all ticket entry for events where greater than, say,
       70% of the total available capacity could be expected.




 HB8AAC/JJJ
                                                                  %               U^(H*&hor'
FILE NOTE
                                                                              /

Re: Safety of Sports Grounds - Sheffield United Football Club

I received a telephone call from Gordon Levers, Safety Officer, Building
Surveyors Department on the 21st September 1989. He indicated that he had
visited Sheffield United Football Club to carry out an inspection of the outside
perimeter of the club. There were a number of maintenance items which needed
attending to fairly quickly and he had served a handwritten letter by FAX on the
club requiring their immediate attention. He was also concerned because the
wall at Shoreham Street and Cherry Street was in a substantial state of
disrepair. He was therefore considering issuing a Dangerous Structures Notice.
He agreed that   he would let me have a full written note about the matter to
enable us to give consideration to the question of safety of sports grounds and
whether or not we needed to consider issuing a Prohibition Notice. Late in the
afternoon of 21st September, I advised Mark Webster and Julian Ward about the
natter and said that I would review the matter the following day when I had
further information from Mr. Levers. Julian Ward drafted a letter to the club
which was sent   by FAX since we were unable to contact them by telephone. A copy
of that letter   is on the file.I telephoned the Police to advise them of the
difficulty since this may well affect their operational plans for the day.     I
also arranged for us to meet with the club at 11 o'clock the following morning.
On 22nd September 1989, I drafted a Prohibition Notice and had it typed in case
we needed to serve it. I also had a disucssion with Gordon Levers about the
nature of the problem. He showed me photographs and a plan. We visited the
club at 11 o'clock as arranged. Mr. Capper represented Sheffield United
Football Club, John Strange was present from Eastwoods and Partners, Craig Dent
attended from the Police and Gordon Levers and I on behalf of the Council.     The
Chairman of Sheffield United was also present.    The meeting was amicable.
Gordon Levers served a copy of the Dangerous Structures Notice upon David
Capper. We had a fairly lengthy discussion about the nature of the problem.
The wall on Cherry Street is presently shored up but there is a substantial
amount of undergrowth nearby and hoardings which are having an effect upon the
structure of it. There are two portions of the wall at Shoreham Street that are
in need of attention. The wall is falling backwards and needs rebuilding in
parts.  Gordon Levers said that he was able to push the wall and move it. The
club were advised that temporary supports were needed immediately and
consideration needed to be given as to whether or not they wished to demolish
the wall and remove the danger or whether they wished to rebuild the wall as a
permanent measure.   For security reasons, the club wished to rebuild.    It was
calculated that there was 40 yards of dangerous wall at Shoreham Street and 30
yards at Cherry Street. John Strange estimated that it would cost £20,000 to
rebuild in brick and probably £13,000 to replace with a steel fence. The club
indicated that they had a three week period during which there were no matches
and they could carry out the work in that time.

We walked around the perimeter of the ground.  Some of the works in Gordon
Lever's Notice have been done, the rest are housekeeping matters which the club
promised to undertake forthwith. We got the WorksDepartment down to the club
to carry out the shoring up work for which the club will     be charged indue
course. Works Department were confident that the work could be undertaken
before 6 p.m. that evening. On the understanding that the work was completed,
it was not felt that there was any necessity to issue a Prohibition Notice.

Gordon Levers and I therefore returned to the office at 12.45 p.m. and I
reported to Mark Webster and Julian Ward.


?!i.6c.FW259
                                                                       4 ( n M ' ) Qrfb %       fa
                                                                             ( jU - £ O U 4 .   ilM O
  m|TfTrirrn^[»                           vo "Ite           <
                                                            maAxw~'i£l>yUM-^ (fenu
  REPORT OF THE ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO
  THE POLICY COMMITTEE

  HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - OVERVIEW AND PROPOSALS FOR FUTURE



  Purpose of Report

               The purpose of this report is to provide a summary of action taken

  by the City Council since the Hillsborough disaster and also to address

  the general recommendations of the Taylor Report regarding the issuing

  of safety certificates by the City Council as the enforcing authority.

  Copies of the following reports are attached:-

   (a)         Report of the Director of Social Services to Family and Community

               Services Programme Committee on 10th May on the involvement of

               the staff of his Department and recommending the setting up of

               a task team.   The recommendations were approved.
               &
   (b)         Report of the Director of Libraries and Information Services to

               this Committee on 23rd May.

   (c)         Report of the Director of Health and Consumer Services to Health

               and Consumer Services Programme Committee on 20th June concerning

               the involvement of his Department's staff.

   (d)         Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department

               to General Purposes Panel on 17th August, 1989 advising members

               of interim action taken.

   (e)         Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department

               to MEGS Programme Committee on 18th September together with supporting

           y   documents which informed members of action a^i)eady taken and made

               a number of recommendations for future action.      The recommendations

               of the Committee will be reported verbally.

( f$ )         A copy of the Prohibition Notice served on Owlerton Sports Stadium,

   v'jf)       Copies of letters from South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service,

               the Building Surveyor, Department of Land and Planning and the
          Director of Health and Consumer Services oil'Thr» review of the

          administration and inspection system.

Summary of Action Taken

The report to MEGS Programme Committee summarises the action which has

already been taken by the Council in its capacity as licensing authority

and no need is seen to repeat it here; however, members should be aware

that the General Purposes Panel, acting under delegated powers, considered

a report of the Advisory Group at its meeting on 15th September concerning

Owlerton Stadium and resolved to serve a Prohibition Notice with immediate

effect.

          Members should also be aware that the Advisory Group is at present

being chaired by one of the Department's Principal Solicitors as an interim

measure pending a decision by the Council on its future and to respond

to the views of the Taylor Report that the Group should be chaired by a

senior officer.

          Finally, the views of other interested bodies and Departments have

been requested on how the responsibilities of the Council should be carried

out in future; as already indicated, copies of these observations are

attached.

Matters for Consideration

A number of matters now require members' considerationj these include

(i)       The staffing requirements necessary for the effective and efficient

          running of the licensing service.

(ii)      The level   of fees which should be charged for the issuing of

          certificates and the length of such certificates.
                                     aM .                     p tv c U iM W ’O
(iii)     The future administrat^ive arrangments^required to operate the

          service.

This report addresses these three issues in turn.

(i)       Staffing

          It has to   be said that the existing staffing arrangements in         the
Licensing Section of my Department are totally incapable of handling

the additional volume of work likely to arise from the implementation .

of the recommendations of the Taylor Report as well as the existing

licensing obligations.    Members will see that the report to MEGS

recognises this and proposes a new structure and additional staffing

to handle the inceased workload.     It has to be said that the additional

expenditure of £26,400 needed to implement this additional staffing

requirement cannot be found from within the provisional cash limit

            to the Department for 1990/91.   It may be possible to

meet some limited expenditure in the remainder of the current financial

year but not in a full year.

Fees

At the present time fees are not charged by the Council for the

issuing or amendment of any safety certificate.    Regulation 14

of the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976 enables a local

authority to "determine the fees to be charged in respect of

applications for the issue or amendment of safety certificates

but such fees must not in a particular case exceed an amount commensurate

with the work actually and reasonable done".

       The guidance quoted in the Taylor Report is that every safety

certificate should be reviewed annually and renewed annuallyj

therefore it can only be assumed that the expenditure will increase.

       Accordingly it is recommended that with immediate effect fees

be charged to all applicants for safety certificates at whatever

level is considered to be appropriate for the work done - clearly,

fees may be different in different cases.    Any increased income

would of course be used to offset the increased expenditure referred

to above.

Future Administrative Arrangements

Paragraphs 16 and 17 of the interim recommendations of the Taylor

Report state that a local authority should review its administrative
                                                          -    A -
                                                Ctyl
                        arrangements and set up aa£- effective Advisory Group with a Chairman

                        from the local authority and an effective procedure which should

                        produce regular written reports for consideration by the local

                        authority.

                             The revised administrative structure that is summarised in

                        the report to MEGS Programme Committee would in my view provide

                        an administrative structure within my Department which would enable

                        the Council to deal adequately with the administration of the certificate,

                        but clearly the Council must consider whether its procedures would

                        need to be amended in the light of the recommendations.

                             So far as the Advisory Group recommendation is concerned,

                        such a Group already exists, although it does not have representatives

                        from the Clubs and Supporters' Club and is at present chaired by

                        one of my Principal Solicitors.       Members may wish to consider whether

                        these arrangements are considered satisfactory or whether it would

                        be appropriate for the local authority Chairman to be a member

                        rather than an officer.   In any eve   members should consider
                                                            <•
                        whether it is desirable that an Advi ory Group reporting directly
it\JA , 1W    Wft-o j
             a t        to the Council on matters related to( safety of the public should

                        include representatives of the Clubs knd Supporters' Clubs or whether

                        an additional body including represer Jtatives of Clubs and Supporters'

                        Clubs should be created to advise th^ Advisory Group as and when

                   x~ .^appropriate.

                            Finally, any consideration of the Council's procedures must

                        clearly include the formal decision-making process of the Council.

                        At present the powers and duties of the Council under the Safety

                        of Sports Grounds Act 1975 are delegated to the General Purposes

                        Panel of MEGS Programme Committee, with urgent matters delegated

                        further to me.   Members need to consider whether this arrangement

                        is satisfactory, and if not, whether another Committee or Sub-


              L
^    w     r rritM i« y     ffiin m       r.* jfr ■           x        v             -•


t      '                                                  f J V y 'V                                                                  'r             -. "

                          ______________________                    _ _ ... .. ^ __________                                  afoi'i<£A      —        ....     —         »~-
               ([                                 ( f e^f.'       1ta      6>imuU             duu/2               Ice.                     ua- tfo -biz m o s l -



                                       . ...... 4............                                                            o ru         my ^ m o ir cgfceco os> <*f
                           C KA^      WWdJlL&l ^U/VTVYU                                             CWmj^L,                                                   ^
,        nL o^ud-                             I                                  I            V               ~                             1
    fouiix^         (UQ     CJSkoWlZ^v^ fj                  (fa.         fU/^U760H0^                                         l/S/LO                          S A M I'
                                                                                                          m       M                    .                      ,*
                      RLti onru-vi) (?3 / ^ a o                   tt^i         tt*     GmatlW                                 0Wh^x<.                w      UKJax J sl

    t^f^yC kXoZiis,')                     (tea      clu.6?;         c/<LVt£          <jUfCfo <c v ^ o i ‘
                                                                                                        t ^;c»1 c i u f i o                5K.        ^ucd—         £


    6Wv ^      w^ujO              cj^vU             (Sm.    m t e i oua*              tou_           ‘t a             (hdhxr^         (2t^       uvbixb           Tta


    (Sa'vio,          Oj/\dbLiM crvy                tfc*                   fee G>^VC^                                 IMArtficikL^              Ik       Yl£uS> uj^


    (J^vfe?         cua^                                                   h ) j3 &       (!7V


    C) | i / ^ ^ U vl& ?                               t ^ ( j ^ ( K J9./7|?0             iv-hhS^Q^j' 'h                         fl&Vl/ZP ~1f-v              Q iu -lc J

    ^y\ ' & S L - 4 ^ n c ^           M
                                          V
                                              fe>    h iiS ^ w
                                                     (J
                                                                         ^ o         ,
           f (a A t t s f t U              m o $ > <(( t U T                    a         x         f             U              in ^ r r f e H c e c [ ,u v m ( t o K f

                          fTfchdft         coaA S w ^ r f t e i ^               <slc&^Q            ki         ^ U ^ U Ix T ^ h /1 l^S                       GHjPtfc-^v>


                                                  } i'5kuX—         e W ^            Q%<jMV\             M|^-ee^futi/io                    \| t *


     ISvvoCn^ §rswj) li/tfc S^j tfex ciu$s                                                       <o^j^<lbu/o QyO                                            ^UivCRpv
     v^OCfc          \&    tb         maloL                                              t>r^U           kU z? t}vj             6m\|)                (J,n2> t t l m u ^ L v


    (jD* G»vU/iXc! c^v rv^te/5 ^                                                     cwieei'w           i>*           tfc>     o w i t v ^           / t£ h it£ &       H \


    (fcvy ^   u u    Cm i a ^ j               ( W t u J           unieA i t c                                     Sjp^vfo        6wufi^7                       Kp^        rr




     C^-ttu^ujte^ ^ \ t ^                     UHU'Uof              tfc                            1-9^    ifc * r ^ li\4 \            'W^retti—


     ^c^n'^.iia^L                     l: ^ ~U± ^ L jk i - ^ t - p i) :
            Committee of the Council should be responsible for such matters.
    v /\                                                                                        CL-fc
      X     Members need to be aware that Annual Council resolved •’bapfc its meeting

            on 17th May that ".... the powers and duties exercised by MEGS

            Programme Committee in relation to licensing matters be referred

            to the Health and Consumer Services Programme Committee ....".

                    It would seem to be consistent with that decision that the

            licensing functions of the Council should in due course be transferred

            to Health and Consumer Services Programme Committee, presumably

            at the same time as this Committee considers the date of transfer

            of the other licensing functions.                      Such a decision should, however,

            take into account the need to consider what level the delegation

            to the Programme Committee and any Panels or offices would need

            to be established.

Recommendations

Members are asked to note this report and to

(i)          agree with the proposed new staffing structure and to indicate

            how this should be funded;

(ii)        agree with the basis of charging fees;— and

(iii)_— consider what Committee/Pancl/Offioer apraflgcmcnta should bc-brought

                                                                                                        the Gouncil

            under tne balety ol SporrTS'""GF<5Unds Aul 1975.



   Clip                        Kri%7\             HLtomfYwxAa£i<?vvo (J?>no u n u ^ t f e                 ju ta c e
           A < tl'L O O l/tJ 6 w ) U - p j U /)   C 0 )V V ?^ X .'L L U y y v , (XisZi c U l ^ W T K > (X iv o 7 iA ,p (Xl'Cb
           oJj^D                tfu                W                     &PCU't'j&z yVoxLp                     r i -|7TM r
            mdu&i^p                                        4-A ( U stoSru* ooaT                Ct\jw € d k j           A
          rr^rM /) fc                                 ^                                                     "1
      (\\? COtimM/s (JW l^                  Ccmnufee (P
                                                      cusuU                                               iar
MARK WEBSTER                                                                                                            J
                     U'Xtb .jii'iL         djL&J ksv{K Him ShJXAiryl'i                       ivoifaUlZi <3 3          fc?
A c t in g Head o f D e p a rtm e n t     ( jz u fu j    U t / l i i h TCk                               (tn-Cxuhb      f\O v

                                              rcns            m t',x tu-A' >
                                                                           ;i cLcmsn c
                                            ✓     '^
                                            i£va'u<J        no    i J t i A — ftUvy,
                                         POLICY COMMITTEE

19- Hillsborough Disaster—Overview and Proposals for Future
MiThe A c tin g H e a d of Administration and Legal Departm ent submitted a report (a) providing a
summary of action taken by the City Council since and in the light of the tragedy at Hillsborough
Football Ground on 15th April, 1989, (b) addressing the general recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor regarding the issuing of safety certificates by the City Council as the enforcing authority and
(c) arising therefrom identifying a number of matters now requiring consideration including (i) the
staffing requirements necessary to the effective and efficient running of the licensing service, (ii) the
level of fees which should be charged for the issuing of certificates and the length of such certificates
and (iii) the future administrative arrangements and decision-making procedures required to
operate the service. Copies of the following associated documents w e re e n c lo s e d a s a p p e n d ic e s to
 the report—
      1. A report of the Director of Social Services to the Family and Community Services
      Programme Committee on 10th May, 1989 on the involvement of staff of his Department in
      the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster and proposing the setting up of a task team to
      continue the ongoing work with people emotionally affected by the disaster.
       2. A report of the Director of Libraries and Information Services to this Committee on 23rd
       May, 1989 on the arrangements made by that Departm ent for the operation of a
       "Hillsborough Helpline” service.
       3. A report of the Director of Health and Consumer Services to the Health and Consumer
       Services Programme Committee on 20th June, 1989 on the action which was taken by the
       Bereavement and Support Services and Public Health Divisions of that Department in
       response to the disaster.
       4. Reports of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Departm ent to the General
       Purposes Panel and the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee at
       their meetings on 17th August and 18th September, 1989, respectively, advising members of
       action taken and recommendations for future action in connection with the Safety of Sports
       Grounds Act, 1975.
       5. A copy of the Prohibition Notice served on Owlerton Sports Stadium.
       6. Copies of letters from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service, the Building
       Surveyor, Department of Land and Planning, the Director of Health and Consumer Services
       and the South Yorkshire County Fire Service on the review of the administration and
       inspection service.
 r e s o l v e d : That (A) the proposals now reported of the Municipal Enterprise and General Services
 Programme Committee for the creation of two additional posts of Chief Licensing Officer on Grade
 P 01d and Licensing Officer on Scale 4/5 to deal with safety of sports grounds and other issues,
 subject to discussions with the appropriate trade unions under the Council’s Responding to Change
 agreement, be approved so far as this Committee is concerned and that consideration be given to
 the means of funding the posts;
   (B) approval be given to the principle of charging fees in respect of applications for the issue or
 amendment of safety certificates and that the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
 be requested to report back with a suggested scale of fees;
    (C) with reference to paragraphs 16 and 17 of the interim recommendations of the Taylor Report
 relating to the future administrative arrangements for the issuing etc. of safety certificates and the
 setting up of effective Advisory Groups, authority be given for (i) the continuation in operation in
 its existing form of the Advisory Group which comprises appropriate professional officers and is
 chaired by a senior officer in the Administration and Legal Department and which advises the City
 Council in the exercise of its functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 and (ii) the
 establishment of a separate group on the lines now indicated and including representatives of the
 stadia and recognised supporters' clubs, to be chaired by an elected member of the City Council,
 whose function would be to make representations to the Advisory Group and through it to the
 Council on matters of particular concern to the group; and
   (D) further to the decision of the City Council at its annual meeting on 17th May, 1989 to refer to
 the Health and Consumer Services Programme Committee, as from a date to be determined by this
 Committee, the powers and duties exercised by the Municipal Enterprise and General Services
654                                    POLICY COMMITTEE

Programme Committee in relation to licensing matters, approval be given for the powers and duties
of the Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 to be similarly transferred to the
Health and Consumer Services Programme Committee on the understanding that such transfer is on
the basis that all existing delegations of powers to officers shall remain unaltered and that, until such
time as the Health and Consumer Services Programme Committee has determined and has in
operation an appropriate Sub-Committee/Panel structure to deal with these additional
responsibilities and to exercise the same delegated powers as the General Purposes Panel of the
Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee, the Council s powers and
duties under the said Act shall continue to be delegated to the General Purposes Panel.

20 Local Government and Housing Bill—Miscellaneous Charging Provisions
  The Committee received and noted a report of the Acting H ead of Administration and Legal
Departm ent giving details of the provisions of Clauses 138 - 141 and 150 in Part IX of the Local
Government and Housing Bill relating to the proposed powers of local authorities to make charges
for the provision of local authority services.

21 Appropriation of Land
  The Acting H ead of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the question of
the appropriation to the general estate of the City Council of land which was currently held for
housing and education purposes and which was not considered to be necessary for the specific
statutory purposes of either the new Housing Revenue Account envisaged by the Local
Government and Housing Bill or the Education Reform Act, 1988, respectively.
resolved   : That (a) the information contained in the report now submitted be noted and the Acting
Head of Administration and Legal Departm ent, in consultation with the appropriate Officers, be
requested to report back with details in respect of lands proposed to be appropriated to the general
estate of the Council; and
  (b)     in the event of the City Treasurer and the Acting H ead of Administration and Legal
Departm ent being of the opinion that urgent action is required in this connection in order to
safeguard the Council’s interests, the Emergency Sub-Committee of this Committee be given
delegated powers to deal with the m atter on the understanding that on any occasions when
proposals relating to education land or premises are to be considered, the Chair of the Education
Programme Committee shall be co-opted on to that Sub-Committee.

22 AMA Community Policy Group
r e s o l v e d : That (a) approval be given to the action taken by the Chair of this Committee i n

authorising arrangements to be made, in conjunction with the Federation of Community Work
Training Groups, for the Community Policy Group of the Association of Metropolitan Authorities
to hold a meeting in the Town Hall, Sheffield, on 13th September, 1989; and
  (b)    attendance at that meeting by members of the City Council be recognised as an approved duty
for the purposes of the payment of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government
Act, 1972.

23 Conferences/Seminars
r e s o l v e d : That (a) delegates b e appointed to attend conferences etc. as follows—


Conference, etc.                                      D ate and Venue       Delegates
Quarterly meeting of the Association of           29th September,         The Chair of the Contracts
Direct Labour Organisations                       1989—Glasgow            Panel and the Principal
                                                                          Solicitor, Contracts Advisory
                                                                          Unit.
Centre for Local Economic Strategies—             lO th/llth              The Chair and any interested
—Annual Conference on “Reclaiming the             November,               members of this Committee.
Public Interest—A n Economic Agenda for           1989—Sheffield
the 1990’s”
—Four one day policy seminars on “The             18th October and        The Chair of this Committee
Future of the Public Sector”                      1st, 15th and 19th      (or his nominee).
                                                  November, 1989—
                                                  London
                                              Councillor CJC Betts
The Head of the Administration and
                                              cc Councillor J Fiore
Legal Department
                                                 Chair of MEGS
6 November 1989
MW/DG
4018




STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - LIABILITY ISSUES

I thought it appropriate that I write at this stage and inform y°u
certain information in the form of rumours which are being P ^ e d up
regarding the conduct of the litigation and the issues       of liability.
However,  I must ask, that at this stage this information is treated pure y
as a rumour and as being strictly confidential as I am not yet
position to verify the same.

Basically, it would appear that initially the City Council was not added as
a party to the writs issued by the Plaintiffs’ Solicitors as they did no
appear to feel that there was any particular liability on the part of the
authority, and that the writs were re-issued at the suggestion/insistence
of Sheffield Wednesday, or rather its Insurers, Sun Alliance, who require
that the City Council be added to the parties to be sued.

 Moreover, it was apparent at the recent pre-trial review on this issue that
 the plaintiffs are still not particularly interested in pushing claims
 against the City Council and see their real targets as being elsewhere.

 Moreover, I am given to understand that the real problem in the way of any
 sort of negotiated settlement on this matter of Sun Alliance, Sheffield
 Wednesday’s Insurers, who are apparently not at this stage winded
 cooperate in negotiated settlements.       It is hoped that they will c ange
 their mind thereby obviating the need for a trial.

 Moving on there has also been a suggestion m a d e that the Police
 would rather like the retention of             the City Council in the list of
 defendants for several reasons, including the one that they are
 moment as you know u n d e r - insured, and therefore, any additional party upon
 whom to spread liability would be welcome.

 Clearly at some stage or other there may need to be a policy consideration
 of this topic as if the Council remained party to the litigation which
 currently appears probable, and if it was say found at maximum responsible
 for 10Z of     the damages this would have a corresponding reduction on the
 amount which the Police Authority had to pay and therefore would reduce the
 amount that might have to be found by the four District Councils,
 Sheffield’s insurance contribution being limited to the £50,000 excess on
 its policy and with no real prospect of additional surcharges on its
 premiums. Against that, of course, there is the issue of the Poor “ “ 8®
 that would arise once again of the authority should it be found, even to a
  small extent, liable in damages for negligence.

  Clearly, as I stressed at the beginning these are merely    "legal Chinese
  rumours" which I shall do my best to verify, but which I thought, you ought
  to know in confidence at this stage as they may well require certain action
  to be taken at some future date assuming there is some substance in them
  regarding our relationship with the Police Authority.
JUea th a t su ch a B ritis h state-                                                                  P re to ria regim e. A nd tn e y endorsed                                                      —u u .cu .iw stings, o u i w e             ”      “*     »»>.J II«t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       aL_r     ^l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ..^ ^J
                                                   n e t m in iste r by issu in g a sta te m e n t                                                           everyw here, a n d praying              tu m o u r h a s persisted, and       m onitored for a lo n g tim e to e o m i,v p
 - could be issued a fte r Mrs                     w hich c o n trad icts th e sta te m e n t         th e e stab lish m e n t o f a n ind ep en d en t      th a t it w ill go off w ith in the                                           described th e d isease condition in w h ich
 cn er h e rse lf p roposed th ead o p -                                                             ag en cy to review a n d re p o rt on                                                           now a tra n s p la n t u sin g th e
                                                   w hich h e signed o n B rita in 's b ehalf                                                                n ex t six w eeks, signalling           jjyer of a n o th e r child is the    it leads to d e a th in th e te e n s, b u t n o t a ll
 of th e jo in t s ta te m e n t.”                 in K uala L um pur.                               S o u t l ^ ^ r i c a ’s i n t e r n a t i o n a l      th a t a d o n o r o rgan has                                                 ch ild ren a re affected a n d sh e m a y n o t
it th e Foreign S ecretary , Mr                                                                      fin a n c ^ B n k s .                                                                              > hope.
                                                   . "M r M ajor’s position is now                                                                           been found in tim e.                   T J e a n w hile th e agonis­          need a tra n sp la n t." .          .
i M ajor, said o n BBC Radio 4                     becom ing u n te n ab le. We h av e a                M e a JB R le S o u th A frica’s biggest
   it w as perfectly p ro p e r for                                                                  n e w s p a p e r , t h e S u n d a y T im e s ,           M r G ough said yester­             in g w a it goes on fo r M r and          Y esterday, D aljit enjoyed a p arty to cel- '
                                                   P rim e M in ister w ho do esn ’t ca re for       claim ed y esterd ay th a t P re to ria was             day: “E very n ig h t we go to         M rs G ould.                           e b rate th e firs t an n iv e rsa ry of th e liv e r
 n s o f balanced d eb ate,                       lo y alty in h e r C abinet a n d for                                                                      bed a n d say o u r prayers,
 he C om m onw ealth sta te m e n t                                                                  read y to drop a k ey d em and th a t th e                                                        “W aitin g fo r th e phone          tra n sp la n t p rogram m e a t th e R oyal F r e e «
                                                  B rita in ’s sta n d in g in th e w orld,                                                                  h o p in g th a t som ew here          to rin g o r tn a t bleeper to go      Hospital in Hampstead, north-west**
 ou t w h a t th e C om m onw ealth               p ro v id in g sh e gets h e r w ay.”              ANC a b an d o n arm ed stru g g le before
  >. .It does n o t set o u t w hat                                                                  ta k in g p a rt in negotiations.                       t h e r e is a d o n o r for           is a n ig h tm a re ,” said Mrs        London;
                                                  . In S o u th A frica, th e foreign m in is­                                                               pAhpr/1!! **                           G ould. “If I h e a r a bleep on
iin w a n ts,” h e e x p la in e d .,             te r, M r P ik B otha, criticised th e                M r de K lerk said in a speech on                                                                                                      He said: “I w as v e ry ill an d I w ould w ak e 1
  said th a t B rita in h a d success-                                                               S a tu rd ay th a t th e go vern m en t still              A nd D r Cliff B ailey, who         a cooker tim e r m y h eart
                                                  C om m onw ealth statem en t. •                                                                            h as been tre a tin g Rebecca                                                 up and go back to sleep. A t first I could not-*
   ‘drag ged people in o u r direc-                                                                  w an ted th e ANC a n d o th e r groups                                                        goes in m y m outh. I t’s a            ea t th in g s I w anted to eat, b u t now I c a n t
                                                      “S an ctio n s can only fu rth e r delay       fig h tin g w h ite ru le to ren o u n ce               a t S t J a m e s’s H ospital,         risk y o p eratio n b u t we
oy g e ttin g th em to acknow ledge               th e n eg o tiatio n process in South                                                                      Leeds, said: “We cannot                                                       e a t a n y th in g .”        .
u tility of san ctio n s.”                                                                           violence a s p a rt o f step s tow ards                                                        k now w e’ll lose h e r if she            A nd y esterd ay , D aljit h ad cho co late?
                                                  A fn c a ,” h e said in a statem en t.             reconciliation.                                         w ait m u c h longer.                  d o esn ’t ha,ve a tra n sp la n t
                                                                                                                                                                “We h av e d one a s m uch          soon.”                                 C ontinued on P age 3. ;


rewman
’owns                                                                                                              aim cas                                                                                                                 Cheers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for the
: yacht
ipsizes
                                                il                                                                    isaster fund                                                                                                         best of
AILOR died and
                                            ,           i , ___ w an t
                                     c a s h t r o m t h e Hills-
                                                                            the individual amounts
                                                                            involved run into tens of                                                         t r o p h e to p r o v i d e          the fund, but the appli­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           bitters
ier is fig h tin g fo r h is         borough d isa ste r fu n d —         'thousands of pounds.                  EXCLUSIVE                                    e m otional an d practical            cations have been given a BEERS     produced by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                J o h n S m ith ’s T a a c a ste r
Iter th e ir y a c h t capsi-       as th e first big pay-outs are                                                                                            su p p o rt for victim s.             low priority by the
                                                                              The move fulfilsthe aim            By MATT YOUDALE
  in th e S o l e n t
rday. . -
  y w ere plucked from
                                    m a d e to v i c t i m s ’
                                    fam ilies.
                                        Sheffield social services
                                                                           of the fund’s adminis­
                                                                           trators to distribute the
                                                                                                                                                                 W ork h a s Included coun­
                                                                                                                                                             sellin g for L iverpudlians
                                                                                                                                                             o n p ilgrim ages to H ills­
                                                                                                                                                                                                    trustees.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      The fund’s biggest pay­
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ments are likely to be to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B rew ery a n d T ay lo r’s •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Knowle S p rin g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B rew ery in K eighley’- •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              . i                   ■t I I n
                                                                           money as quickly as poss­                                                                                                                           have been selected as
 ■a by h elico p ter from
  D aedalus a fte r th e ir
'i g h t w e i g h t r a c i n g
                                    chiefs a re seek in g m oney
                                    from th e appeal, w h ich h as
                                    raised m ore th a n £10m
                                                                           ible, and sooner than was
                                                                           the case after the Valley
                                                                           Parade fireand Zeebrugge
                                                                                                                 s e c r e t a r y of t h e H ills ­
                                                                                                                bo rou g h fam ily su p p o rt
                                                                                                                group, M r B arry Devon-
                                                                                                                                                             borough, and group
                                                                                                                                                             th e rap y for local residents
                                                                                                                                                             an d stew ard s o n d u ty at
                                                                                                                                                                                                    those left with brain dam­
                                                                                                                                                                                                    age or other incurable
                                                                                                                                                                                                    injuries, whose cases are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B eers of th e Y ear by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               com pilers of th e 1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Good B eer Guide.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B1
  P andem onium , w as              sm ce 95 Liverpool fans                                                     s id e , w h o s e 1 8 -y e a r-o ld         th e gro u n d o n th e day of        still being assessed.
                                                                           ferry disasters.
om e in h eav y seas.               w ere cru sh e d to d e ath at            By last week, more than
                                                                                                                son, C h risto p h er, died In
                                                                                                                th e disaster.
                                                                                                                                                             th e d isaster.                          Victims’ lawyers have F o r th e firs t tim e In its
: o th e r erew m em bers           th e ir te a m ’s FA C up sem i­                                                                                             T h e cost of th e Initiative,    also started actions        17-year h isto ry , th e
                                                                           £500,000 had been released               He said la st nig h t: “ We                                                                                C am paign F o r R eal A le
 nicked u p by n earb y             f i n a l w i t h N o tti n g h a m    by trustees to settle fun­                                                        inv o lv in g a n eight-strong        against South Yorkshire
                                    Forest la st A pril.                                                        hav e received m oney in                     te a m of experienced social          police and Sheffield Wed­   form ed ta s tin g panels
                                                                           eralexpenses, and incases            th e p ast 24 h o u rs a n d I               w o rk ers an d clerical staff                                    to ev a lu a te a n d rate--sw
■' P an d em onium w as                 T he city is se t to jo in         of financial hardship.                                                                                                  nesday Football Club, who
 f 15 vessels w hich set           local au th o ritie s from M er­                                             know a n u m b e r of o th er                s u p p o r te d by a senior          were largely blamed by      342 beers It lis ts in th e '
                                                                             The fund is processing             fam ilies h a v e also. T h e size           h o sp ital psychologist, is                                      guide. V o lu n teers'
  vn th e H am ble R iver          seyside in claim in g a co n ­          about 650 applications                                                                                                  Lord JusticeTaylorforthe
 ■'j, C lub to com pete in         trib u tio n to w ard s th e cost                                            of th e fu n d , show s th e                alread y believed to be ap­            disaster. Compensation      tongues w ere * . v s
                                                                           made on behalf of those              fan tastic gen ero sity of th e             p ro ach in g £100,000.                                            “profiled” an d p alates
                                   of h elp in g th e bereaved,            who suffered less serious                                                                                               demands are expected to
 lough th e re w as a              in ju red a n d w itn esses to                                               public, a lth o u g h n o th in g               C ou n cil officials a re now      top £20m.                   “ed u cated ” in lntensivo
                                                                          injuriesatHillsborough or            can com p en sate u s for th e               p la n n in g to scale dow n the                      w orkshops before being 1
 f breeze, officials be-           com e to te rm s w ith th e            were psychologicallydam­                                                                                                    M r D evonside said: “We
! sailin g w ould be               tragedy.                                                                    loss of o u r son.”                          team , a lth o u g h it w ill be                      let loose in public
                                                                          aged         by     their                Sheffield officials w ill                                                       have n o objection to local
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  houses, say s CAM RA i'
nd m ost of th e o th e r               S u b stan tia l su m s w ere     experiences.                                                                      r e - e s t a b l i s h e d for key    authorities making
                                                                                                               seek form al ap p ro v al from               ev en ts lik e n ex t y e a r’s                    As well as b ein g praised
 :titors com pleted th e
h tsm en dubbed th e
 •s a 10-m inute hurrl-
                                   han ded o v er a t th e w eek­
                                   end to th e re lativ e s of
                                   those killed in th e Shef­
                                   field stad iu m .
                                                                             The weekend payments
                                                                          involve the families of
                                                                          those killed or badly in­
                                                                                                               co uncillors la te r th is week
                                                                                                               for th e a u th o rity to m ake a
                                                                                                               claim on th e fund.
                                                                                                                                                            Sheffield in q u e sts Into the
                                                                                                                                                            95 d ea th s a n d th e first
                                                                                                                                                            a n n i v e r s a r y of th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                   claim s. It is only rig h t an a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  in th e book, tn e
                                                                                                                                                                                                   pro p er if th e m oney is for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  honoured b rew eries - t
                                                                                                                                                                                                   th e b en efit of anguished
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ■'!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  w ill be fe a tu re d for th e                                    *'¥#9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                          juredatHillsborough,who                                                                                                  fam ilies.
 ;ind every lifeboat                   D etails of th e p ay m en ts                                               T he claim w ill cen tre on            . tragedy.                                              first tim e in a 48-page
                                                                          have not been required to            expenses in c u rred by th e                                            “But under no circum­      in sert ta ilo red fo r b eer '
   th e S o l e n t w as           are stric tly confidential,            submit claims.                                                                        O th er a u th o ritie s from
                                                                                                                                                                                     stances must the disaster
 led to save dozens of             b u t it is u n d ersto o d th a t                                          form ation of a special u n it               Merseyside have sub­                                  fan s’ p e rso n a l
                                                                             One recipient was the             In th e w ake o f th e catas-                                         fund be invested In foot­    organisers.                .
 ■n vessels.                                                                                                                                                m itted sim ila r claim s to
                                                                                                                                                                                     ball facilities.”
.■■s?e c a ta m a ra n capsi-                                                                                                                                                                                  T he guide describes
 i th e e n tra n c e to                                                                                                                                                                                         T aylor’s L andlord as a ;
:on h a rb o u r a n d do-
 f boat crew s ta k in g
i a ra c e off Lyming-
 rf to be rescued.
                                   Five killed as coach hits car
                                   FIVE people w ere killed                 The two men and two be serious, were taken to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 distinctive, full-bodied
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 b itter: a n d Jo h n • .■ .v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S m ith’s M agnet as q r 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 p alatab le b est b itter.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               O f th e selected beers,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 only fo u r a re produced
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !,   "M*
    INDEX
                                   yesterday w h en a coach
                                   appeared to go o u t of
                                                                          women in the car, who Peterborough District
                                                                          havenotbeennamed, were Hospital, Cambs,
                                                                                                                                                             There were no rear seat
                                                                                                                                                           belts.                      Devon and Cornwall
                                                                                                                                                                                     police were Urging motor­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 by th e sev en n a tio n al
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 com panies. T w en ty of .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     c
^prtainment.... 11
■r P n « + . . . . .        4
                                   control an d h it a n oncom ­
                                   ing car.
                                     The dead iwki
                                                 ere
                                                  .t..th e coach
                                                           r\i..
                                                                          thought to have been on   In a thirdaccident a boy
                                                                          their way home from a of 10 was killed when he
                                                                          wedding in south Devon. was thrown roit nf « nor
                                                                                                                                                             Two people were killed ists to stay at home and
                                                                                                                                                           ina car crash on Saturday Devon County Council
                                                                                                                                                           njght after heavy over- said there was more rain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 th e 46 cho sen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 brew eries w ere founded
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 onlv in th n m a t <W»/U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •o<
                                                                                                         3     - 6     0        I   (PLj,
                                                                                                             ^                  I           y   ico|io
    South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                   POLICE H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                                                   SNIG H ILL
                                                                                   S H E F F I E L D S3 8 L Y
                                                                                   T E L E P H O N E (0742) 7 6 8 5 2 2
                                                                                   TELEX 547996



       ALL COMMUN ICATIONS SHOULD BE A D D R E S S E D TO
       "T HE CHIEF C O N S T A B L E "
r                                                            n                      Y O U R R E F E F^E N (J E . '.'. , , , . * 1

    Mr M Webster
    A/Head of Department
    Administration and Legal Department                                            'D AT E                            £jL;.QGtober 1989
    Town Hall                                                                      1     i '•<
    Sheffield SI 2HH
L                                                            J


    Dear Sir

    During the afternoon of Saturday 30 September 1989 the police were present
    and on duty at the Hillsborough football ground when Sheffield Wednesday
    played Coventry City. When the match had finished Professor R A Smith,
    Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, University of Sheffield,
    Mappin Street, Sheffield approached one of the police constables on duty and
    explained.that he was working with the Taylor Inquiry into the Hillsborough
    Disaster, and that he was at the ground in connection with his involvement
    with the work being undertaken into that incident. Professor Smith went on
    to explain that he had examined a number of barriers situated at different
    locations on the Spion Kop, had taken photographs of those barriers and that
    he wished to draw to the police officer's attention certain barriers which
    it was claimed showed signs of corrosion.  Professor Smith explained to the
    police officer that he wished to point out the corrosion so that his
    observations could be confirmed for the time and date by a police officer
    who was on duty at the ground.  Professor Smith went on to say that he had
    taken photographs of the game which had just taken place to prove that his
    findings had been discovered on the particular date, ie: 30 September 1989.

    The Professor was invited to speak to a Club official or a more senior
    police officer but he declined that offer.

    This letter is forwarded for your information and attention and any action
    you deem necessary.

    Yours sincerely_______ ■                       _____




    A/Assistant Chief Constable
    Operations


    cc         Professor Smith




           THE OFFICER DEALING WITH THIS CORRESPONDENCE IS .............................               EXTENSION

    A D M /1
    R3719                                                                                              Sch 9 1 6 0
                                C IT Y O F S H E F F I E L D — M E M O R A N D U M
                                                                                                       v/tG>|lO
From        Chief Publicity Officer                        Jo     SEE LIST BELOW           ___ _


Date        10th October 1989                                                        r -     I     ■
R ef.       SL/CLH
Tel. Ext.   4068                                           Ref.




            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

            I attach a draft report which is expected to be considered by the IC S P
            Panel at its next meeting at 2.00 on Wednesday 25th October.  Please let
            me have any comments you may have by 16th October.     reJ.     H-
                                                                               -'
            Assuming the report goes through, I will be convening a meeting of
            interested parties in line with Recommendation 7.2 and propose to invite
            yourself or your nominee to contribute to the discussion.




            att




            LIST

            Pamela Gordon, Chief Executive
            Keith Crawshaw, Director of Libraries
            Mark Webster, Acting Head of Admin & Legal
                       Emergency Planning Officer
            Phil Dent, Principal Press Officer
                         International Officer
                                 THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                              PUBLICITY DEPARTMENT'S RESPONSE




         IMMEDIATE RESPONSE: THE FIRST 36 HOURS

         1.1     The disaster occurred around 3.00 pm on Saturday 15th April 1989 and
                 the first telephone calls from the media were received by the
                 Principal Press Officer at home about 45 minutes later. He consulted
                 the Leader and Chief Executive and put out an official press
                 statement via the Press Association just after 4.00. By 6.30 pm, the
                 Chief Publicity Officer and Principal Press Officer had set up a base
               ■ in the Town Hall, using the Lord Mayor's and Chief Publicity
                Officer's office (which are joined) and four telephones, whichwere
                in constant use until after midnight. Radio and television
                journalists were in pursuit of interviews, plans of the stadium and
                information on safety certificates.

         1.2    During the evening it was agreed that the Lord Mayor, then Councillor
                Phyllis Smith, would set up an Appeal Fund the following day, in
                Sheffield Town Hall.  Arrangements were made for representatives of
                Sheffield, Liverpool, Nottingham and Nottinghamshire to be in
                Sheffield at noon on the Sunday.  Wreaths and floral arrangements
                were ordered through the Recreation Department and arrived on Sunday
                morning.

         1.3    The Chief Publicity Officer's office became the focus for media
                enquiries, arrangements for the Appeal and for general enquiries not
                connected with the Police or Medico Legal Centre.  This meant that
                their telephone lines could be Kept free for relatives.and other
                enquiries, as all other queries were referred to Publicity.   The
                first donation to the Appeal, a beermug of cash collected by
                Nottingham Forest supporters, was brought into the office on Sunday
                morning.

         1.4    A press conference was called to cover the launch of the Appeal. A
                small civic party, without the media, then went to Hillsborough
                football ground to deliver wreaths during the afternoon and then to
                visit the injured in the Northern General and Hallamshire Hospitals.
                The Chief Publicity Officer and Principal Press Officer continued to
                run a limited service until well into the Sunday evening, in an
                effort to respond to the continuing flood of media enquiries.   They
                also acted as clearing house for all kinds of information, offers of
                help in accommodating relatives etc and ensuring such information was
                passed to radio and television stations.


    2.   THE FIRST TWO WEEKS

         2.1     On Monday 17th April a small group of officers went to Liverpool to
                 sort out the organisation of the Appeal Fund, as Liverpool F.C. were
                 setting up another Fund and we wished to ensure there was no
                 confusion.  This was satisfactorily resolved and a Sheffield trustee,
                 Norman Adsetts 0BE, was nominated.

                 The Publicity Department subsequently dealt with all aspects of the
                 Appeal from the Sheffield end, including a city-wide collection,
                 co-ordination of events, distribution and collection of collecting

                                                                  ... cont



1
recep.tacles (buckets and election boxes were pressed into service as
well as over 1000 tins), and publicising the Appeal through posters,
stickers and the media.   About 15 members of staff were involved most
of the time together with a 'number of volunteer helpers who presented
themselves at the reception desk and offered to do anything
necessary.   A daily lunchtime meeting was instituted with four
officers : the Chief Publicity Officer, the Principal Press Officer,
a Press Officer and an International Officer, to enable us to keep
track of what was happening.   These four officers were fully
committed on post—Hillsborough work for these two weeks.

The Press Office continued to answer enquiries from the media and
also began to put out statements and releases of its own.  In the
first two weeks, the Press Team dealt with a tremendous volume of
enquiries from newspapers, radio and television, not only in this
country but aiso Europe, the United States and Australia, dealing
with all aspects of the Council's involvement, as well as carrying
out a large number of interviews themselves, both live and recorded,
on the setting up and running of the Appeal fund.

A huge quantity of mail flooded in to the Appeal in general and the
Lord Mayor's office in particular.    (We had arranged for the Lord
Mayor's address to be published on Prestel since the day of the
disaster).   This was opened, sorted and donations recorded.    All the
mail had to be read.  Donations were paid in by City Treasury, whose
cashcounting machines were invaluable.   Staff in City Treasury
provided an extremely efficient and cheerful service in the face of
tremendous pressure, and we are most grateful to them for their help.

A Book of Remembrance was acquired and opened.   With volunteer
labour and Publicity Department staff, it was available for signing
all day in the foyer of the Town Hall, including Saturday 22nd and
29th April.   Arrangements were made for celebrities, football teams
and various eminent visitors to aign the book and for this to be
covered by the press.  This helped to provide an antidote to the
scurrilous and distasteful stories then appearing in some sections of
the media.

The Chief Publicity Officer and the Principal Press Officer attended
a number of daily briefing meetings where the efforts of various
different departments were reported on and co-ordinated.  This
assisted with the co-ordination of information and our ability to
find the right spokesperson at the right time.

During this period the City was hosting a high level civic delegation
from our twin town of Anshan, including Anshan's new Mayor.  Although
their programme had to be altered because of the disaster, it was not
curtailed.  The visitors from Anshan signed the Book of Remembrance
and attended the service held in Sheffield Cathedral on 23rd April.


The normal working of the Department continued as far as possible,
with all staff playing their part in spite of constant interruptions
from camera crews (on a daily basis), volunteers, donors, telephone
and personal enquiries and VIPs who appeared without warning to see
how the Appeal was progressing.  In the main, staff gave of their
time voluntarily, putting in considerable extra hours at evenings and
weekends, and rarely taking lunch breaks.




                                                      cont
                                     - 3 -


     2.8   In addition to arranging for a civic party to attend the service in
           Sheffield Cathedral, arrangements were also made to accommodate the
           Deputy Mayor of Bochum, who flew in and wished to attend the service
           in Liverpool Cathedral. He brought a substantial donation to the
           Appeal.


     APPEAL CO—ORDINATION

     3.1   Within two weeks of the disaster it was clear that the Department had
           somehow to try to get back to normal working.   Staff were tired,
           stressed and emotionally affected by the work they had been doing.
           Approval was sought and obtained for the appointment of an Appeal
           Co-ordinator and Roy Dixon was appointed to the post on 24th May
           1989, for a period of 3 months.

     3.2   This appointment took the pressure off the three staff in the
           Department who had been working constantly on the aftermath of the
           Disaster.   The Co-ordinator dealt with all the correspondence, made
           appropriate acknowledgements, provided details to the Leader on other
           contributing local authorities and to the Trust Fund Manager on
           donations of over £1,000 and passed to West Midlands police letters
           from those who said they were at Hillsborough at the time of the
           disaster and therefore may have been witnesses.

     3.3   The Co-ordinator then took on the task of co-ordinating all current
           and future activities in relation to the Appeal and receiving
           presentations of donations im-various parts of the country.   The
           appeal stood at £4 million when he arrived and just under £10 million
           when he left at the end of August.  He also looked after the Book of
           Remembrance and arranged for its presentation to Liverpool FC on 19th
       ’■* August, Liverpool's first match of the 89/90 season, by which time it
           contained 20,000 names.

     3.4   Co-ordination with the Trustees was through the Chief Publicity
           Officer, who attended their meeting in Sheffield, accompanied them to
           Hillsborough Football ground and later to a meeting with the Lord
           Mayor and those who had helped with the Appeal.   The media were,
           exceptionally, invited to this event in the Lord Mayor's Parlour, and
           it proved valuable both as a morale booster for staff and an
           opportunity for the Trustees to say on television what they were
           doing with the money raised.   The Chief Publicity Officer has
           continued to act throughout as unofficial PR and media adviser to the
           Trustees.

     3.5   On the termination of the Co-ordinator's contract at the end of
           August, various separate bank accounts were wound up and consolidated
           into the main fund account and final contacts were made with the
           Trust Fund Manager and the Liverpool City Council Appeals office and
           shop.




4.   PUBLIC INQUIRY

     4.1   The Department's involvement with the Taylor Inquiry was small in
           relation to its involvement elsewhere.   It consisted of these
            elements.
     4.2   The Design Studio produced a large number of signs, notices, name
           plates and identification at very short notice.

                                                            ... cont



                              i
      4.3   The Conference and Tourism Manager worked with the Home Office
            representatives and Assistant Chief Personnel Officer (Safety, Health
            and Welfare) on the arrangements for a venue for the Public Inquiry,
            which was finally set up in the Town Hall.

      4.4    The Press Office made all the arrangements with the media and the
            Central Office of Information for all press facilities during the
            Inquiry.   During the course of the Inquiry, the Press Office provided
            an ongoing facility to the media and continued to coordinate the
            Council's response to the media.

      4.5    On the publication of the interim Report of the Taylor Inquiry, the
            Press Office again co-ordinated media relations at the Sheffield end
            on behalf of COI and ’also issued the necessary press releases and
            statements on behalf of the local authority.


5.    AFTERMATH

      5.1   The Department has identified a number of areas in which improvements
            could be made to procedures to ensure that communication is better,
            quicker and more effective.   While it is not possible to be in a
            state of preparedness for a disaster such as Hillsborough there are a
            number of practical steps to be taken, such as better use of
            telephone answering machines and mobile phones and a 'duty officer'
            system for press enquiries.  A review of these procedures is
            underway.

      5.2   In conjunction with this, the Chief Publicity Officer, the Director
            of Libraries and the Acting Head of Admin & Legal, have briefly
            discussed the information and communication aspects of our planning
            for peacetime emergencies, and believe there is a further need for
            discussion at a corporate level on how we approach this.

      5.3   There are a number of lessons to 'be learned on how to deal with the
            public response to such a tragedy, and the Chief Publicity Officer is
            preparing material on this which should be useful if it should be
            needed in the future.  Other issues are raised such as the
            suitability of local authority involvement in fundraising for an
            Appeal if, in the final analysis, the authority may be found at
            fault.


6.   CONCLUSION

      6.1   Apart from dealing with the Trustees, and with the small trickle of
            donations still coming in, the Publicity Department's response to the
            Hillsborough Disaster is now concluded.


7.   RECOMMENDATIONS

      7.1   To note the arrangements made by the Publicity Department in the
            aftermath of the Hillsborough Disaster.

      7.2   To initiate corporate level discussion on the information and
            communication aspects of our Plan for Peacetime Emergencies.




Shirley Lanstone                                             9 October 1989
Chief Publicity Officer                                      B :SLJB64
                                    A P P E N D I X

                              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL


         The total raised at 25th September 1989 is £10.5 million.        The following
         table shows the date at which each million was reached :

              £ million                                Date (1989)

                 1                                     24th   April
                 2                                     28th   April
                 3                                      2nd   May
                 4                                     11th   May
                 5                                     23rd   May
                 6                                      7th   June
                 7                                     27th   June
                 8                                     30th   June
                 9                                     27th   July
                10                                     21st   September


         Over £0.5 million has been paid out.    Payments are confidential.  However,
         the trustees can say that funeral expenses for all but one or two of the
         deceased have been met, and initial., payments were made to all the next of
         kin of the deceased and to the seriously injured by the end of May.
         Subsequently, payments have been made to those less seriously injured
         where there has been financial hardship and further interim payments have
         been made, where necessary.


         As they were aware of the identity of those killed and seriously injured,
         the trustees have not sought claims from family members.   In the case of
         those suffering less serious physical or psychological injury, the
         trustees have had to rely on people claiming.  To this end, the Publicity
         Department placed on the trustees' behalf a number of advertisements in
         the national and appropriate local press, inviting claims.   To date, 650
         such claims have been received and acknowledged.  About % of the 650
         respondents have made a detailed claim and these are currently being
         assessed by a Medical Assessment Panel.


         The trustees' aim is to make a major distribution before the end of 1989.
         This depends in part on the stabilisation of the more serious injury cases
         and the return of completed applications from those who have registered
         claim. Previous funds established after the Bradford and Zeebrugge
         disasters reached finality in two years, but had substantially completed
         their work in about 15 months.


         As to the use of "surplus" funds, various ideas have been tentatively
         canvassed, but the trustees believe that this is a matter which can only
         be considered when the major distribution to beneficiaries has been made
         and there is a clearer idea as to what surplus remains.


    Shirley Lanstone
    Chief Publicity Officer                             10th October 1989
    B :SLCH69



I
    R3719                                                                         Sch 9 1 6 0
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From        Councillor Clive Betts               To     Mark Webster
                                                        Acting Head of Admin. & Legal

Date        11th October, 1989
Ref.        CJCB/JM
Tel. Ext.   4701                                 Ref.


                             Fencing at Leppings Lane and Hillsborough

            Could you please inform me what is happening now with regard to Leppings
            Lane and Hillsborough and whether the ground has to stay in its current
            condition until the criminal investigation has taken place.

                                                                                  IO



                                                            ^   Uaoe     as,Usd


            C. J. C. BETTS                                   id c.c\<$act      CTC&s.
            LEADER OF THE CITY COUNCIL
                                                             OpAC£_ ^    LrvftYrA.              O p
INQUIRY INTO TH E HILLSBOROUGH                           T h e R t H on L o r d J u s t ic e Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                                         50 Queen A nne’s Gate
                                                         London SW1H 9 AT
                                                         01-273 2577/3602/2370




      G j ^ j c If                        ^
                         ^   L ~ ^ tQ < x X ^ {Qs-jofc

                             H   o x a   .^              Date
                     S W JfuiAot ^                                  ^c| ( d \ s ^ .

                             S\         2-t+ti'
                                                                     Ref: Hl/E




      Thank you for your letter of Q w Ocfco^eV
      which Lord Justice Taylor has read and which will be
      taken into account in the Inquiry.




  j                      * VS&L
  ____ P?~;
         Hi:-';                  iua.
      A l
      B     1 2 OCT 1089 PM . RSecretary
                                 M WHALLEY
                                         to the Inquiry
  If OS^.j           \            PSO
  GS                              CC
   R 3719                                                                                                Sch 9 1 6 2
                                    CITY OF SHEFFIELD — M EMORANDUM                           G?   3- VJboctVvcjQvd

From                                                           To       Mark Webster
            Social Worker                                               Chief Legal Advisor
            Hillsborough TaSK           Team                            L e g a l & A d m i n De pt.
Date        9th O c t o b e r , 1989
Ref.
Tel. Ext.   4887                                               Ref.


            RE          PUBLIC M E E TIN G             7 - 00 p.m. 1 0 t h O C T O B E R ,    1989
                        E S K D A L E C O M M U N I T Y CEN T R E , E S K D A L E C L O S E

            F o l l o w i n g our p h o n e call today, p l e a s e f i n d a t t a c h e d s o m e n o tes
            of the l a s t m e e t i n g the r e s i d e n t s held.             Th e v a r i o u s p o i n t s
            r a i s e d are g o i n g t o w a r d s the A g e n d a .      T h e m a i n items l i k e l y to
            n e e d a d d r e s s i n g by s o m e o n e f r o m y o u r D e p a r t m e n t are p o i n t s 1, 2
            and 3, a l t h o u g h o t h e r s may be r a i s e d f r o m the floor.

            Thanks     for   your    help     at s u c h s h o r t    notice.




            Enc.
1.    A wa y fans s h o u l d not be c h a n n e l l e d t h r o u g h the n a r r o w s t r e e t s
       s u r r o u n d i n g the gro un d, but s h o u l d e n t e r f rom P e n i s t o n e R o a d and
       then r o u n d the o u t s i d e of the g r o u n d and into the W e s t Stand .

2.    Semi-finals         should         no   longer     be    held   at S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y
      ground.

3.    B o t h f o o t b a l l c l u b s ( S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y and S h e f f i e l d   U n i t e d)   m o ve
       out of b u i l t up a reas a l t o g e t h e r and s h a r e a gro un d.

A.    W h e n m a t c h e s do take p l a c e the b a r r i e r s s h o u l d be in p l a c e so oner,
       to p r e v e n t e x t r a p a r k i n g and fans w a l k i n g t h r o u g h the s ide st r ee ts .

5.    R e s i d e n t s s h o u l d be p r o v i d e d w i t h s t i c k e r s for t h ei r c ars to
       e n a b l e f ree u n h i n d e r e d a cc es s in and out of t h e i r s t r e e t /
       r e s i d e n t s o nly p a r k i n g ar e a s in the s id e st re et s.

6.    S t e w a r d s m i g h t man b a r r i e r s in        the   street      earlier      in   the    day     and
       then be m a n n e d by the Police.

7.    R u b b i s h - t h o u g h t by r e s i d e n t s      to be   a major       problem       and    a number
       of s o l u t i o n s w e r e o f f e r e d .

(a)   T he c lu b m i g h t s p o n s o r l a rge m e ta l l i t t e r bins a r o u n d the o u t s i d e
       of the g r o u n d and s u r r o u n d i n g s t r ee ts .     T hi s may be e x t e n d e d to
       s p o n s o r s h i p by p ub s   and shops.

(b)   Th e c l u b   should      employ        people      to c l e a r    up   immediately           after    the
       game.

(c)   E x t r a r o ad s w e e p e r s    should    be     brought        in by   the C o u n c i l     after
       the      mat c h .

8.     T o i l e t s - a g ain a s i g n i f i c a n t p r ob l em . R e s i d e n t s q u e r i e d the
       p o s s i b i l i t y of t e m p o r a r y t o i l e t s b e i n g b r o u g h t in, a l t h o u g h it
       was n o t e d that t h er e are no p u b l i c t o i l e t s a v a i l a b l e for local
       r e s i d e n t s a nyway .

9.     P a r k i n g - s ome     suggestions           h ave   ben m e n t i o n e d   (points        A and     5)
       o t h e r s a re :-

(a)   that m o r e car p a r k i n g s p a c e s are p r o v i d e d by the club, e.g. by
      p u r c h a s i n g the p i e ce of g r o u n d in the t r i a n g l e b e t w e e n H e r r i e s
      R oa d and P e n i s t o n e Road.

(b)   that fan s are e n c o u r a g e d to pa rk on the o u t s k i r t s ,                  and     then     be
       b u s s e d in. (As for C h r i s t m a s s h o p p i n g ) .

(c)    S u p e r t r a m - r e s i d e n t s w e r e c o n c e r n e d t hat the c o m b i n e d e f f e c t
       of the S u p e r t r a m and e x t r a p e o p l e a t t e n d i n g a m a t c h w o u l d have
       s e r i o u s c o n s e q u e n c e s on the L e p p i n g s L an e t r ia ng le .




9.10.89
                                        "The Family Club"                                                   SU         /
             Bramall Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 738955 Fax: 0742 723030


   DC/0610                                                                     6th October 1989

   M. Vfebster,
   Acting Head of Department,
   City of Sheffield,
   Administration and Legal Department,
   Town H a l l ,
   Sheffield SI 2HH


   Dear Sir,
    Sheffield Eagles Rugby M a t c h - 8 October 1989

    I acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 2nd October.
    I confirm that Sheffield Eagles Rugby Club has requested the provision of a
    fully equipped ambulance for the above game.
    I also confirm that no alcohol will be on sale in our Stadium Bars as is the case
    at Football matches under the restrictions of the Control of Alcohol legislation.


   Yours faithfully,


                                                                              \         Vi.'1
   DAVID CAPPER
   COMPANY SECRETARY




D irectors: R.J. Brealey (Chairman), D. Dooley (Managing Director), A.H. Laver, M.A. Wragg, R. Wragg, P.G. Woolhouse
             Company Secretary: D. Capper,         Team M anager: D.T. Bassett,      England Reg. No. 61564
                                                                                                            n iM
     \South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                POLIC E H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                                                                SN IG HILL
                                                                                                S H E F F I E L D S3 8LY
                                                                                                T E L E P H O N E (074 2) 7 6 8 5 2 2
                                                                                                TELEX 547996



          A L L C O M M UN IC AT IO NS S H O U L D BE A D D R E S S E D TO
          " T H E CH IE F C O N S T A B L E "

                                                                                                YOUR REFERENCE

      Mr M Webster                                                                              OUR REFERENCE
      Acting Head of Department
      Administration and Legal Department                                                       DA TE
      Town Hall
      Sheffield
1—    SI 2HH                                                                     J



      Dear Sir

     Safety of Sports Grounds - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club - Pitch Perimeter
     Fence Gates

     I refer to your letter dated 21 September 1989 under the above heading and
     acknowledge that the discussion which took place between the police and the
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club is clearly a matter for the Advisory Group.                                                                 -
     That was always the intention as you will see .from the copy letter - attached)*;
     - sent by Chief Superintendent Nesbit, F Division, to Eastwood and Partners.                                                             Co       -
     The discussions previously referred to were held with the best of intentions
     with the purpose of establishing some common ground before the matter was
     referred to the Advisory Group.  I am conscious of your wish for all matters
     involving the safety in sports grounds to be subject of consideration by the
     Advisory Group so that such matters can be referred to Members of the Council,
     and will bring those matters pertinent to that wish to your attention.

     Yours faithfully




     A/Assistant Chief Constable                                                                         AD?*mi3TRAT!0N & LEGAL
     Operations                                                                                              D?PT., SHEFFIELD.
                                                                                                         A i         I  Hr AO  |L .b .
                                                                                                         B
                                                                                                                   - 5 OCT 1989         PAA
                                                                                                              r,     ,/i.j   1 ,B   I   PSO
                                                                                                      h i                               CC




                T H E O F F I C E R D E A L I N G WITH T H I S C O R R E S P O N D E N C E IS                   EX TE NS IO N

     A D M /1
        R3719                         C ITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEM ORANDUM          ^ T 162
                                                        j0 Mr. H. M. Webster, Acting Head
     Fr0m       Mr- J - G - Ward
                Principal Solicitor                        of Department

     Date       2nd October, 1989
     Ref.
              4001
^ T e l . Ext.4 0 0 1                                   Ref.




                Hillsborough - Future Action

                I refer to your memorandum of 25th August; I must apologise for the delay
                in responding to you on this.

                The suggestions that Councillor Betts puts forward seem to be a possible
                way forward to deal with the long term problem of the terracing, but at
                the present time the terracing is closed, and it is probably better to
                await the detailed comments of Sheffield Wednesday on the terracing before
                responding to them. Certainly, when a proposal is submitted by the club,
                the various comments made by theALeader can be put to them.




                JD
    R3*719

                                      CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM
From           Hie Building Surveyor
                                                               To    Acting Head of Admin. & Legal Dept.

               2 October 1989                                        For the attention of Mrs F Wbodhpad

Tel. Ext. 4169 - Mr K Blount




            Safety of Sports Grounds —
            Sheffield United F . C . , Bramall Lane, Sheffield
            External Perimeter Walls at Cherry Street/Shoreham si-r^t-



            DeSrtLS                                 25 SePtember' 1989 (received in this


           professional dutles and glvlng you professional advice at iheappropriate


           r e c i n t 5 ^ e ? :S 2 ^ r? f ’r^ y'?Utaf? Sar to aEPreciate    tine which has
                                cons™ ed in administering the Council's Safety of Soorts
           S       a   f   e     ’S   t h 3 £ “ ’V ? "     “        Uttle              «   indeed given
           fannulSTS           ^   t¥ ne sPent bY your technical advisors in
           formulating the material for you to administer.




           conflicting?        inat°r S° that adviCe received is neither duplicated or

           With reference to these external walls, my report of the annual
           S S CS <^ y “ 9 |f . OUt        the 16        1989       * * ln "«norandum formto you

        For clarification, I extract the last two items of the report.-
        6.4
                   tiiStilesr7f j 3 S7r te^ht°              bridc wal1 over     entrance to
                   rebuilt.                  S ^         °f the wal1 should ** renoved and-




                   be n e S S r ^     U tate “ y                     action which ray be found to


       ? % ,%1 1
               %. 1^       u    TL<- barec-
                               X-     £   e y unit
                                               ^ r was
                                                     ^ delayed,
                                                        T   i r your-       “*                *•
                                                                t t e r S Deoartment- pvhih-it-^q
       the 17^u^st?                              ** °am ents to         CLub, fran the 24 May to


       t f 2 6 £5 £ u ? W 8 9                                   ^      sU a e   in ^       ™ » n d u m
       G       *       you S     X l l c T r Z V Z S S 1™ °£ She£fiela Unlte3
    a)
                Written coments regarding the stadim, must be sent to you by the
                                      :T                        .     -        . ,   ..



      BT£ -£ ,,        , ;              • i      Far 'the-' atfe^ria,« cf. -Mrs
       If.offlcf rf find ^   defects in the S t a d i S T ' L" ~ g~ ~
      serious risk to spectators safety iirrosdiate steps must be taken to
      te taken1^'        to W attention so that the appropriate action may

c)
               sh?!4d refrain from expressing opinions in relation to
      either possible requirements or safety issues in general to Club
      repesentatives."

craJ*^ffLn                i00
                            lt€®     ° ^ report, the note of a severe
            ^ fiu ° Ver  turnstiles was reported to you in writing within
           of the annual inspection, facilitating the work to be done
within the closed season" at the ground. It is regretted that it was
necessary for my staff to have to take action under separate legislation
to remove this particular part of the wall, which you had known about for


Your manorandum asks for assurance that the exterior perimeter of the
          designated stadia have now been checked. Conment 5.9 of my
S T S k h S f ^ 10n rep° ? f°r *** Hillsborough Stadium and comments rade at
                                 *** 25 July regarding the condition of the
                     ^    Stadium, shows that the perimeter construction to
haw S S S       Vfedfesday ground has been inspected, and I am sure that you
          S comments concerning the external perimeter construction in your
reading of my recent report on the Owlerton Stadium, before you used these
comments to substantiate a prohibition notice on the ground.

I trust that these comments satisfy your concerns expressed in your

tne General Purposes Panel. ^   ln item 5’2 of Your report to MbE         s   of
                R 371 9
m 'ism                                         CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM
                          The Building Surveyor                        Acting Head of Admin. & Legal Dept.
         From                                                   To
                                                                       For the attention of Ms. F Wbodhead
                          29 September 1989
         Date
         Ref.
                          4169 - Mr K Blount
         Tel. Ext                                               Ref.




                          Safety at Sports Grounds
                          Advisory Group Maetinqs


                          I refer to your memorandum of 25 September concerning the perimeter walls
                          of Sheffield United Football Club and the question of the membership of
                          the Advisory Group.

                          Mr Butler is currently indisposed and therefore a full reply concerning
                          the walls will be sent after his return. However, may I draw your
                          attention to my report to you dated 24 May, 1989 (for the attention of
                          Mr D Bownes) wherein the condition of these walls was infact noted (at
                          item 6.5) and that further investigation would be needed in order to
                          determine appropriate action.

                          As to the membership of the Advisory Group, I note your intention to
                          invite Mr B J G Levers to future meetings. As a matter of principle I do
                          not think it is necessary for an authority or department to be represented
                          by more than one person. To do otherwise is to invite the Advisory Group
                          to become again an unwieldy body consumed by indecision.

                          Clearly, however, there will be occasions when such a representative might
                          wish to be accompanied by other officers of the same department to give
                          advice to him/her as may be necessary on particular issues. I see no
                          problem in that.

                          Except where I attend an Advisory Group in person, I am content that
                          Mr Butler represents the Division. Where it is necessary, however, he may
                          be substituted by another appropriate officer or be accompanied by another
                          officer, for example, Mr Levers or Mr Sheriff. I trust that I make myself
                          clear on this point.
The Chief Executive                        Lord Mayor


29 September 1989
AH/DG
4018



RE:   HILLSBOROUGH APPEAL FOND

Further to my recent communication on this issue and your message agreeing
to the suggestion. Having looked at the issue again, it seems to me that
although the Appeal was launched by your predecessor, in conjunction with
the three other Civic Leaders, the decision as to whether or not to close
the matter ought to be taken in conjunction with the Trustees.

Accordingly, I append for your consideration a draft of a letter which I
suggest you could send to Mr Reddington the Trust Fund Manager, if you
agree to this course of action.
Mr CM Reddington
Trust Fund Manager
The Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal
PO Box 220
4 Water Street
Liverpool
L69 2DN


Dear Mr Reddington

                                DRAFT LETTER


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL

I enclose for your information and attention copies of correspondence that
have passed between the Chief Executives for Sheffield and Nottingham
regarding this matter.

My own view is that there may well be some merit in the proposal advanced by
Nottingham, but in light of the fact that the Trust is now a separate entity,
I believe any discussion upon this issue should involve the Trustees.

Accordingly, I would be grateful if you would put the issues before the
Trustees and indeed before the other two authorities involved in the Appeal,
and if necessary, convene a meeting of the appropriate persons to discuss the
best way forward.

Yours sincerely,




Lord Mayor
Mr MHF Hammond
Chief Executive and Town Clerk
Nottingham City Council
The Guildhall
Nottingham
NG1 4BT

Dear Mr Hammond,

Further to the Chief Executive’s communication of 20 September,    concerning
this matter,   I now enclose for your information and attention a copy of a
letter I have today sent to the Trust Fund Manager, the contents of which are
reasonably self-explanatory.

Yours sincerely,




Lord Mayor
The Acting Head of the                                   Councillor CJC Betts
Administration and Legal
Department
28 September 1989
AH/DG
4018


RE: OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM

With reference     to your query of the 25 September, I suppose the answer to your
question is that   w e do, on occasions, in the interest of urgency c o m m u n i ca t e offers
verbally, but I    would fully anticipate that to avoid any confusion or doubt such
offers should be   followed up by written confirmation at the earliest opportunity.
  City of Sheffield        Metropolitan District


                                                           Councillor C. J. C. Betts, BA(Cantab.)
Mr. M a r k Webster,
 Acting H e a d of Admin. & Legal                          Leader
                                                           Sheffield City Council
                                                           L e a d e r ' s Office
 D o w e normally c o m m u n i c a t e offers verbally?   T o w n Hall
                                                           SHEFFIELD
                                                           S1 2HH Tel. 734701

 CJCB
 25.9.89.
                                                           with compliments
                                                                                                                                                Sch 9 1 6 2
       R3719                                         C ITY OF SHEFFIELD — M EM ORANDUM
         i
  From           sThe   Acting H e a d of the                                            To         Councillor C J C Betts
                  Administration and Legal                                                          Leader
                                                                                                                                    2 2 era
                  De p a r t m e n t                                                                                                                 1989.
  Date            20 S e pt e m b er 1989                                                           cc F W o o d h e a d
  Ref.            AH/DG                                                                                J G Ward
  Tel. Ext.       4018                                                                   Ref.




                  Further to our brief telephone conversation of M o n d a y 18 September, in connection
                  with the above topic. Frances W o o d h e a d ascertained from Jon Bauer that last
                  W e d n e s d a y i.e. the 13 September, the Council had m a d e a verbal offer of the grant
                  of a lease of I



                   Apparently, M r Littlewood is going to put the proposals to the Board and is expected
                   to c o m e back quickly.
                   With regard to the Prohibition Notice, conversations with the Club's Solicitor suggest
                   that they will not be appealing but will concentrate on getting the work done,
                   however, this is not borne out by recent public statements by M r Littlewood as
                   per the attached article. /                                                      , ,i 7

                                                                                    i)



                            By John Highfield
        THE owners, o f Sheffield’s Owlerton
        Stadium say they will go to court in
       }heir fight to overturn the city council’s
       [decision to close the venue on safety
       jgrounds.
           T h e s ta d iu m was
         closed last Friday after
         councillors issued a
         prohibition order
         under the Safety of
         Sports Grounds Act.
            A rep ort to councillors                                                                                VM &P
         highlighted a string of
         p ro b le m s in c lu d in g a
         lack o f emergency lights
         in stands, rubbish un der­
         n e a th tim b e r seatin g ,
         s tru c tu ra l w eaknesses
         a n d in a d e q u a te ex it
         signs.
          Managing director and
       company secretary Albert
       Littlewood says he hopes to
       see the stadium back in full
       o p e ra tio n as soon as
       possible.
“ IS     And he predicts that the           Fighting the decision — managing director Albert Littlewood at Owlerton
       cost to the stadium in terms
         of work to be done and lost to see whether we can                 M r Littlewood said that valuable greyhound race in
         revenue is likely to be in       section off the stadium and    the shock closure decision E n glan d , the Tennents
         excess of £100.000.              take the main panorama         came at the end of one of the Extra £10,000 final, which
           Meanwhile arrangements         building, do the neccessary    stadium's most successful created tremendous interest.
         h ave b een m a d e f o r        work in that area and then     seasons.                         "T h e brewers were so    T H E g ru b s o f w o od -eating
         Owlerton's regular Tuesday                                                                    pleased that they say they   insects. attack in g the picture
                                          apply to the council for the                                                              frames of masterpieces by ITlh
         and F rid a y greyhound          withdrawal of the prohib­                Pleased             are bringing it back next
                                                                                                       year.                        century (winter Cararagg'O 15
         meetings to take place at        ition order for that area                                                                 well as priceless antique furni­
         Colwick Par. Nottingham.         alone.” he explained. "Then       "We have had our best         "Now we have to take it   ture, hate forced the closure of
                                          we would do the rest bit by     year," he said. "Only a week all day by day, week by      Rome's Borghese gallery for
                 PncQiliiUtv                                                                                                        a:
                                                                                                                                     .
   For the attention of Mr. M. Webster

                                                                   ADMINISTRATIONJ l LEGAL
                                                                          DFPT., ?’’■>
W ith Compliments                                                 ■7 T

                                                                            - 2 OCT13
                                                                         ~ S .M . I   LIB   |   e LMS

DR. W. EASTWOOD,                           F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D
                                                                    HJL
D.Eng., C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E., F.l.Mech.E,, F.G.S., M.Cons.E.

Consulting Engineer

Eastwood & Partners
(Consulting Engineers)
St. Andrews House
23 Kingfield Road
Sheffield S11 9AS                                    Telephone (07 4 2 ) 583871
                                                                                  C cpcj    s & rd r - f o      Fv<J,         (z r&           *      'b / M '6             ->-j


EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                              S t.       A n d rew s
                                                                                                                                 23         K ln g fle ld      Road
               ( Con s u l t i ng En gi n eer s)
                                                                                                                                 S h e ffie ld          S11     9AS
Director* :
                                                                                                                                 T e l.:      (0 7 4 2 )    554554
W . E a s tw o o d             F.Eng . B.Eng . P h .D .. D Eng .
                               C.Eng., F.l C E.. P P.I.S truct.E .,                                                              Fax: (0742) 554330
                               F .I.M ech.E . F G S . M .C o n s E.

A .A .W o o d                  B.Eng., Ph D . C Eng., F.l C.E ,
                               F .l.S tru c t.E . M l. W .E .M . M Cons E
                                                                                                                                                               and a t :
R .C .A .E a s tw o o d         B.Sc , C.Eny . M I C E., F I S truc t E

G .S p ir                      C.Eng , F.l C E     M l. M e c h .E                                                                   Premier      House
                                                                                                                                     12/13 Hatton Garden
C .S .G re a v e s              B.Eng., C.Eng     M I C E., M l S tru c t E
                                                                                                                                     London EC1N 8AN
S . P resto n                   B.Eng , C.Eng.. M I C E.. M l.Struct.E .
                                                                                                                                     Tel.: (01) 242 7436
G .M . Seam an                  B Sc., C.Eng . M I C.E , F .l.Struct.E.                                                              Fax.: (01) 404 5424
D .S . S te p h e n s           C.Eng . F.l C.E.. F I S tru c t.E , F B I M


                                                                                                Our R e f:               WE/KB/11237
                                                                                                Your Ref :

South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service,                                                                          29 September 1989
Ambulance Service Headquarters,
Fairfield,
Moorgate Road,
Rotherham S60 2BQ.


For the attention of Mr. A. Page


Dear Mr. Page,
                                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
                                 Access Between North Stand and Spion Kop
              We have now studied your letter of 11 September and are sorry
to see that it is in such uncompromising terms. First,                                                                                  I should
perhaps begin by saying that there was clearly a misunderstanding
in your office regarding the dismantling of the access ramp.                                                                                               A
statement was made to the Press that this had been at the request
of the consulting engineers to the Club.                                                                That was completely inaccurate.
We agreed to the ramp being taken down because that could be done
in a few hours whereas the design of new gates,                                                                     their approval by the
working party, and their subsequent manufacture and erection would
clearly take several weeks.                                                 There was an insistence on the part of
your staff that they wi shed to have the ramp down before the first
game of the season.                                 In the circumstances we considered it reasonable
to agree as a temporary measure until access for ambulances could
be sorted out.
              In the third paragraph of your letter you refer to our proposal
to reconstruct the concrete landing at the end of the ramp in a
different form. The original concrete landing at the base of the ramp
was feathered out bo t h along the access route and to the side.                                                                                               As


 Associates:
 J . A . S tra n g e      A . J . C lo u g h                  R. T a n d y            J. M . W o o d            C . M . P o lla rd                R. K. G od d en
 C.Eng., F.l.Struct.E.    B A . C.Eng , M C I B.S E..         C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.   B.Sc. C.Eng.. M IC E ..   B.Eng.. C.Eng., M.I.C.E..         F.S.C.A. (Accountant
                          M l.Mech.E.                                                 M.(.Struct.E,             Ml.Struct.E.                      & Administration
                                                                                                                                                  Manager)

                                           A n U n lim ite d C o m pa n y. Registered in England - No. 1833144
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                     SHEET   2.




 a result one of your ambulances coming in to the ground was
  tilted sideways when its wheels ran up onto the concrete.       In
 consequence it rubbed the gate post.     In reconstructing the
  landing to the ramp,   the existing ramp handrail will be lengthened
  so that the concrete landing strip only needs to be feathered in
  one direction.    The gate width is being increased by 900mm, which
  means that there will be approximately 3ft. more space than there
  was on the day of the disaster and in addition,    the mound of
  concrete which tilted the ambulance sideways will have been
  removed.   It seems to me that this is a perfectly reasonable
  proposal in the circumstances.     I am sure that your drivers are
  sufficiently skilled to manoeuvre through such an opening, driving
  slowly and carefully if necessary.    There may well be many
  spectators leaving the ground in an emergency on the northern
  side of the gates.     That is unfortunately inevitable so your
  ambulances will have to slow down, but there is unlikely to be
  very many people in the area between the North stand and the
  disabled toilets.    There were, of course, a number of people in
  that area on 15 April mainly because they had been carrying
  casualties across the pitch.      That will be unnecessary if
  ambulances have access but even if there were spectators,       the use
  of the siren and reasonable care will mean that the ambulances can
  easily go through the 2810mm wide space which we are now providing.
  I do not believe that there will be more than a second or two of
  delay even if there are people standing round, and that delay
  will be small compared with the delays which will occur when the
  ambulances cross the main exit routes from the ground on to
  Penistone Road.
       I understand from John Strange that with the corner of the
  ramp marked out on the ground there was no difficulty whatever
  in swinging an ambulance round on to the pitch.    If there is doubt
  about this I suggest that members of the advisory group should have
  a demonstration at the ground with an     ambulance so that they can
  form their own opinions before they next meet.     We will be pleased
  to be represented.
EASTWOOD ft PARTNERS                                     SHEET   2   .




       Your final point about the possible use of a lift for
  the disabled does not take account of the need to evacuate the
 disabled quickly in the event of an emergency.      When using a
 ramp the 30 or so wheelchairs plus   'helpers'   can proceed at a
 walking pace and be down the ramp in a short time.      If they had
 to queue to be placed on the lift, wait for it to descend, be
 offloaded, and then wait for it to rise again before the next
 person could be dealt with, the process would be far too slow.
 This was explained to Mr. Morley when he met John Strange on site.
       We are new submitting our proposals for consideration by the
 working party so as to avoid further delay.


                                  Yours sincerely,




 c.c. Mr. G. Mackrell, SWFC
      Mr. T.F. Broomhead, South Yorkshire Police
      Mr. M. Webster, Admin & Legal Dept.
      Chief Fire Officer, South Yorkshire Fire Service
 E AS T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                           S t.       A n d re w s         House
                                                                                                                                     23         K in g fie ld           Road
                  (C onsulting Engineers)
                                                                                                                                     S h e ffie ld           S11           9AS
Qireetors :
                                                                                                                                     T e l.:      (0 7 4 2 )         554554
W . E a s tw o o d              F.Eng . B Eng., Ph.D.. D.Eng..
                                C.En g.. F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E..
                                                                                                                                      Fax:        (0 7 4 2 )         554330
                                F .l.M e c h .E ., F.G.S.. M .C ons.E,

A .A .W o o d                   B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F l. C E.,
                                F .l.S tru c t.E .. M .I.W .E .M .. M.C ons.E.                                                                                           and a t:
R .C . A . E a stw o o d        B.Sc., C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., F .l.Struct E.

G .S p ir                       C .Eng., F.I.C.E.. M .l.M ec h.E .                                                                      Premier         House
                                                                                                                                        1 2 / 1 3 Hatton Garden
C .S .G re a v e s              B.Eng .. C.Eng.. M .I.C .E .. M .I.S truct.E
                                                                                                                                        London EC1N 8AN
S. Preston                      B.Eng .. C.Eng.. M .I.C .E . M .l.S tru ct.E .
                                                                                                                                        Tel.: (0 1 ) 2 4 2 7 4 3 6
G .M . Seam an                  B Sc . C.Eng , M I.C.E., F.1.S truct E.                                                                 Fax.:       (0 1 ) 4 0 4           5424
D .S . S teph en s              C.Eng     F I C E.. F I Struct.E.. F B I M


                                                                                                    O u r Ref :
                                                                                                                             WE/JAS/KB/11238
                                                                                                    Y o u r Ref :



City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,                                                                                     28 September 1989
Administration & Legal Department,
Town Hall,
Sheffield SI 2 H H .


For the attention of Mr. M. Webster
                                                                                                                                                                       i
Dear Mr. Webster,                                                                                                              r
                                   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club p l c *~
                                      Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
              Thank you for your letter dated 21 September about the pitch
perimeter fence gates and also your letter dated 22 September,
enclosing the copy letter to South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
Serv ice.
              In conversing and writing to individual members of the Advisory
Group, we fully appreciate that the discussions and correspondence
with members of the Advisory Group are not in any way binding on the
City Council.                     The purpose is to try to avoid abortive work and also
to speed up the progress of our various submissions on behalf of the
Club.              With this background I trust you will understand that we
are not in any way intending to embarrass the City Council, but to
make their job easier when they have to rule on our various proposals,


                                                                                       Yours sincerely,




c.c.         S.W.F.C. - Mr. G. Mackrell



 Associ j ’. es

 J. A. S tra n g e       A . J. C lo u g h                     R. T a n d y             J. M . W o o d              C . M . P olla rd               R. K. G o d d e n
 C.Eng., F.l.Struct.E.   B A.. C.Eng.. M .C I.B.S.E.,          C.Eng.. F.l.Struct.E.    B.Sc..C.Eng.. M .l C.E..    B.Eng., C.Eng.. M.I.C.E..       F.S.C.A. (A c c o u n ta n t
                         M I Mech.E                                                     M .I.S truct.E              M.I.Struct.E.                   & A d m in is t r a tio n
                                                                                                                                                    M a n a g e r)

                                           A n U n lim ite d Com pany. Registered in England - No. 1833144
                                                                                                                                      S t.      A n d re w s           H ouse
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                                   23        K in g fie ld          Road
              (Consulting Engineers)
                                                                                                                                      S h e ffie ld         S11            9AS
Directors :                                                                                                                           T e l.:     (0 7 4 2 )      554554
W . E a stw o o d              F.Eng B Eng P * D . D Eng .                                                                            Fax:        (0 7 4 2 )      554330
                                C Eng . P I C E   P P I S tru c t E .
                                F I M ech E     G 5 . M Cons E

A .A .W o o d
                                F I S tru c t E   M ! W E M     M Cons E                                                                                                and at *
R .C .A .E a s t w o o d        B.Sc      C E«g    W * C E , f l S tru c t E
                                                                                                                                        P r i m i i r             H o u u
G .S p ir                       C Eng . F I C E      V I Mecn E
                                                                                                                                         1 2 /1 3 H a tto n G arden
C .S .G re av es                B Eng , C Ena       MICE       M l S tru ct E
                                                                                                                                        London EC1N                         SAN
S. Preston                      B Eng      C Eng    M l C E . M I S tru c t E                                                           T e l.: (01 ) 2 4 2                7436
G .M . Seam an                   B Sc     C Sng    MICE       F I S tru c t E                                                            Fax.:      (01 ) 40 4             5424

D .S . Steph en s               C Eng      F I C E . F * S truct E   F B •M


                                                                                                Our R e f:                   WE/KB/11237
                                                                                                Y o u r Ref :


South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service,                                                                              29 September 1989
Ambulance Service Headquarters,
Fairfield,
Moorgate R o a d ,
Rotherham S60 2 B Q .


For the attention of Mr. A. Page


Dear Mr. Page
                                        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
                                  Access Between North Stand and Spion Kop
              We have now studied your letter of 11 September and are sorry
to see that it is in such uncompromising terms. First,                                                                                       I should
perhaps begin by saying that there was clearly a misunderstanding
in your office regarding the dismantling of the access ramp.                                                                                                      A
statement was made to the Press that this had been at the request
of the consulting engineers to the Club.                                                                  That was completely inaccurat
We agreed to the ramp being taken down because that could be done
 in a few hours whereas the design of new gates, their approval by the
working party, and their subsequent manufacture and erection would
clearly take several weeks.                                                     There was an insistence on the part of
your staff that they wished to have the ramp down before the first
game of the season.                                    In the circumstances we considered it reasonable
 to agree as a temporary measure until access for ambulances could
be sorted out.                                                                                                                                                         «
                  In the third paragraph of your letter you refer to our proposal
 to reconstruct the concrete landing at the end of the ramp in a
different form. The original concrete landing at the base of the ramp
was feathered out both along the access route and to the side.                                                                                                             As


  A sso cia tes
  J. A . S tra n g e       A . J. C lo u g h                    R .T a n d y           J. M . W o o d              C. M . P o lla rd                  R .K .G o d d e n
                                                                                       B.Sc..C .E ng..M .I.C.E..   B.Eng., C.En g., M.I.C.E..         F. S C . A. ( A cco u n ta n t
  C.Eng.. F.l.Struct.E.    B A ..C Eng .M .C.I.B.S.E .          C.Eng.. F I.Struct.E
                                                                                       M.I.Struct.E .              M .I.S truct.E .                   & A d m in is tra tio n
                            M I M ech.E
                                                                                                                                                      M a n a g e r)

                                              A n U n lim ite d C om pany. Registered in England - No. 1833144
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                      S H E tT   2 .




 a result one of your ambulances coming in to the ground was              1
 tilted sideways when its wheels ran up onto the concrete.            In
 consequence it rubbed the gate post.     In reconstructing the
 landing to the ramp,   the existing ramp handrail will be lengthened
 so that the concrete landing strip only needs to be feathered in
 one direction.    The gate width is being increased by 900mm, which
 means that there will be approximately 3ft. more space than t h e r e ^ ^
 was on the day of the disaster and in addition,     the mound of
 concrete which tilted the ambulance sideways will have been
 removed.   It seems to me that this is a perfectly reasonable
 proposal in the circumstances.     I am sure that your drivers are
 sufficiently skilled to manoeuvre through such an opening,           driving
 slowly and carefully if necessary.     There may well be many
 spectators leaving the ground in an emergency on the northern
 side of the gates.     That is unfortunately inevitable so your
 ambulances will have to slow down, but there is unlikely to be
 very many people in the area between the North stand and the
 disabled toilets.     There were, of course, a number of people in
 that area on 15 April mainly because they had been carrying
 casualties across the pitch.      That will be unnecessary if
 ambulances have access but even if there were spectators, the use
 of the siren and reasonable care will mean that the ambulances can
 easily go through the 2810mm wide space which we are now providing.
  I do not believe that there will be more than a second or two of
 delay even if there are people standing round, and that delay
 will be small compared with the delays which will occur when the
  ambulances cross the main exit routes from the ground on tou
 Penistone Road.
       I understand from John Strange that with the corner of the
                                                                *
  ramp marked out on the ground there was no difficulty whatever
  in swinging an ambulance round on to the pitch.    If there is doubt
  about this I suggest that members of the advisory group should have
  a demonstration at the ground with an    ambulance so tnat they can
  form their own opinions before they next meet.     We will be pleased
  to be represented.
“ EASTWOOD & PARTNERS 5
                                                          SHEET   2.




        Your final point about the possible use of a lift for
   the disabled does not take account of the need to evacuate the
   disabled quickly in the event of an emergency.     When using a
   ramp the 30 or so wheelchairs plus 'helpers' can proceed at a
   walking pace and be down the ramp in a short time.     If they had
   to queue to be placed on the lift, wait for it to descend, be
   offloaded, and then wait for it to rise again before the next
   person could be dealt with, the process would be far too slow.
   This was explained to Mr. Morley when he met John Strange on site
        We are nowsubmitting our proposals for consideration by the
   working party so as to avoid further delay.


                                   Yours sincerely,




   c.c. Mr. G. Mackrell, SWFC
        Mr. T.F. Broomhead, South Yorkshire Police
        Mr. M. Webster, Admin & Legal Dept.
        Chief Fire Officer, South Yorkshire Fire Service
                                                                                                      O                             H 'i-

                                                                                                                                     S t.       A n d re w s     House
EAST WO OD & PARTNERS
                                                                                                                                     23         K in g fie ld       Road
               (C onsulting Engineers)
                                                                                                                                     S h e ffie ld            S11        9AS
Directors :
                                                                                                                                     T e l.:        (0 7 4 2 )   554554
W . E a s tw o o d                 F.Eng . B.Eng., Ph.D . D.Eng.,
                                                                                                                                     Fax:           (0 7 4 2 )   554330
                                   C.Eng.. F I C.E.. P.P.I.Struct.E..
                                   F.l.M ech.E ., F.G.S., M.C ons.E.

A .A .W o o d                      B.Eng., Ph D . C.Eng.. F I C E .
                                   F I.S truct.E . M .I.W .E M . M.C ons.E.                                                                                          and a t :
R .C . A . E a s t w o o d         B.Sc., C.Eng    M I.C E., F .I.S tiu ct E
                                                                                                                                           Premier               House
G .S p ir                          C Eng.. F I C.E.. M I.M e ch E
                                                                                                                                           12 /1 3 H a tto n Garden
C. S . G re a v es                 B.Eng., C Eng    M .I.C .E .. M .l.S tr u c t E
                                                                                                                                           London E C 1N 8 A N
S . P r e s to n                   B Eng , C.Eng.. M .I.C.E , M l S tru ct E                                                               T el.:    (0 1 )   242    7436
G .M . S eam an                    B Sc.. C Eng . M I C E , F.l.Stru ct.E.                                                                 Fax.:      (01 ) 4 0 4        5424
D .S . S t e p h e n s             C.Eng . F I C.E., F.l S truct E . F B.I M


                                                                                                   Our Ref :
                                                                                                                            WE/JAS/KB/11238
                                                                                                   Your Ref :


City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,                                                                                     28 September 1989
Administration &.Legal Department,
Town Hall,
Sheffield SI 2 H H .


For the attention of Mr. M. Webster
                                                                                                                                                                    t1


Dear Mr. Webster,                                                                                                      t.'-
                                                                                                                       •       *     ...      . .                        —   -

                                      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club~ p l c "~'
                                        Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
            Thank you for your letter dated 21 September about the pitch
perimeter fence gates and also your letter dated 22 September,
enclosing the copy letter to South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
Se r vi ce.
             In conversing and writing to individual members of the Advisory
Group, we fully appreciate that the discussions and correspondence
with members of the Advisory Group are not in any way binding on the
City Council.                        The purpose is to try to avoid abortive work and also
to speed up the progress of our various submissions on behalf of the
Club.             With this background I trust you will understand that we
are not in any way intending to embarrass the City Council, but to
make their job easier when they have to rule on our various proposals.


                                                                                        Yours sincerely,




c.c. S.W.F.C. - Mr. G. Mackrell



 Associates:
 J. A . S tra n g e        A . J . C lo u g h                   R. T a n d y             J. M . W ood               C . M . P o lla rd                R. K . G o d d e n
 C.Eng.. F.l. Struct. E.     B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S.E..        C.Eng.. F.l.Struct.E.    B.Sc., C.Eng.. M.I.C.E..   B.Eng.. C.Eng.. M.I.C.E..         F.S.C.A. (Accountant
                             M.l.Mech.E.                                                 M.I.Struct.E.              M.I.Struct.E.                     & Administration
                                                                                                                                                      Manager)

                                             A n U n lim ite d C o m p a n y . R egistered in England - No. 1833144
Th e Acting H e a d of the                         See below
Administration and Legal
Department
28 September 1989
AH/DG
4018


I attach for your information a copy of a recent letter from Peter Hayes, Deputy
Chief Constable, together, m o r e importantly, with a copy of the notes of a meeting
with local authority representatives which took place at the Police's request on
M o n d a y 13 September.

M y purpose in copying the d o cument to you, is first of all to ensure that you are
kept fully informed of oil such matters, but secondly, and equally importantly,
to draw your attention to the fact that even post Taylor there are quite clear
differences in the m a n n e r and fashion in which local authorities are seeking to
enforce the legislation in question in that both Barnsley and Doncaster were
represented at the meeting by m e m b e r s of the Planning Department with the
responsibility being delegated to the Planning Department at Barnsley; to tw o
Departments at Doncaster and with R o th erham being represented by Environmental
Health Department with the powers there being delegated to such Department.
Th e final issue to which I would also specifically draw your attention is the matter
 of suggested further joint meetings and in particular the c o m m e n t s expressed
by the representative for Barnsley whose attitude, I think typifies the approach
to this legislation nationally in the sense that there does not appear to be a desire,
nor do certain authorities see the need even apparently post Taylor, to share
information on the best practices.

cc Councillor CJC Betts, Leader
   Councillor J Fiore, Chair of MEGS Programme Committee
   Councillor P Nelson, Deputy Chair of MEGS Programme Committee
   Councillor PA Midgley, Chair of Health and Consumer Services
   Programme Committee
                AH/DG
                DCC/JEL
                28 September 1.989



P Haves Esq Q P M L L B M A
Deputy Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 3 L Y

Dear M r Hayes,

RE: M E E T I N G - M O N D A Y 18 S E P T E M B E R 1989

I thank you for your letter of the 21 September, concerning' this topic, which I
received on the 27 September, and for the enclosed copy minutes.

I can confirm that I have passed on your thanks to both M r W a r d and M r B o wn e s
and I would like to take this opportunity of thanking you for the offer contained
in the final paragraph of your communication and you m a y rest assured that I will
take up that proposal if the opportunity should arise.
Yours sincerely,




M Webster
Acting H e a d of Department




                                                            734018
TELEPHONE:                                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                       POLICE HEADQUARTERS

TELEX: 547996                                                     SNIG HILL

FAX: (0742) 523243                                                    SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P HAYES QPM LLB MA
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                DCC/JEL
                                                                      21 September 1989



Mr M Webster
Acting Head
Administration & Legal Department
Sheffield City Council
Town Hall
Sheffield SI 2HH




       Dear Mr Webster

       I have pleasure in forwarding two copies of the minutes of the
       meeting held at the South Yorkshire Police Sports & Social Club,
       Niagara Road, Sheffield, on Monday 18 September 1989, and would be
       grateful if they could be passed to your representatives, Messrs
       Ward and Bownes.

       In terms of the Taylor recommendations I believe we are making
       excellent progress and this has been made possible by the high
       degree of understanding and co-operation between ourselves.

       Perhaps on my behalf you would be kind enough to thank Mr Ward
       and Mr Bownes for attending the meeting and for their contribution.

       If at any time you feel I can be of assistance, please do not
       hesitate to get in touch.

       Yours sincerely




                                                      DEPT. SHEi-i-
                                                      HEAD OF-----------        Abijici I ».r\ir
                                                       DCPT                II       HEAD




                                                 e     2 7. SEPT 89                                m
                                                                     ua            j     oqnv




 Enclosure
                    MINUTES OF MEETING WITH LOCAL AUTHORITIES
                              RE. THE TAYLOR REPORT
           HELD AT SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE SPORTS & SOCIAL CLUB, NIAGARA
                       AT 2.00 PM, MONDAY 18 SEPTEMBER 1989



Present:

Mr P Hayes QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - (Chairman)
Mr T F Broomhead, A/Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Superintendent Sleath
Chief Inspectors Beal, Bettison, Hellewell and Warne
Inspector Townend

                             representing Doncaster MBC


                             representing Rotherham MBC

                             representing Barnsley MBC
Mr Ward
   David                     representing Sheffield City Council




The Chairman opened the meeting by explaining that whilst local authorities
tend to act as a discrete organisation it is necessary for South Yorkshire
Police officers to serve throughout the Force area which includes five
football league clubs representing the four football league divisions. There
is therefore the need for some area of commonality.

The aim of this meeting therefore is two-fold. First, to discuss areas of
common interest and, second to strengthen the relationship of the South
Yorkshire Police with the four separate licensing authorities for football
league grounds in the area.

The Chairman then explained to the.meeting the position of the South Yorkshire
Police subsequent to the Taylor Inquiry. He highlighted the various inquiries
and investigations that were taking place in relation to the incidents of
1 5 'April 1989.


Police Facilitation Team '

The Chairman pointed out that he was nominated by the Chief Constable to
oversee the implementation of the Taylor recommendations as far as the South
Yorkshire Police was concerned. Of the 43 recommendations, 11 had to be in
place before 19 August. The Chairman explained how the in-force
implementation team was constituted and how it functioned.  It was recorded
that each of the 11 recommendations had in fact been implemented before the
start of the football season and that written agreements with each of the five
Clubs were in being.

He explained that the centralised operation based on Headquarters, that was
necessary at first, was now being increasingly delegated to the Divisional
responsibility to implement the remaining recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor.
The Chairman pointed out that so far our dealings with the various football
clubs in the area had been very positive and he invited comment from local
authority members on this fact.

Mr _______((Barnsley MBC) pointed out that at Barnsley most of the
recommendations are already covered.   The Chairman pointed out that
computerised turnstiles are an objective of Barnsley Football Club. Mr
agreed but pointed out that the Taylor recommendations allow for manual
monitoring and that the Barnsley stance - that they were complying with the
recommendations - was a sound one.

The Chairman emphasised the need for both ourselves and local authorities to
encourage Clubs to comply with safety requirements. M r _______ [agreed pointing
out that often Clubs devote their resources to the football team to the
detriment of their stadium. Mr          suggested however that a conciliatory
and co-operative approach to the football clubs is likely to reap greater
rewards.

Mr        made the point that he would not wish to see a dilution of the
single contact arrangements that existed, with local authorities as that
single contact, before the Taylor Report. He pointed out that the South
Yorkshire Police had necessarily been active in pursuing implementation of the
Taylor recommendations and feared that the local authorities co-ordinating
position may be overlooked.

The Chairman thanked Mr         for this point and agreed to discuss the
process for future implementation at a subsequent in-force implementation team
meeting when Mr         s views would be taken into account.


Ground Safety Certificates

The Chairman asked whether the agreements reached with football clubs should
be included in the ground Safety Certificates. Mr         stated that
Doncaster are now considering re-writing the Safety Certificate (in
conjunction with their Legal & Admin Department) to take account of matters
arising from the Taylor Report.

None of the other representatives offered a view about the status of Safety
Certificates.

Mr Paxton raised the question of 'advisory groups' and how they might
influence licensing and certification. The Chairman took up the subject of
advisory groups and asked the various local authority representatives how they
foresaw the constitution of their group. Would it be an extension of the
existing officer working party or would it be something different, and in
addition to, that working party?

Mr        and Mr         representing Doncaster and Barnsley respectively, saw
the advisory group as an additional group outside of the officer working party
which would meet at infrequent but regular intervals under a neutral chairman
who would then convey that group's views to the officer working party.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) pointed out that this matter amongst many
others was not resolved. He had submitted a report to members asking for
direction in certain areas. The nature of the advisory group was one of those
areas. Mr Ward's personal view was that it may well be a two-tier structure
                                    - 3 -


along the lines envisaged by Barnsley and Doncaster and pointed out that it
would be unfortunate if technical officers were out-voted by Club and
supporter members of such an advisory group.

Mr_______ |(Rotherham MBC) said that the officer working group in Rotherham had
always included a representative of the Club who might not necessarily be
invited to meetings if the chairman of the working group felt it appropriate.

The position therefore is that Barnsley and Doncaster envisage the advisory
group as separate from the officer working group, Rotherham envisage it as an
extension of the officer working group and, Sheffield have yet to resolve the
matter.

Mr        asked if the Chairman could clear up the ambiguity with relation to
the intended constitution of the advisory group as far as the Tribunal members
were concerned. The Chairman pointed out that an ACPO Sub-Committee on
Hooliganism at Sports Grounds is pursuing this question with the Treasury
Solicitors and the Chairman agreed to report back to the local authorities if
and when this is resolved.


Delegation of Licensing Authority

The Chairman raised this matter by pointing out that Mr Webster of the
Sheffield City Council had written to say that no individual officer
representing the Council had any authority to act without full Council
approval.

Mr         representing the Planning Department at Barnsley MBC, stated that
all matters were officially delegated to his Department by the members there.

Mr |
   _______|of the Planning Department at Doncaster MBC, pointed out that
technical matters are delegated to the Director of Planning and procedural
matters to the Director of Legal & Admin Department. He was hopeful that all
matters might become the responsibility of one Department.

Mr         representing the Environmental Health Department of Rotherham MBC,
pointed out that all powers are delegated to Environmental Health officers.

The Chairman's concern in this matter was that in the case of urgent need
there must be someone empowered to revoke or suspend the Safety Certificate as
required by the Safety at Sports Grounds Act.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) stated that he had already appreciated the
need for genuine emergency powers and had flagged this need for members'
decision.

The representatives of Doncaster, Barnsley and Rotherham pointed out that
emergency powers are delegated to themselves.


Ambulance Dispute

The Chairman asked what action the licensing authorities intended to take in
the event of SYMAS being unable to provide an ambulance on stand-by at future
football matches. M r ______ (Doncaster MBC) stated that this was an agenda
item for a meeting of the Authority next week although he did not anticipate
many future matches where the crowd would reach 5,000.
                                       - 4 -


Mr |
   _______ ((Barnsley MBC) suggested the ambulance position would not make a lot
of difference in his mind and he would advise allowing the game to go ahead.
He went on to express the view that this recommendation was one of several in
the Taylor Report that, in his view, were unnecessary.

The counter view was expressed by Mr           who thought it a very necessary
recommendation.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) pointed out that in Sheffield it would be a
decision for members of the Council but his personal view was that in such a
situation where an ambulance could not be provided the Safety Certificate
would be revoked.

Mr         [Rotherham MBC) pointed out that the need at Rotherham is marginal
with crowds hovering around the 5,000 mark. He determined to look at each
individual match where this problem was likely to occur.


Concluding Remarks

The Chairman, in drawing the meeting to a close, thanked local authority
representatives for attending and asked if there was anything that the police
were doing that the local authorities would wish otherwise or anything that
the local authorities would like to see the police undertaking in relation to
the safety certification of football grounds. None of the members expressed
a view.

Mr        :hanked the Chairman for arranging the meeting. He said he felt
heartened by the fact that there was so much common ground between the various
local authorities and the police.

The Chairman asked if the local authority representatives would like a meeting
to be arranged on a regular basis. Representatives of Doncaster, Sheffield
and Rotherham thought such a meeting  annually would be very useful (July was
suggested as a most appropriate time). Mr         [Barnsley MBC) suggested he
saw no benefit in such meetings as the procedures in Rotherham, Sheffield and
Doncaster were of little concern to the safety certification of Barnsley
Football Club.




There being no further business the meeting closed at 3.30 pm.
                    MINUTES OF MEETING WITH LOCAL AUTHORITIES
                              RE. THE TAYLOR REPORT
           HELD AT SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE SPORTS & SOCIAL CLUB, NIAGARA
                       AT 2.00 PM, MONDAY 18 SEPTEMBER 1989


Present:

Mr P Hayes QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief Constable - (Chairman)
Mr T F Broomhead, A/Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)
Superintendent Sleath
Chief Inspectors Beal, Bettison, Hellewell and Warne
Inspector Townend
Mr                       )
Mr                       ) representing Doncaster MBC
Mr                       )
Mr                     )
Mr                     )   representing Rotherham MBC
Mr                       )
Mr                       ) representing Barnsley MBC
Mr Ward
Mr David Bownes            representing Sheffield City Council




The Chairman opened the meeting by explaining that whilst local authorities
tend to act as a discrete organisation it is necessary for South Yorkshire
Police officers to serve throughout the Force area which includes five
football league clubs representing the four football league divisions. There
is therefore the need for some area of commonality.

The aim of this meeting therefore is two-fold. First, to discuss areas of
common interest and, second to strengthen the relationship of the South
Yorkshire Police with the four separate licensing authorities for football
league grounds in the area.

The Chairman then explained to the meeting the position of the South Yorkshire
Police subsequent to the Taylor Inquiry. He highlighted the various inquiries
and investigations that were taking place in relation to the incidents of
15"April 1989.


Police Facilitation Team '

The Chairman pointed out that he was nominated by the Chief Constable to
oversee the implementation of the Taylor recommendations as far as the South
Yorkshire Police was concerned. Of the 43 recommendations, 11 had to be in
place before 19 August. The Chairman explained how the in-force
implementation team was constituted and how it functioned.  It was recorded
that each of the 11 recommendations had in fact been implemented before the
start of the football season and that written agreements with each of the five
Clubs were in being.

He explained that the centralised operation based on Headquarters, that was
necessary at first, was now being increasingly delegated to the Divisional
responsibility to implement the remaining recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor.
                                    - 2 -


The Chairman pointed out that so far our dealings with the various football
clubs in the area had been very positive and he invited comment from local
authority members on this fact.

Mr |
   _______|(Barnsley MBC) pointed out that at Barnsley most of the
recommendations are already covered. The Chairman pointed out that
computerised turnstiles are an objective of Barnsley Football Club. Mr
agreed but pointed out that the Taylor recommendations allow for manual
monitoring and that the Barnsley stance - that they were complying with the
recommendations - was a sound one.

The Chairman emphasised the need for both ourselves and local authorities to
encourage Clubs to comply with safety requirements. Mr         agreed pointing
out that often Clubs devote their resources to the football team to the
detriment of their stadium. Mr         suggested however that a conciliatory
and co-operative approach to the football clubs is likely to reap greater
rewards.

Mr        made the point that he would not wish to see a dilution of the
single contact arrangements that existed, with local authorities as that
single contact, before the Taylor Report. He pointed out that the South
Yorkshire Police had necessarily been active in pursuing implementation of the
Taylor recommendations and feared that the local authorities co-ordinating
position may be overlooked.

The Chairman thanked Mr        for this point and agreed to discuss the
process for future implementation at a subsequent in-force implementation team
meeting when Mr       's views would be taken into account.


Ground Safety Certificates

The Chairman asked whether the agreements reached with football clubs should
be included in the ground Safety Certificates. Mr         stated that
Doncaster are now considering re-writing the Safety Certificate (in
conjunction with their Legal & Admin Department) to take account of matters
arising from the Taylor Report.

None of the other representatives offered a view about the status of Safety
Certificates.

Mr        raised the question of 'advisory groups' and how they might
influence licensing and certification. The Chairman took up the subject of
advisory groups and asked the various local authority representatives how they
foresaw the constitution of their group. Would it be an extension of the
existing officer working party or would it be something different, and in
addition to, that working party?

Mr |
   _______ and Mr        representing Doncaster and Barnsley respectively, saw
the advisory group as an additional group outside of the officer working party
which would meet at infrequent but regular intervals under a neutral chairman
who would then convey that group's views to the officer working party.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) pointed out that this matter amongst many
others was not resolved. He had submitted a report to members asking for
direction in certain areas. The nature of the advisory group was one of those
areas. Mr Ward's personal view was that it may well be a two-tier structure
                                    - 3 -


along the lines envisaged by Barnsley and Doncaster and pointed out that it
would be unfortunate if technical officers were out-voted by Club and
supporter members of such an advisory group.

Mr       (Rotherham MBC) said that the officer working group in Rotherham had
always included a representative of the Club who might not necessarily be
invited to meetings if the chairman of the working group felt it appropriate.

The position therefore is that Barnsley and Doncaster envisage the advisory
group as separate from the officer working group, Rotherham envisage it as an
extension of the officer working group and, Sheffield have yet to resolve the
matter.

Mr        asked if the Chairman could clear up the ambiguity with relation to
the intended constitution of the advisory group as far as the Tribunal members
were concerned. The Chairman pointed out that an ACPO Sub-Committee on
Hooliganism at Sports Grounds is pursuing this question with the Treasury
Solicitors and the Chairman agreed to report back to the local authorities if
and when this is resolved.


Delegation of Licensing Authority

The Chairman raised this matter by pointing out that Mr Webster of the
Sheffield City Council had written to say that no individual officer
representing the Council had any authority to act without full Council
approval.

Mr        , representing the Planning Department at Barnsley MBC, stated that
all matters were officially delegated to his Department by the members there.

Mr|_______|of the Planning Department at Doncaster MBC, pointed out that
technical matters are delegated to the Director of Planning and procedural
matters to the Director of Legal & Admin Department. He was hopeful that all
matters might become the responsibility of one Department.

Mr         representing the Environmental Health Department of Rotherham MBC,
pointed out that all powers are delegated to Environmental Health officers.

The Chairman's concern in this matter was that in the case of urgent need
there must be someone empowered to revoke or suspend the Safety Certificate as
required by the Safety at Sports Grounds Act.

Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) stated that he had already appreciated the
need for genuine emergency powers and had flagged this need for members'
decision.

The representatives of Doncaster, Barnsley and Rotherham pointed out that
emergency powers are delegated to themselves.


Ambulance Dispute

The Chairman asked what action the licensing authorities intended to take in
the event of SYMAS being unable to provide an ambulance on stand-by at future
football matches. Mr _______ (Doncaster MBC) stated that this was an agenda
item for a meeting of the Authority next week although he did not anticipate
many future matches where the crowd would reach 5,000.
♦ -




                                             - 4 -


      Mr        (Barnsley MBC) suggested the ambulance position would not make a lot
      of difference in his mind and he would advise allowing the game to go ahead.
      He went on to express the view that this recommendation was one of several in
      the Taylor Report that, in his view, were unnecessary.

      The counter view was expressed by Mr           who thought it a very necessary
      recommendation.

      Mr Ward (Sheffield City Council) pointed out that in Sheffield it would be a
      decision for members of the Council but his personal view was that in such a
      situation where an ambulance could not be provided the Safety Certificate
      would be revoked.

      Mr        (Rotherham MBC) pointed out that the need at Rotherham is marginal
      with crowds hovering around the 5,000 mark. He determined to look at each
      individual match where this problem was likely to occur.


      Concluding Remarks

      The Chairman, in drawing the meeting to a close, thanked local authority
      representatives for attending and asked if there was anything that the police
      were doing that the local authorities would wish otherwise or anything that
      the local authorities would like to see the police undertaking in relation to
      the safety certification of football grounds. None of the members expressed
      a view.

      Mr        thanked the Chairman for arranging the meeting. He said he felt
      heartened by the fact that there was so much common ground between the various
      local authorities and the police.

      The Chairman asked if the local authority representatives would like a meeting
      to be arranged on a regular basis. Representatives of Doncaster, Sheffield
      and Rotherham thought such a meeting annually would be very useful (July was
      suggested as a most appropriate time). Mr         (Barnsley MBC) suggested he
      saw no benefit in such meetings as the procedures in Rotherham, Sheffield and
      Doncaster were of little concern to the safety certification of Barnsley
      Football Club.




      There being no further business the meeting closed at 3.30 pm.
  R3719                                                                                  Sch 9162
                                 CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From      Miss                                   To      Mr. M. Webst


Date      27th September. 1989                                 f
 ef.             Wo\\
 el. Ext. 4119                                    Ref.



          Police Headquarters, Snig Hill, Sheffield
          Dispute over Payment.......... ..........

          As I understand from reading                 s file on this matter,
          (Design and Building Services Department) suggested that this department take no
          further action until he had discussed the matter with yourself and Mr. Podmore.
          Please let me know if you require me, in any way, to proceed with this case.




                                                                   ADMINISTRATION ft LEGAL
          BH66/   >69                                                 DEPT., SHpFrJELD^__
                                                                        T t A O ^ l ASSIST^ M h   S
                                                                         _r£:JT   I hf-AO     --- ’
                                                                          2 8 SEP 1389 'o--.'
                                                                        O.S.i-i
V                               CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

FrxxrU    Frances Woodhead,                     To:    Itork Webster,
          Solicitor                                    Acting Head of AdniLnistration
                                                       and Legal Department
Date:    27th September, 1989                          c.c. Julian Ward, Principal Solicitor
Ref:     FW
Tel Ext: 4004 - Mrs. Woodhead                   Ref;




          Re:   Safety at Sports Grounds

         I^enclose a note of a conversation I had with Ken Blant upon receipt of
         his memorandum of the 21st September. In view of the tone of that
         memorandum, it is clear that steps need to be taken to improve
         relationships between our respective Departments. I am hopeful that
         same discussion can take place when the Advisory Group meets on the 28th
         September and this was my purpose in inviting Ken Blant to that meeting.
         Unfortunately, he is unable to attend. I think it nay be necessary for
         a meeting to be arranged to discuss the issues raised in my
         conversation. Hopefully, things should be clearer after the meeting on
         the 28th September. I will keep you advised of developments.


         Enc.




         MS2/AA
>
                            Re:   Safety of Sports Grounds


     Having received Ken Blant s memorandum of the 21st September, I telephoned
     Mr. Blant since it was clear that relationships between our Department and
     the Building Surveyor were at a particularly low ebb as was apparent fron
     the rude tone of his memorandum.

     He was out of the office and returned my call at 10.30 a.m. I felt that
     there needed to be seme discussion between our Departments to achieve an
     improvement in relationships. I felt this particularly in the light of
     recent telephone conversations I had had with Arthur Butler and the tone of
     recent memoranda.

     I explained to Mr. Blant that there was an Advisory Group Meeting on the
    28th September when the issue of the inspection of the exterior of Sheffield
    United would be discussed with a view to that natter being referred to
    members of the General Purposes Panel at its meeting on Monday. I said I
    thought it would be appropriate for him to ccme to that meeting on the 28th.
    He said he was unable to do so. I suggested it would also be appropriate
    for his Department to be represented at General Purposes Panel on Monday.
    H® confirmed that he would arrange for this to be done. I also explained
    that L ^ ^          had been invited as a member of the Advisory Group. He
    said he did not wish this to happen on a permanent basis. I said that that
    was the intention and asked him why he did not feel it was appropriate. He
    said that he felt it was more appropriate for their Department to be
    represented by one person and said that if he allowed F                 to care
    to the Advisory Group,              would also want to c cjiir i Alter sore
    discussion, it was finally agreed that                would certainly core to
    the meeting on the 28th and we would discuss further the issue of Iona term
    representation.

    I concluded our conversation by saying that I was hopeful that the situation
    would improve once Policy Canmittee have met this afternoon and we had firm
    guidance from members as to how they wished to proceed with the matter.
    1      thfit 1 sensed     everyone was over reacting a little at the ncment
    and that hopefully relationships would improve after today's Ccmmittee
    meeting and once systems became more established. Mr. Blant aqreed and our
    conversation terminated amicably.




    26th Septanber, 1989




    MS2/AA
                                                                    WE/ JAS/AV/11237
Mr J Strange
Eastwood 6 Partners                                                 F/JAN/DR
St Andrews House
23 Kingfield Road                                                   25        September 1989
SHEFFIELD
Sll 9AS




Dear John

SHEFFIELD WEENESQAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
SAFETY OF SPORTS GOJKDS ACT 1 9 7 5
PITCH PERIM5EB* FBiCE GATES

1 acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 15 September 1989 and can
confirm that following meetings with my- senior officers we are agreed
that there is no requirement to retain the perimeter gates at the
Hillsborough Stadium. However, like yourself, being unaware of what Part
2 of Lord Justice Taylor's Report may recanroend, I wuuld suggest that
provisions are retained for gates to be fitted at some future time.

The present gates at the Hillsborough Stadium are too n a r r o w and totally
inadequate, and by only opening through an angle of 90<J give restricted
access both onto and from the terraced areas. Therefore, your proposal to
increase the width between the securing frames is, in my opinion,
essential in the interests of public safety.
In conclusion, as you will appreciate, the final decision regarding any
recotrrnended alterations to the perimeter gates will have to be considerd
and approved by the Advisory Group "be fore they are implemented.

Yours sincerely


        C

Chiu f\5upe r in tenden t
                                                           TT!




                                                                ^MINISTRATiON & LEC3AL
                                                           £




                                                                  DEFT., SHjs£f?8E0N
                                                                 K-;- £ ^ •’>r ’ *


                                                                   -   9    OCT 1989
                                                                                              PAA
                                                                O.S.M.        LIB    1 ELNg   PSO
                                                          &
                                                         (G S
                                                                I.
                                                                 ..                           cc



 -&v          CJL.          lfV>eloiY
City of Sheffield
             ^                           k               nifitrict
                                                                                                      Administration and Legal Department
R o ger P e n s a m , FCIS,   MBIM, S olicitor
H ead o f D e p a rtm e n t                                                                           Town Hall,
                                                                                                      Sheffield S1 2HH

                       GP/262/DMB

Your reference

Date                    21st September, 1989.

  Mr. P. Hayes,
  Deputy Chief Constable,
  South Yorkshire Police,
  Police Headquarters,
  Snig Hill,
   Sheffield,
   S3 80Y.

   Dear Sir,
   Safety of Sports Grounds - SheffieldWednesday Football                                                         Club
    - Pitch Perimeter Fence Gates-------- .---------------------- —

    ! have received a copy of a letterfrom
    Mr. Nesbitt dated 15th September,                                                                ” f j “ es          I enclose a
    between the Police and Eastwoods about pitch p e n m e t e . gat
    copy of Eastwood's letter for your information.

     The letter Implies that there has
     existence or otherwise of pitc                                          P ^ 1” ^       that the matter has not been
     d“                d b^the'&dvisor^Group or                                    referred to Members of the Council.

     I am writing to mate it clear that                                            -    ^    “        i n ^ s may^be arrived^a^in
      connection with matters of                                     e                            certificating Authority. This
                                                                              S    -    -        t ^ u and to the Club's of 30th

      August.
                                                             .           jr j-uq -Pul 1 farms of the discussions so that
      r     ^     T     a       n    ^       e   ^   f   L       l       .        Advisory                         copied this letter
      to Sheffield Wednesday and to Eastwoods m

      Yours faithfully,




       Acting Head of Department

        Enc.

        MS4ABG/JL




                                         For telephone enqu
 Sheffield Wednesday                                                                                  u/                           £
              Football Club PLC




GHM/MB/S6/379 2




   Mark Webster
Acting Head of Department
City of Sheffield
Administration and Legal Department
Town Hall
Sheffield SI 2HH


Dear Mr Webster

Re: Safety of Sports Grounds - Sheffield Wednesday Football .Club
Pitch Perimeter Fence Gates

I am in receipt of your letter dated 21st September 1989.

I must say that I believe you have rather overreacted with regard
to the correspondence. The Club and its professional advisers
were merely seeking the opinion of the police to assist it in
 iormulating its plans for submission to the Local Authority.

If we are not able to proceed in this way,                                 then progress would
take place at an unacceptably slower pace.

Yours sincerely




Secretary




                                                                                                       LIB
                                                                                                                      CL




             Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
 Tel: (0742) 343122 Grams: W ednesday Sheffield 6.
  Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145

                     Chairman: H. E. M cG ee, Secretary: G, H. Mackrell. F.C.C.A., Manager: R Atkinson
 Directors: M. Sheppard, J.P., F.C.A. (Vice-Chairman). 3, L. Speight, O.B.E., C, Woodward. K.7, Addy, E. Barron,   G. K. Hulley.
                                                                                                                                        F
                                                  Registered in England No. 62478
                                                                                                                                       J:
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                  S t. A ndrew s H o u se
                                                                                                                            2 3 K in g fie ld R oad
             (C onsulting Engineers)
                                                                                                                            S h e ffie ld S 1 1 9 AS
Director*:
                                                                                                                            Tel.: (0742) 5 5 4 5 5 4
W . E a s tw o o d             F.Eng., B.Eng,, Ph.D., D.Eng.,
                               C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E.,                                                           Fax: (0742) 5 5 4 3 3 0
                               F.l.Mech.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
A .A .W o o d                  B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                               F.I.Struct.E., M.I.W.E.M., M.Cons.E.                                                                                  and a t :
R .C .A .E a s tw o o d        B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.

G .S p ir                      C.Eng.. F.I.C.E., M.l.Mech.E.                                                                   Premier       House
                                                                                                                               12/13 H atton Garden
C .S .G re a v e s             B.Eng,, C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                               London EC1N 8A N
S . P re s to n                B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                               Tel.: (01) 2 4 2 7 4 3 6
G .M . S e a m a n             B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.                                                          Fax.: (01) 4 0 4 5 4 2 4
D .S . S te p h e n s          C.Eng., F.I.C.E.. F.I.Struct.E.. F.B.I.M.

                                                                                          Our R e f:      WE/JAS/SEB/l 12 3 8
                                                                                          Your R e f:



City of Sheffield Metropolitan District                                                                   21 September 1989
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
Sheffield
SI 2HH


For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes


Dear Mr. Bownes,
                                       Sheffield United Football Club L t d .
                                         Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
                                                                    Radial Fences

             I write to confirm that the lengths of barriers, numbers 38,
42 and 46 on Spion Kop and 19 and                                                   20on the Bramall Lane terrace
were load tested, in accordance with the procedure                                                                        set          out in
the        'Green Guide', on Friday 15 September, as requested.
             A copy of each of our two record sheets showing the results
of the tests together with extracts from our drawings 6518/100C
and 6518/102C showing the location of the barriers tested are
enclosed.                 You will see from the results that in all cases the
barriers withstood the test load.
             Our report about the results                                           of the annual barrier                              testing
will be forwarded in the next day                                                   or so.

                                                                        Yours sincerely,




c.c. Mr. D. Capper -                                  S.U.F.cL_
Associates
J. A . S tra n g e      A .J . C lo u g h                R. T a n d y            J . M . W ood             c. M . P o lla rd            R. K. G o d d e n
C.Eng.. F t.Struct.E.   B.A.. C.Eng.. M.C.I.B.S.E..      C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.   B.Sc..C.Eng..M.I.C.E..    B.Eng.. C.Eng.. M.I.C.E..    F.S.C.A. (Accountant
                         M.l.Mech.E.                                             M.I.Struct.E.             M .l.Struct^.                & Administration
                                                                                                                                        Manager)

                                          An U n lim ite d C o m pa n y. R egistered in E ngland - No. 1833144
        Rf3719
                                      CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

                 The Building Surveyor                        Acting Head of Admin_ & Legal Dept.
    From                                               To                          •


                                                              For the attention of Mr D Bownes
                 21 September 1989
    Date
                 BSD/ABu/AW/KH6ADL
    Ref.
                 4162 - Mr A Butler                    Ref.
    Tel. Ext.




                 Safety at Sports Grounds
                 Sheffield United Football Club - Capacity of Kop


                 I refer to your memorandum of 19 September regarding the above.

                 I was most surprised to receive this memorandum, which was written to
                 request information which had already been supplied to your department, at
                 the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group meeting on the 14 September.
                 Item 5 of the agenda for that meeting was specifically for the purpose of
                 receiving conments from the Fire Service and the Building Surveyor.
                 Although the Fire Service comments could not be given since they had not
                 been formulated at the time, my comments should be clearly minuted.

                 By reference to those minutes, you will note that you have incorrectly
                 presupposed that the removal of the radial fences would "obviously" have
                 an effect on the capacity of the kop for the purposes of the calculations
                 carried out by my staff.

                 This correspondence follows in the wake of a similar request for
                 information from another member of your staff, where it was found in that
                 case the information had been provided to you in written form some days
                 before a memorandum had been written requesting it.

                 These situations show a lack of co-ordination between your staff, and if
                 allowed to remain unanswered, would appear to cast a suggestion of non
                 co-operation by my staff, which could not be further from the truth.

                 At a time when the building industry in Sheffield is at its busiest for
                 many/ years, and hence so are my staff, I can ill arrord
                                                                    afford this time spent on
1                non productive work, and would therefore urge you to achieve co-ordination / ? !
                     ./een the many members ot
                 between                    of your staff who now appear to have an input     V
                 into this function.
    Sheffield Wednesday
                 Football Club PLC

                                                                                       v    I ) .fa    -+    t'W V G l'Y '' ^        ^


    GHM/MB/S6/3787
                                                                                           i, ^4,                    to 'M 5
                                                                                                                        -f-


                                                                                                            ■* Y ?


    21 September 1989




    Mr M W e b s t e r
»   Administration and Legal Department
    Town Hall
    Sheffield
                                                                                                                                         J
    SI 2HH


    Dear Mr W e b s t e r
    Re: Safety of Sports Grounds Act

    Further to my letter dated 7th September 1989, please find enclosed a
    copy of our plan showing the deployment of Stewards. I would point out,
    of course, that this is a basic plan and subject to amendment in agreement
    with the police for individual matches.

    Should there be any further f u ndamental alterations,                                            I will of course
    send a revised plan.

    Yours sincerely




('GG H Macfr~g<ll
         ■&£-tary_

                                                                                                  ADMINISTRA710N * i - '
                                                                                                       DEPT.
                                                                                                  I    headof   h       .Trfr"


                                                                                              B        2 5. SEPT 89             Jw
                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                             Ural




                 Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
     Tel: (0742) 343122 Grams: W ednesday Sheffield 6.
      Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145

                         Chairman: H. E. M cGee, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell, F.C.CA, Manager. R Atkinson
     Directors: M. Sheppard, J.P., F.C A (Vice-Chairman), S. L. Speight, O.B.E., C. Woodward, K.T. Addy, £ . Barron,     G. K. Hulley.
                                                     Registered in England No. 62478
       C E x /A H /D G

       C E / P J P / P & R 222

       20 September 1989




Mr M H F Hammond
Chief Executive and T o w n Clerk
Nottingham City Council
The Guildhall
Nottingham
N G1 4BT


Dear M r H a m m o n d ,

Thank you for your letter of the 14 September upon which I a m taking instructions
from the Lord !\!avor and hope to be in a position to c o m e back to you upon your
suggestion in the very near future.

However, m y initial reaction to your suggestion is that I think it is probably the
most appropriate w a y forward.
Yours sincerely,




Chief Executive
The Chief Executive                             Lord Mayor


20 September 1989
AH/DG
401$



REj HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL

I attach for your attention a copy o f a letter from the Chief Executive and Town
Clerk at Nottingham, together with a copy of my holding reply.

My own view Is that the suggestion that a meeting ought to be arranged and that
it should be called by the Lord Mayor of Sheffield is probably appropriate in all
circumstances, and if you agree, please let me know and I will arrange for Mr
Hammond and the others to be informed accordingly, and for the necessary
arrangements to be put in hand.



 cc Councillor H Knight
    Councillor J Fiore
                                                                                     City of
                                                                                     Nottingham
                                                                                    Michael H.F. Hammond
                 CE/PJP/P&R 222                                                     Chief Executive and Town Clerk
My Ref                                                                              The Guildhall
                 Chief Executive                                                    Nottingham NG1 4BT
Please ask for
                                                                                    Telephone (0602) 483501 ext
Your Ref                                                                            Telex 377459




 14 September 1989


 Dear Mr Podmore

Mr Morris, the Chairman of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal,
has written to the Lord Mayor raising the question whether
steps should be taken to cease fund raising in view of the
amount that has been contributed to the fund.   As our three
authorities, together w ith Liverpool Football Club, sponsored
the appeal the decision to close the fund ought to be made
by us.  For this purpose do you think a meeting ought to be
arranged and if so, would it be perhaps appropriate for this
to be called by the Lord Mayor of Sheffield?

 Yours sincerely




Chiet Executive and Town Clerk




  M r I L Podmore DMA
  Chief Executive
  Sheffield City Council
  Tov/n Hall
  Sheffield
  SI 2HH




                 Address all letters to the Chief Executive and Town Clerk and not to individuals
                             —                __

                             HILLSBOROUGH
                             - DISASTER -
                             — APPEAL —

         The Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal
         P.O. Box 220, 4 Wa te r Street, Liverpool L69 2DN
                         O   £~l   A 3   o c u f - '^




                                                        24th April,                        1989
                                                                       Jv    2—s   s*sn 1 (1 \J >•* -j
I. L. Podmore, Esq.,                                O   D   U
                                                                 jU iis*.!                 si * — i

Chief Executive,                                                 \ SHEFFIELD-                       f O - P .O .’

Sheffield City Council,                                 M.T.
Town H a l l ,                                                   2 5 APR 1989! n!!rs
Sheffield      si 2HH
                                                                i R .i-.U . | H .C .C .U -l              r   f /
                                                        y,P.                  1                      i
                                                                                          -~ h )
Dear
                                                                                                              r
       You will probably know that a Deed has now been
executed containing the detailed declaration of trust and
the administrative provisions regulating the Appeal Fund.

            I therefore enclose a. copy of the Trust Fund
Deed, together with a copy of the formal notice which will
appear in 'The T i m e s 7 , 'Liverpool E c h o 7, 'Sheffield S t a r 7
and the 'Nottingham Evening P o s t 7 on Tuesday, 25th April,
1989, stating that a copy of the Deed will be available for
inspection at your offices.

           You may wish also to display a copy of the public
notice.   May I ask if you will be good enough to arrange
for the Deed to be made available for inspection.


                                     Yours sincerely,




          ADMMSTRA'

                                     C. M. Reddington,
                                     Trust Fund Manager
              2 e




CMRACD
                     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL FUND




    The Trust Deed containing the detailed provisions regulating the
Appeal Fund was signed by the Trustees on 21st April 1989.

    As previously announced the Appeal Fund has been established as a
discretionary trust fund (rather than a charity) so as to give the
Trustees maximum flexibility, without the constraints of charity law, to
provide for the injured or bereaved and their families and dependants.
The Deed also contains provisions allowing separate trusts to serve
community needs in ways which commemorate both the disaster at
Hillsborough and the generosity of those who responded to the Appeal.

    Copies of the Trust Deed may be inspected at the principal office of
each of the following local authorities:- Liverpool City Council,
Sheffield City Council, Nottinghamshire County Council, Nottingham City
Council, and the Metropolitan Borough Councils of Kndwsley, St. Helens,
Sefton and Wirral.

    The Trustees appreciate that many people will have made donations to
the Appeal before the precise terms of the main Fund were announced.    If
any contributor feels that these do not meet the purposie for which the
contribution w«is made he or she may apply to have the contribution
refunded by writing to the Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal,
4 Water Street, Liverpool 2 not later than 28th April 1989, after which
date all contributions made to the Appeal Fund will be irrevocably part
of that Fund.
D A T E D              21ST APRIL              19 89




            THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL




                  DECLARATION OF TRUST




                     ALSOP WILKINSON
                        LIVERPOOL
             THIS          DECLARATION OF TRUST is made the Twenty first day of
      April 1989 BY DEREK HAZLITT MORRIS of           290 India Buildings   Liverpool
      L2 ONH Solicitor MICHAEL DAVID BLANKSTONE of Martins Building              6
      Water Street         Liverpool L2 3SP Stockbroker   MICHAEL H&IRY FRANK„
                                                      ■ ' ■ "■I— .1— ■ — .1—

      HAMMOND of The Gu?1dhall Nottingham The Chief Executive of Nottingham
      City Council and WILLIAM NORMAN ADSETTS of Hillsborough Works
      Sheffield S6 2LW Company Director ("the Original Trustees”)
             W H E    RE    A S :-
(A)          An Appeal has been set up to establish a Fund for those injured
      or bereaved in the terrible disaster at Hillsborough Football Ground,
      Sheffield on Saturday the 15th April 1989 and their families and
      dependants
(B)          The terms of the Appeal were set out in a Press Statement issued
      on the 20th April 1989 (a copy of which is set out in the Schedule
      hereto) and made it clear:
      (I)    that the Original Trustees and other the trustees or trustee for
             the tine being should have a discretion how and to what extent
             to benefit individuals and to determine who are to be regarded
             as beneficiaries
      (?.)   that the Original Trustees or other trustees for the time being
             would hold on separate trusts any part of the fund which they in
             their discretion decide is not immediately required for the
             direct benefit of the v'ctims of the disaster and their
             relations and dependants such separate trusts being available to
             serve charitable community needs .in ways which commemorate both
             the disaster and the generosity of those who respond to the
             appeal
(C)          Large sums of money have been donated in response to the appeal
      and it is expected that further sums of money investments and
      property will be given to be held on the trusts hereof
(D)          The Original Trustees desire to declare the trusts hereinafter
      set out
(E)          This Declaration of Trust is intended to be irrevocable
      N 0 W    THIS DEED     W I T N E S S E T   H as follows
1     The Trust constituted by this Deed shall be known as        the
      "Hillsborough Disaster Appeal” (unless and until the Trustees
      adopt and apply to it (as they are hereby entitled to do) sotoe
      other name)

2     In this Deed the following expressions have the following means:
2.1   "the Trustees" means the Original Trustees or othertrustees or
      trustee for the time being of this Deed and "Trustee" means any
      one of the Trustees;
2.2   "the Trust Fund" means and includes:
      2.2:1          the sum of £.660,184 already donated less any sums.
                     which may be returned by the Trustees in accordance
                     with the provisions of the said Press Statement
      2.2:2          all other money investments or other assets hereafter
                     paid or transferred by any person or persons to or
                     rnto the control of the Trustees and accepted by them
                     as additions to the Trust Fund
      2.2:3          any property the proceeds of   sale whereof are required
                     or directed to be held upon the trusts hereof
      2.2:4          all other capital assets and   capital money which
                     hereafter by any means become or are made subject to
                     Che trusts of this Deed and
      2.2:5          the Investments property and   other assets from time to
                     t-'rae representing the foregoing items or any part or
                     parts thereof
2.3           "the disaster” means the disaster which occurred on the
      1-5th April 1989 at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield
2.4           "the    Beneficiaries" means such persons being victims of the
      disaster or relatives or dependants of such victims as the
      Trustees shall from time to time determine shall be regarded as
      beneficiaries
2.5   "charities" and "charitable" have the meanings assigned to them
      by English Law
2.6   "the Trust Period" means the period commencing on the date of
      this Deed ana ending eighty years thereafter which shall be the
      perpetuity period for all the purposes of t M s Deed              ‘




                                      2
The Trustees shall stand possessed of the Trust Fund and the

income thereof upon the trusts and with and s u b je c t t o ttie
powers and provisions hereinafter      declared and contained
concerning the same respectively
The Trustees shall hold the Trust Fund and the income thereof
upon trust during the Trust Period to pay or apply the same
without making any distinction between capital and income to or
for the benefit of all or any of the Beneficiaries in such
shares and In such manner as the Trustees in their absolute
discretion from time to time shall select and think fit
including (at any time or times before the end of the Trust
Period") payment or application of such sum or sums as they in
the circumstances think fit to any charitable trust charitable
appeal or charitable company constituted for the charitable
benefit of persons who fall within the class of Beneficiaries as
herein defined and payments by way of reimbursement to any
person or statutory or local authority or body which has made
payments to or   for the benefit of any    of theBeneficiaries in
consequence of   the disaster
For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared that any
payment to or for the benefit of any Beneficiary may be made
either absolutely or upon such discretionary or protective or
other trusts and subject to such discretions and powers
including powers    of accumulation limitations and other
provisions (including provisions permitting the delegation of
any duties discretions or powers to any person or persons) as
the Trustees shall by any Instrument in writing revocable or
irrevocable and in any case without infringing the rules against
perpetuities and excessive accumulations appoint and so that in
exercise of this foregoing power the .Trustees may if they think
fit transfer funds to any other trust under which any
Beneficiary is   or may be entitled to benefit
In addition to   their powers under theforegoing      provisions
hereof the Trustees may ac any time before the end of the Trust
Peri od pay or apply the Trust Fund or any part or parts thereof
to or for the benefit of such organisations institutions or
purposes w h e t h e r or not charitable ts the Trustees in ffiteif
discretijon seiect and think appropriate as serving community
needs and purposes in the spirit of this Trust
If any t i m e before the end of the Trust Period the Trustees,
shall in their absolute discretion determine that no further
provision need be made for the Beneficiaries out of the Trust
Fund or any part thereof the Trustees shall thereafter hold the
Trust Fund or such part thereof and in any event at the end of
the Trust Period the Trustees shall hold whatever then remains
of the Trust Fund and the income thereof upon such charitable
trusts as shall serve charitable community needs in the cities
of Liverpool, Nottingham, and Sheffield or the County of
Merseyside or any one or more of them in ways which commemorate
both the disaster and the generosity of those who responded to
the appeal hereinbefore mentioned or subsequently gave money
investments or property to this trust and as the Trustees shall
in their di scret-*on determine
Any land and hereditaments situate in England and Wales which
shall at any t’me or times hereafter become subject to the
trusts of this Deed (and any land situated elsewhere than in
England and Wales becoming so subject to which the Trustees in
their discretion    may decide that this provision shall apply)
shall be held by    the Trustees upon trust for sale with     power for
the Trustees in their discretion to postpone the sale of the
whole or any part or parts of it for so long as they shall think
fit
The Trustees sha.11 hold the Trust Fund as to so ouch of it as
does not consist of money and as is not held upon trust for sale
upon trust either to retain it or any part or parts of it in its
or their actual condition or state of investment for so long as
the Trustees shall think fit or at any time or times in the
discretion of the Trustees to sell call      -n and convert   it or any
part or parts of it into money
The Trustees shall hold the net proceeds of every sale and
Conversion of any part or parts of the Trust Fund and so much of
                             .    v              .   .   .   .   •   .


the remainder of the Trust Fund as consists of money and all
other capital moneys (if any) requiring investment under this
Deed upon trust to lay out or invest the same in thenanes or
under the control of the Trustees in any investments or
investment of any nature authorised by this Deed with powers of
any nature at any time and from time to time to vary or
transpose any of such investments f o r or into any other
investments or investment of a like nature
Any money for the time being subject to the trusts of this Deed
may be invested by the Trustees in any part of the world in any
way which they in their discretion think f^t (whether or not
money so invested will produce, income) as if they wepe a sole
absolute beneficial owner of the money and for the purposes of
this clause the purchase of any property whether real or
personal movable or immovable (including chattels) for the
beneficial occupation use or enjoyment of any person who would
be entitled to receive or to whom or for whose benefit the
Trustees would have power to pay or apply the income of such
property if it produced income and the lending of money to any
person with or without interest and with or without security
shall constitute investment and the provisions of Section 6(1)
of the Trustee Investments Act 1961 shall not apply to this Deed
The Trustees shall have and may exercise at any time or times
the following additional powers
Power to effect or concur in effecting any transaction
concerning or affecting any part of the Trust Fund or any other
property whatsoever ■>'f the Trustees think the transaction is for
the benefit of the Trust Fund or the persons interested in it as
If the Trustees were a sole absolute beneficial owner of the
Trust Fund and for the purpose of this paragraph "transaction"
includes any sale exchange assurance grant lease surrender
reconveyance release reservation or other disposition and any
purchase or other acquisition and any covenant contract licence
option or right of pre-emption and any compromise partition
insurance or other dealing or arrangement arid "ef'feet"; 'has “the
meaning appropriate to the particular transaction and references
to property include references to restrictions and burdens
affecting property
Power to make improvements to or to develop any land or building
or other structure which forms part of the proceeds of sale or
which form part of the Trust Fund and in particular to erect
enlarge improve or rebuild any building or other structure on
such land if the Trustees think it will be for the benefit
whether permanent or temporary of the Trust Fund and to pay the
cost of such improvement and development and all incidental
costs out of the capital of the Trust Fund
In addition to the powers of improving land and maintaining and
repairing property conferred by law upon trustees holding land
and property upon trust for sale power to pay as they in their
discretion think fit out of the income or capital the cost of
improving maintaining and repairing (including decorative
repair) any land or property which or the proceeds of sale of
which form part of the Trust Fund
Power to keep any property whether real or personal movable or
immovable forming part of the Trust Fund insured against such
risks and for such amount as they think fit with an insurance
office of repute and to arrange for the installation improvement
repair maintenance and servicing of any system designed to
protect any such property against theft or any other risk and to
pay all premiums installation maintenance servicing and other
charges and any other moneys which may be required for these
purposes out of income or capital and to apply any money
received in respect of any such insurance as if it were proceeds
of sale of the property insured
Power to borrow money for any purpose connected with the trusts
of this Deed (including the making of investments to be held as
part of the Trust Fund) and to mortgage charge assign or pledge
the whole or any part of the Trust Fund by way of security for
the repayment of any money borrowed in the same unrestricted
manner as if the Trustees were                        ..wnefs.-thereof-
Power   to purchase any additional property to be "held subject   to
the trusts hereof and for that purpose to enter into contracts
and to b^nd themselves by promissory notes or by any other
security for the purchase price and generally to acquire such
additional property as fully and as freely as a beneficial owner
might do
Power in respect of any buildings or any chattel or other assets
forming part of the Trust Fund
9.7:1      to grant such leases or tenancies thereof or to let or
           lend or hire out the same to any person or persons     on
           such terms as the Trustees think fit
9.7:2      to sell or grant options to purchase the same on t e r m s
           under which the price is payable to the Trustees by
           instalments
and otherwise to exploit manage and deal with the same in the
sane unrestricted manner as *f the Trustees were the absolute
beneficial owners thereof
Power to carry on any business and for that_^purpose to employ in
the business (as working capital or otherwise) any trust money
or other trust assets and to raise money by "overdraft and to
make any outlay out of the capital or income of the Trust Fund
Power at the expense of the Trust Fund to promote and
incorporate or join in promoting and incorporating in any part
of the world any company or companies for the purpose of
conducting any business or of acquiring (with or without other
property) any property comprised in the Trust Fund and the
holding or developing or otherwise dealing with any such
property and so that the Trustees or any of them may act as
directors or director of any such company or may appo/nt
nominees or a nominee to act as directors or director thereof on

their behalf
Power to cause or permit any company the shares or securities
whereof are comprised in the Trust Fund to retain the whole or
       any part of Its income undistributed and so that (whether or not
       the Trustees have a controlling interest in any such company)
       the Trustees shall not be under any obligation to take any step
       to remove directors of any such company who recommend such
       retention of the company's income and if any Trustee is a
       director thereof he may recommend such retention       ^
9.11   Power to permit any investments or property forming part of the
       Trust Fund to be held in any part of the world by or in the name
       or names of any nominee or nominees of the Trustees on such
       terms (if any) as to execution of blank transfers or
       declarations of trust and as to custody of the documents o f _
       title relating to such investments or property and otherwise as
       the Trustees may think fit and so that (but without prejudice to
       the generality of the foregoing) this power nay be exercised for
       the purpose of qualifying any nominee (including any Trustee) to
       act as a director of any company
9.12   Power to apply trust capital in purchasing effecting or
       acquiring by any other means policies of insurance (whether life'
       policies or endowment or sinking fund policies or policies of
       any other k’nd) and annuities perpetual or terminable and for
       lives or any other periods and power in relation to any
       insurance policy effected by the Trustees to surrender exchange
       sell charge or otherwise deal with the same in the sane
       unrestricted manner as if they were the absolute beneficial
       owner thereof
9.13   Power in connection with the investment and changing of
       investments of trust money
       9.13:1    to obtain and pay for the advice of such broker or
                 other persons as the Trustees may think fit and
       Q .13:2   to employ and remunerate any banking or merchant
                 banking company or firm or other person or persons to
                 manage such investments and to delegate to such
                 manager or managers all or any of the duties or powers
                 of the Trustees in respect of the investments or
                 changing of investments of trust money




                                    8
9.14   Power to cause the accounts of this Trust to be audited annually
       or at such other intervals as the Trustees think fit    fey such
       professional accountant or accountants as they may appoint for
       the purpose
9.15   Power in respect, of any trust capital or income which becomes
       the property of or payable or applicable to or for the benefit
       of any person who   is for the time being   under the age of
       eighteen years to   apply the same in any manner which the
       Trustees consider   to be for   the benefit of that person
9.16   Power to appoint any one or     more of the Trustees and/or the
       Trust Manager to be the agents of the Trustees for the purpose
       of operating any bank or building society account of the
       Trustees or for the purpose of collecting any rents or income of
       or managing of administering any property (in any part of the
       world) comprised in the Trust Fund or for any other purpose for
       which the Trustees may appoint agents
9.17   Power (without prejudice to the jurisdiction of the Court) to
       decide what money or property represents income and what
       represents capital and how as between the capital and income of
       the Trust Fund any expenses or costs shall be borne or provided

9.13   Power to agree to any scheme for amalgamation or reconstruction
       of any company in which shares stocks or securities are held by
       the Trustees or any other scheme relating to any such company

9.19   Power for the purpose of the trusts declared by this Deed
       concerning the Trust Fund to enter into any arrangement or
       contract notwithstanding that the person or persons w-'th whom or
       on whose behalf the arrangement or contract is made are or
       include one or more of the Trustees

9.20   Power to make rules and regulations for the management and
       administration of the Trust Fund or any part thereof and for
       matters connected therewith as the Trustees from time to time
       may think fit and from time to time to amend revoke and replace
       all or any such rules or regulations

9.21   Power to appoint and constitute such committees or other bodies
       as the Trustees may think fit or convenient for or in connection




                                       9
           with such management or administration and (pursuant to the
           general power for that purpose conferred by subclause 9.20 of
           this clause) to make amend revoke and replace rule's and
           regulations for the purpose of defining the functions powers and
           organisations of any such committee or body and power also (if
           the Trustees think fit) to pay an honorarium or fee or salary to
           and the expense of any member of any such committee ,or body
9.22       Power to delegate from time to time to any such committee or
           body or to any other person or oersons all or any of the powers
           and duties of the Trustees hereunder
9.23       Power to employ or engage the services of and remunerate a Trust
           Manager and such other official or staff as the Trustees m§y
           from time to time think fit and to enter into any service
           agreement for that purpose and to pay contributions to any
           superannuation or pension scheme which may be established (by
           the Trustees or otherwise) for the benefit of such employees
■h“*




       0   Every individual Trustee who is a solicitor stockbroker or
           accountant or member of any other profession or engaged ..in any
           business shall be entitled to charge and be paid all usual
           professional or other charges for business transacted t^me
           expended and acts done by him or his firm in connection with the
           trusts affecting the Trust Fund including acts which a trustee
           not engaged in any profession or business could have done
           personally   And any such Trustee shall be entitled to retain any
           commission or brokerage receive 1 by him or his firm in
           connection with any investment or change of investment of trust
           money or any insurance effected by the Trustees and any interest
           credited to him or his firm in respect of any trust money at any
           time temporarily held by him or his firm in any bank account so
           long as he declares the same to his co-trustees
11 '       Any individual Trustee who is for the time being a director
           officer auditor or employee of any company shares or securities
           whereof are for the time being comprised in the Trust Fund shall
           be entitled to receive and retain any remuneration paid to him
           as such director officer auditor or employee although his




                                      10
       appointment or continuance in office may have been due to the
       holding by the Trustees of such shares or securities or have
       been otherwise obtained or retained by reason of his position as
       a Trustee so long as he declares the same to his co-trustees
12     The   statutory provisions about the appointment retirement a n d .
       discharge of trustees shall apply to the trusts declared by this
       Deed concerning the Trust Fund subject to the following

       provisions of this clause
12.1   a person appointed to be a Trustee may be resident in any part
       of the world
12.2   any   Trustee (not being the sole Trustee) shall be at liberty at
       any time by notice in writing to the other Trustees or Trustee
       to resign and retire from the trusteeship hereof
12.3   any   company or other corporate body (whether or not a trust
       corporation) may at any time be appointed a Trustee upon such
       terms and conditions as to remuneration (which may be payable
       out of the capital or income of the Trust Fund) and otherwise as
       the person or persons making the appointment shall think proper
12.4   the   person or persons for the time being entitled to appoint new
       Trustees    shall have power if and whenever he she or they think
       fit toappoint new separate,trustees of any part      of the Trust
       Fund and power in connection with any such appointment to make
       all necessary and proper appropriations of investments and other
       property and to transfer the same to such separate trustees and

       so that thereafter
       12.4:1      the separate trustees in relation to all the property
                   so transferred to or thereafter held by them and the
                   income thereof shall have all the same powers and
                   discretions as are hereby conferred on the Trustees in
                   relation to the Trust Fund and the income thereof
        12-4:2     subject to paragraph 12.4:1 of this subclause all
                   property held by such separate trustees and all
                   property retained by the Trustees shall remain subject
                   to the same trusts powers and provisions as if no
                    separate trustees had been appointed




                                     11
The Trustees shall have power from time to time to appoint one
of their number to be Chairman of    the Trustees to hold office
for such period as the Trustees determine
Any act or decision by a majority of the trustees shall have the
same force and effect as if it were the act or decision of all
of them but *n the event of an equality of votes the Chairman                /
                                                  ' ' ■ S '
for the time being of the Trustees shall have a second or
casting vote   .No one dealing with the Trustees shall be
concerned or affected to see that this provision     has been
complied with and any such majority or act or decision shall be
done or made only after consultation between all the Trustees
                                                                t
The Trustees may in the execution of any of the trusts of this
Deed or i n the exercise of any of   the powers given to them       by
this Deed or by law sail property or lend money to or buy
property or borrow money from or carry out any other transaction
with the trustees of any other -trust or the executors or
administrators of any estate notwithstanding that the Trustees
or any of them are or is the same person as those trustees               j
executors or adainistrators or any of them and where the
Trustees are the same persons as those trustees executors or
administrators the transaction shall be binding on all persons
then or thereafter interested under this Deed though effected •
and evidenced only by an ertry in the accounts of the Trustees :
In the professed execution of the trusts and powers hereof no
Trustee shall be liable for any loss to the Trust Tund arising
by reason of the failure depreciation or loss of any investments
made in good faith or for the negligence or fraud of any agent
employed by him or by any other Trustee hereof although the
employment of such agent was not strictly necessary or expedient
or by reason of any mistake or omission made in good faith by
any Trustee hereof or by reason of any other matter or thing
except wilful and individual fraud or wrongdoing on the part of
the Trustee who is sought to be made liable
Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained none of the
powers or discretions hereby conferred on the Trustees shall at
              any time be capable of being exercised so as to benefit any
               person who has fflade any gift or contribution to the Trust Fuad
               or any spouse of such person and no part of the capital or
               income of the Trust Fund shall at any time be paid lent or
               applied for the benefit of any such person as aforesaid or any
               spouse of such person
                                                                                                      .S' ■
18            If at any time hereafter it shall appear to the Trustees that by
               reason of any defect or omission in the preceding provisions of
               this Deed it would promote the better administration of the
               Trust Fund and the income-thereof or the more convenient or
               effectual execution of the trust declared in Clause 4 hereof if
                                                                                                                    t
               further or other powers were conferred on the Trustees it shall
               be lawful for the Trustees by any deed or deeds revocable or
               irrevocable to supplement or alter or amend the provisions of
               this Deed to such extent (but to such extent only) as may in the
               opinion of the Trustees be requisite for the purpose of
               conferring on the Trustees such further or other powers
19            This Deed shall be governed by and construed in accordance with
               English Law
               IN      W'l T N E S S whereof the Original Trustees have hereunto
      set their respective hands and seals the day and year first before
      written
                                                       SCHEDULE
                                                          —■ ■■■- ■-   .         .          .




                                                 PRESS STATEMENT

                               THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL FtTND

         F o llo w in g a m e e tin g h e ld i n L iv e r p o o l on 1 7 th A p r il 1989 under th e
a u s p i c e s o f L i v e r p o o l C i t y C o u n c i l and L i v e r p o o l F o o t b a l l C lu b and
a t t e n d e d by r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f S h e f f i e l d C i t y C o u n c i l , N o t t i n g h a m s h ir e
C ou nty C o u n c i l and N o ttin g h a m C i t y C o u n c i l and c o n s u l t a t i o n s w i t h t h e
M e t r o p o l i t a n B o r o u g h s o f K n o w s le y , S t . H e l e n s , S e f t o n , and W i r r a l
T r u s t e e s w e r e a p p o i n t e d f o r t h e Fund w h ic h i s t o h e l p t h o s e i n j u r e d o r
b e r e a v e d i n t h e t e r r i b l e d i s a s t e r a t H i l l s b o r o u g h F o o t b a l l G round,
S h e f f i e l d on S a t u r d a y 1 5 t h A p r i l 1 9 8 9 and t h e i r f a m i l i e s and d e p e n d a n t s .

        The T r u s t e e s o f t h e Fund a r e a p a s t P r e s i d e n t o f t h e L i v e r p o o l Law
S o c i e t y , t h e Chairm an o f t h e L i v e r p o o l S t o c k E x c h a n g e , t h e P r e s i d e n t o f
S h e f f i e l d Chamber o f Commerce an d t h e C h i e f E x e c u t i v e o f N o ttin g h a m C i t y
C o u n c il.




                                                             13
        I t i s a n t i c i p a t e d th a t w it h in th e n e x t few d ays th e T r u s te e s w i l l
e x e c u t e a D eed c o n t a i n i n g t h e d e t a i l e d d e c l a r a t i o n o f t r u s t an d t h e
a d m i n i s t r a t i v e p r o v i s i o n s r e g u l a t i n g t h e A p p e a l Fund.

        D o n a t i o n s may b e made a t a n y b ank o r b u i l d i n g s o c i e t y f o r c r e d i t t o
t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r A p p e a l Fund a t B a r c l a y s B ank , C i t y O f f i c e ,
W ater S t r e e t , L i v e r p o o l L69 23JX A c c o u n t Number 2 0 5 6 5 5 5 5 , s o r t c o d e
2 0 - 5 1 - Q 1 , o r a t t h e C o - o p e r a t i v e B ank, 8 4 / 8 6 W est S t r e e t , S h e f f i e l d S I
3SX A c c o u n t Number 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 , s o r t c o d e 0 8 - 9 0 - 7 5 .

        The T r u s t e e s w i l l h a v e a d i s c r e t i o n how a n d t o w h a t e x t e n t t o b e n e f i t
i n d i v i d u a l s a n d t o d e t e r m i n e who a r e t o b e r e g a r d e d a s p o t e n t i a l
b e n e fic ia r ie s .

        I t has b een d e c id e d t o e s t a b l i s h th e A ppeal a s a d is c r e t io n a r y t r u s t
fu n d f o r t h e i n j u r e d or, b e r e a v e d and t h e i r f a m i l i e s and d e p e n d a n t s r a t h e r
t h a n a s a c h a r i t y b u t t h e T r u s t e e s w i l l h o l d on s e p a r a t e t r u s t s a n y p a r t
o f t h e fu n d w h i c h t h e y i n t h e i r d i s c r e t i o n d e c i d e i s n o t i m m e d i a t e l y
r e q u i r e d f o r t h e d i r e c t b e n e f i t o f t h e v i c t i m s o f t h e d i s a s t e r and t h e i r
r e l a t i v e s an d d e p e n d a n t s . S uch s e p a r a t e t r u s t s w i l l b e a v a i l a b l e t o
s e r v e co m m u n ity n e e d s i n w a y s w h ic h com m em orate b o t h t h e d i s a s t e r and t h e
g e n e r o s i t y o f t h o s e who r e s p o n d t o t h i s a p p e a l ; b u t t h e m o s t u r g e n t
p u r p o s e o f t h e a p p e a l i s t o b e n e f i t t h e v i c t i m s o f t h e d i s a s t e r and t h e i r
d ep en d a n ts.

         I t i s h o p e d t h a t t h e T r u s t e e s w i l l b e a b l e t o make an e a r l y
d is tr ib u tio n .      As s o o n a s t h e D eed h a s b e e n e x e c u t e d a c o p y w i l l be
a v a ila b le a t th e p r in c ip a l o f f i c e o f each o f th e L ocal A u th o r itie s
r e f e r r e d t o a b o v e . Anyone who h a s c o n t r i b u t e d t o t h e a p p e a l b e f o r e
r e a d i n g t h i s a im o u n c em e n t may, i f h e o r s h e f e e l s t h a t i t d o e s n o t m e et
t h e p u r p o s e s f o r w h ic h h e o r s h e h a s made a c o n t r i b u t i o n , a p p l y t o h a v e
th e c o n t r ib u t io n re fu n d ed .      Any s u c h a p p l i c a t i o n s h o u l d be made t o The
T r u s t e e s o f the H i l l s b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r A p p e a l , 4 W ater S t r e e t , L i v e r p o o l 2
n o t l a t e r t h a n 2 8 t h A p r i l 1 9 8 9 , a f t e r w h i c h d a t e a l l c o n t r i b u t i o n s made
w i l l b e i r r e v o c a b l y p a r t o f t h e A p p e a l Fund.

    The T r u s t e e s a r e c o n f i d e n t t h a t t h i s A p p e a l d o e s r e f l e c t t h e g e n e r o u s
and w i d e s p r e a d p u M i c r e a c t i o n t o t h i s t e r r i b l e d i s a s t e r .

        A f u r t h e r S t a t e m e n t w i l l be i s s u e d i n d u e c o u r s e o u t l i n i n g t h e
p r o c e d u r e s f o r p e r s o n s w i s h i n g t o make c l a i m s on t h e Fund.

                                                                                  2 0 th A p r il 1989




SIGNED SEALED AND DELIVERED                      )
by the said Derek Hazlitt                        )
Morris in the presence oft-                      )
SIGNED SEALED AND DELIVERED   )
by the said Michael David     )
                              )
Blankstone in the presence    )
                              )
of :-                         )




SIGNED SEALED AND DELIVERED )
by the said Michael Harry    )
Frank Hammond ?n the presence)
of:-                          )




SIGNED SEALED AND DELIVERED )
by the said William No m a n  )
Adsetts "in the presence of:- )
The Acting Head of                                          0 1 0 B*tt*
Administration and Legal                          Leader
Department                                             w««dh*«d
20 September 1989                                 ** JJ*®0®*®*®
AH/DG                                                OOWtfd
4018

r

Further to our brief telephone conversation of Monday 18 September, In connection
with the above topic. Frances Woodhead ascertained from Jon ^Bauer that last
Wednesday i.e. the 13 September, the Council had made a verbal offer of the grant




Apparently, Mr Littlewood is going to put the proposals to the Board and is expected
to come back quickly.
With regard to the Prohibition Notice, conversations with the Club’s Solicitor suggest
that they will not be appealing but will concentrate on getting the w<5rk
however, this is not borne out by recent public statements by Mr Littlewood as
per the attached article.
  T H E oustanding success o f hit musical Evita is                                  By Keith Strong                        About a third o f the City H all’s 2,400 seats
  p'aving the way for more W est End blockbusters                                                                         were withdrawn from sale because o f sightline
  at Sheffield City Hall.                                          is the foundation we are building on. The other problems, but the members o f the first large-scale
     With the applause still echoing from the final                shows are definitely coming, it is just a q u estion ' professional touring production to appear there
  curtain call o f the Tim Rice-Andrew Lloyd                       o f agreeing on the dates.”                            were overwhelmed with their reception at the big­
  Webber sm ash, plans are being made to bring                                                                            gest venue on their datesheet.
                                                                       Both the spectacular 42nd Street and Chess
  42nd Street and Chess to the venue within the                    will have two-week runs and, like Evita, based on         “They had a wonderful time and audiences had
  next 12 months.                                                  the life o f the Argentinian actress turned poli­ nothing but praise for the quality o f the show,”
   ' A delighted Graham Scofield, the City Hall                    tician, will be authentic W est End productions.       said M r Schofield.
  manager, said: “ After four years o f trying to                      M ore than 16,000 people paid £8-£15 to see           Jacqui S cott, in the title role, was highly
  prove to promoters that the venue could take a                   E vita, sponsored by S h effield D evelopm ent acclaimed and a bright W est End future is being
  W est End musical tour, we have opened the                       Corporation; from September 5-16, with both predicted for her.
  gates.            I-                                             Saturday evenings and the final Friday night
     “ Evita has been an enormous success and that                 being sold out.                                        the stab says                               m




                                                                                                                                                                                                  •1vi
                                                                                                                                                                                                  •-.-I




                        By John Highfield
 THE owners, o f Sheffield’s Owlerton
 Stadium say they will go to court in
 their fight to overturn the city council’s
 decision to close the venue on safety
 grounds.
    T h e sta d iu m w as
 c lo s e d la st F rid a y after
 c o u n c i l l o r s is s u e d a
 p r o h ib itio n order
 u n d er th e Safety o f
 S p o r ts G r o u n d s A ct.
    A report to councillors
 highlighted a string of
 problems including a                                                                                                                 V S '>   ,m      X. v

 lack of emergency lights '/.-tv/S'A-
 in stands, rubbish under­        ...

 neath timber seating,            I" £ XcSy/U
 structural weaknesses
 and inadequate exit
 signs.
      M a n ag in g d irector and
  c o m p a n y secre ta ry A lb ert
  Littlewood says he hopes to
  see th e stadiu m back in full
  o p e r a tio n as soon as
  possible.
      A n d he predicts that the          Fighting the decision — managing director Albert Littlewood at Owlerton
  cost to the stadium in terms
  o f work to be d o n e and lost      to see w h e t h e r we c a n                M r L ittlew ood said th at      valuable g rey h ou n d race in
  revenue is likely to be in                                                    the shock closure decision           E n g la n d , the T e n n e n ts
                                       section o f f the stadium and
  excess o f £100.000.                                                          cam e at the end o f o n e o f the   E x tra £10,000 final, which
                                       tak e the m ain p a n o r a m a
      M eanwhile arrangem ents         building, d o the neccessary             s t a d iu m 's most, successful     created trem en d o u s interest.
jh a v e b een m ade fo r              work in th at area a n d then            seasons.                                “ T h e b r e w e r s w e r e so      T H E grubs o f w ood-eating
JO w lerto n 's regular Tuesday        a pp ly to the council for the                                                pleased t h a t they say they            insects, attacking the picture
la n d F rid a y g rey h o u n d       withdrawal o f the p ro h ib ­                                                are bringin g it b ack next              frames of masterpieces by 17th
                                                                                           Pleased                                                            century painter Caravaggio as
I meetings to take place at            itio n o r d e r f o r t h a t a r e a                                        year.
JC olwick Par, Nottin gh am .                                                                                                                                 ■veil as priceless antique furni­
                                       alo n e," he explained. "T h en              " W e have h a d o u r best        " N o w we have to tak e it            ture, have forced the closure of
                                       we wou ld d o the rest bit by            y e a r," he said. " O n l y a week all d a y b y day, week by                Rome’s Borghese gallery for
           Possibility                 bit."                                    ag o we had the second m o st w eek .”                                        disinfection.

    “ W e h a v e a rig h t to I
City of Sheffield                   M e tro p o lita n District

R og e r P e n s a m . FCIS. MBIM. Solicitor                                                    A d m i n i s t r a t i o n a n d Legal D e p a r t m e n t
H e a d of D e p a r t m en t                                                                   Town Hall,
                                                                                                Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference         GP/262/DMB

Your reference        GHM/MB/S6/3772
Date
                      19th September, 1989.




  Mr. G. H. Mackrell,
  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic,
  Hillsborough,
  Sheffield,
  S6 1SW.

  Dear Sir,

  Recommendation 17 of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report

  I refer to your letter of 18th September in which you enquire about progress
  on implementing Recommendation 17. In your letter you point out that many
  of the other recommendations have been either implemented or are in a fairly
  advanced stage of implementation.

  For your information the Policy Committee of the City Council will consider
  amongst other things the question of Recommendation 17 and when guidance is
  received from Members, I will, of course, let you know.


  Yours faithfully,




  Acting Head of Department

  MS4ABE/JL




                                For telephone enquiries on this matter please rin g ..7 3 & Q Q 5 .................... (STD Code 0742)                 R4602

                                                             Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)           M r . Bow nes
    Sheffield Wednesday                                                              r          L                      ^
                 Football Club PLC                                                              ^


                                                                                                            u)
    GHM/MB/S6/377 2                                                                        C*=>/C^ c /

                                                                                                             'C l/V s r ,
    18th September 1989                                                                                                 7




     Mr M Webster
     Administration and Legal Department
     Town Hall
    )Sheffield
     SI 2HH


    Dear Mr Webster

    As I am sure you are aware, amongst the 43 recommendations made in the interim
    Report published by Lord Justice Taylor, was Nol7, the creation of an Advisory
    Group. Many of the other recommendations have been implemented, but I should be
    grateful if you would advise me as to the progress on the formation of this
    Advisory Group.




    Secretary

m   ------------




                                                                                                 .O S M..   LtO




                 Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
     Tel: (0742) 343122 Grams: W ednesday Sheffield 6.
       Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145

                         Chairman: H. E. McGee, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A., Manager: R Atkinson
     Directors: M. Sheppard, J.P., F.C.A. (Vice-Chairman), S. L. Speight, O.B.E., C. Woodward, K.T. Addy, E. Barron,   G. K. Hulley.
                                                      Registered in England No. 62478
F ROM   LEADERS   OF F . .   L'POOL                                                     9 . 15.1989   9:31

    'h - . T




                  FROM                                        QXftiKy               f a (fy

                                                     4 f a , . .C a u n o u i



                             C/O LEADER’S OFFICE,
                             LIVERPOOL C m COUNCIL

                             TEL- NO       2252319
                             FAX. NO       23G-3047

                                   f A'G-

                   TO         .. I l T O V l S                                      ^
                                  Q c K ^        lA O a d        «          r   ( J /d A M        $


                                                                                ^

                   NO. OF PAGES TO F O L L O W j

                   DATE       .       . A .r. i       ...................
FROM-LEADERS   OFF.   L'POOL                     9 .1 5 .1 9 8 9   9:31



    \i.> V
                                                                           k te5t.son,




               STATEMENT TO BE FORWARDED TO THE ACTING HEAD OP SHEFFIELD
                  CITY COUNCIL'S ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT


              With reference to your letter dated 23rd August, 1989,
         regarding the Hillsborough disaster] this Hillsborough
         Working Party has been requested, on behalf of Liverpool
         City council, to respond to the concerns, registered in your
         letter, of Members of your Authority and those Members who
         also serve on the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

              From our own enquiries into the Hillsborough tragedy,
         and from a full reading of the transcripts from the
         Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry, we fully agree with
         Lord Justice Taylor's unequivocal contention (para 286 of
         his Interim R e p o r t ) . "The poor performance by the City
         Council of its duties in regard to the Safety Certificate
         was inefficient and dilatory.        The failure to revise or
         amend the Certificate over the period of three years
         preceding this disaster, despite important changes in the
         layout of the ground, was a serious breach of duty.        There
         was, as a result, no fixed capacities for the pens.        The
         Certificate took no account of the 1981 and 1985 alterations
         to the g r o u n d ,"

                  We contend that the comments of the Leader of this City
         Council are fully vindicated in respect of the 'poor
         p e r f o r m a n c e ' of your Authority in its duties and obligations
         to the Hillsborough Safety Certificate,

              Further to the issue of resignations, this Working
         Party, on behalf of the City Council, has continued, and
         will^continue to call for the resignation of those officials
         within Sheffield City Council responsible for the
         Hillsborough Safety Certificate and the Chairman of the
o        South Yorkshire Police Authority.

              Your Members concern at the comments of Mr. Norman Bush
         (Liverpool City Council's Chief Building Surveyor) is
         somewhat perplexing given the C o n s i d e r a b l e offence' already
         caused to the families, relatives and friends of the
         bereaved and injured.

              Finally, your response to the Norman Bush article
         has added insult to an enormous injury and which we hope you
         will^forgive us saying perhaps demonstrates a lack of
         sensitivity to the feelings of Merseyside people.    The fact
         is that your Authority's administration o 1? the safety
         Certificate up to the 19th April 1989 shov«ed a dereliction
         of duty and responsibility which proved to be      recipe for
         disaster . "

                                              Hillsborough Working Party.



         S02AAR
                                                                                       V\   v    >»«^’"ScKs9160
                                 C ITY OF S H E F F IE L D — M E M O R A N D U M                /r-^~ \

From        Acting Head of Admin & Legal Dept             To
                                                                 Mr. D. W. Perchon,   / \                         /
                                                                 Director of Health & OQrtsiMigj-ggl vices

            13th September, 1989.                                 (See distribution list below)
Date
Ref.        FW
            4004-Mrs. Woodhead                            Ref.
Tel. Ext.
                                                                                   i




            Re: Safety of Sports Grounds - Don Valley Stadium

            I refer to our telephone conversation concerning this matter. I confirm
            that a site meeting has been arranged at Don Valley Stadium at 11.00 a.m. on
            Wednesday 20th September, 1989. The purpose of the site meeting is to
            examine an area of the Stadium which has a steep gradient with a view to
            discussing the effect of that area upon safety of spectators. It is also
            proposed to inspect the entrances to the Stadium and discuss whether or not
            these should be serviced by turnstiles.  If there is time, other items of
            safety can be discussed pertinent to the certification of the Stadium.

            All members of the Advisory Group have been invited to the meeting together
            with local authority architects.

            I confirm that sandwiches will be provided at lunch time.

            Upon arriving at the Stadium,     please proceed to the car park. You will see
            cabins located to the left of     the car park. Please proceed to the site
            office which is identified by     a yellow door. Please ensure that you bring
            this letter with you since it     will be required as proof of identity by the
            security guard on the gate.




            Distribution:

            Mr.
            Department of Health & Consumer Services
            Mr. A. Butler, Building Surveyor,
            Department of Land & Planning
            Mr. Julian Ward
            Mr. Mark Webster                  Le_<=\e.v\

            MS3ABJ/JL
        Sheffield Wednesday
                      Football C lub PLC




         Our Ref:       GHM/JB/D34/3745

         12th September 1989


         Mr. M. Webster,
         Acting Head of Department,                                                            3   SET
         City of Sheffield,
         Administration and Legal Department,
         Town Hall,
         Sheffield.
         SI 2HH


         Dear Mr. Webster,

         Re:    Safety of Sports Grounds - Capacity

         I am in receipt of your letter dated 8th September 1989.
B
        As you are aware our Consulting Engineers, Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, are
        submitting plans in respect of the barriers on the Kop. We have agreed that
        included in these plans will be proposals to increase the perimeter gates to 1.1
        metres.

        In the meantime the Club acknowledges that the capacity will be reduced to
        16,800 persons until the necessary work has been completed at which point the
        capacity will revert to its existing level.

        I look forward to receiving your agreement to same.

        Yours sincerely,




          HT"MackreiT-
    C   Secret
        Secretary__




                    Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
        Tei: (0742) 343122 Grams: Wednesday Sheffield 6.
         Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. C742 337145

                            Chairman: H. E. McGee, Secretary': G. H. Mackreli. F.C.C.A., Manager: R Atkinson
        Directors: M. Sheppard, J.P., F.CA (Vice-Chairman), S. L. Speight. O.B.E., C. W oodward, K.T. Addy, E. Barron.   G. K. Huliey.
                                                       Registered in England No. 62478
                                          '*7®®Family Club" ■ -■
               Bramall Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 738955 Fax: 0742 723030

    M. Webster                                                                           8th September 1989
    Acting Head of Department,
    Administration 6 Legal Department,
    City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
    Town Hal1,
    Sheffield SI 2HH.




    Dear Sir,

    re Safety of Sports Ground.

    We have been asked to stage the Rugby League game between Sheffield Eagles and
    Widnes here at Bramall Lane on Sunday 8th October.

    I would be grateful for confirmation that we are able to proceed with the
    arrangements for this game.




    Yours faithfully,




    DAVID CAPPER
    CCMPANY SECRETARY




                                                                                          1 3. SEPT 85




D irecto rs: R.J. Brealey (Chairman), D. Dooley (Managing D irector), A.H. Laver, M.A. W ragg, R. W ragg, P.G. W oolhouse
              Company S ecretary : D. C apper,      Team M anager : D.T. Bassett,      England Reg. No. 61564
 Sheffield Wednesday                                                                                                  ^h /s y
              F o o tb a ll C lu b P L C                                                  *V ^ ^
                                                                                                                                     rV




  our Ref:       GHM/JB/D34

  7th September 1989


  Mr. M. Webster,
  Acting Head of Department,
  City of Sheffield,
  Administration and Legal Department,
  Town Hall,
  Sheffield.
^ S 1 2HH


  Dear Sir,

  Re:    Safety of Sports Grounds Act
                                                                                                                                          t


  I am in receipt of your letter dated 5th September 1989.

  In respect of the points raised please find enclosed a copy of our matchday
  tickets for the current season.                  The wording on the tickets for visiting                                                j
  supporters was printed at the request of the Police.                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                          I
  In addition I am able to confirm that the additional medicalpractitioner                                           is
  trained and competent in advanced First Aid.

  The stewarding plan has been completed but at present it is still in draft form                                                         j
  as the Police and ourselves have been making    minor amendments at each ofour two                                                      j

  heme matches. Once the plan has been finalised I will have it typed and forward                                                         ’
    copy.
                                                                                                                                          I
  With regard to your letter dated 17th August   1989, containing                                   Officers comments,                    I
  I will deal with the points that were raisedin order:                                                                                   j
                                                                                                                                          }
  Pg 1 1(a) (i)Work canpleted.
  Pg 1 1(a) )ii)     In hand, we are awaiting however for therelevant FireOfficer,
                   who is at present on holiday, to return to duty for
                   clarification.
  pg l 1(b)        Work ccEEpleted by service engineer.
  pg l 1(c)        Completed.
  pg l 1(d)        Noted. Relevant staff informed.
  pg l 1(e)        The subject of negotiations between Fire Service and Eastwood
                   and Partners re re-siting.
  pg l 1(f)        In hand. Awaiting exact specifications from Fire Service and
                   Building Surveyors Dept.                                                                                               |
  pg l Kg)         As 1(f) above.                                                                                                         j,
  pg l 1(h)        Work  in progress, notyet completed.                                                                                   [j
                                                                                                                                          ij
              Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW,                      continued . . .                                                        jj
  Tel: (0742) 343122      Gramsi W ednesday Sheffield 6.                                                                     H
   Telex No. 547709        WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145

                      Chairmen: H. E. McGee, Secretory: G. H. MackreU. F.C.C.A., Manager-. R Atkinson
  Directors: M. Sheppard. J.P.. F.C.A. (Vice-Chairman), S. L. Speight. O.B.E.. C. W oodward. K.T, Addy. E. Barron.   G. K. Huliey.
                                                   Registered m tngiand No. 62478
pg 2 1 (i )(i )    Done
           (ii)    Completed
           (iii)   Completed
Pg 2 1 (j )(i)     As i(f) above
           (ii)    In hand
Pg 2 l(k)          As 1(f) above
Pg 2 1(1)          Completed
Pg 2 l(m)          In process of being totally removed - not to be replaced.
pg 3 l(n)          Canpleted
pg 3 1(0)          As 1(f) above
pg 3 1(P)          As 1(f) above
pg 3 l(r)          Work canpleted
pg 3 2(a)          In hand, not yet completed.
pg 3 2(b)          Work canpleted
pg 3 2(c)          In hand, not yet canpleted.
pg 3 3(a)          Completed
pg 3 3(b)          Noted, will be removed.
pg 3 3(c)          Plans for these areas to be converted to Hospitality areas have
                   now been approved. All the requirements of the Fire Service
                   have been complied with.
^g 4 3(d)          Noted. No flamable materials have ever been stored there.
pg 4 3(e)          Noted. Will be removed.
pg 4 3(f)          Canpleted.
pg 4 3(g)          Work completed.
pg 4 1(a)          In hand, not yet canpleted.
Pg 4 1(b)          In hand, not yet completed.
pg 4 2             In hand, not yet canpleted.
Pg 4 3(a)          Panic latch at present being manufactured.
pg 5 3(b)          Repairs canpleted.
pg 5 3(c)          Repairs canpleted.
pg 5 3(d)          Canpleted
Pg 5 4(a)          Completed
pg 5 4(b)          At a meeting between Fire Service and Bownes & Co., SWFC
                   Electricians, it was agreed to defer tests until the nights got
                   a little darker.
Pg 5 1.1.          In hand, not yet canpleted.
pg 5 1.2.          Will be replaced in new scheme for barriers on the Kop, which is
                   to be submitted to the Local Authority on our behalf by Eastwood
                   and Partners, within the next week.
^Pg5   1.3.        As 1.2. above.
 pg5   1.4.        In hand, not yet canpleted.
 pg6   1.6.        In hand, not yet canpleted.
 pg6   1.7.        In hand, not yet completed.
pg 6   1.8.        Contractors have been engaged to undertake this work.
pg 6   1.9.        As the Hillsborough Suite is not used the relevant part of the
                   fire escape stairway will be removed.
Pg 6 1.10.         In hand, not yet canpleted.
pg 6 1.11.         In hand, not yet canpleted.
pg 6 1.12.         In hand.
pg 6 1.13          There have been no incidents involving fans climbing on the roof
                   structure. The Club feel that the installation of barbed wire
                   would be provocative.
pg 6 1.14.         In hand, not yet canpleted.
pg 6 2.1           In hand.
pg 6 2.2           We are awaiting details of a product suitable to enable us to
                   canpleted this work. Normal mortar is not sufficient.
Pg 6 2.3.          In hand.
pg 6 2.4           In hand.
Pg 6 2.5.          In hand.
pg 6 2.6.          In hand.
                                               continued . . .
Pg   7   3.1.     These turnstiles are not in use at the present time.
Pg   7    3.2.    Canpleted.
Pg   7    4.1.    Canpleted.
Pg   7    4.2.    Completed.
Pg   7    4.3.    At present time this terrace is prohibited fran use. Any work
                  necessary would be undertaken at the appropriate time.
Pg 7      4.4.    As Pg 7 4.3.
Pg 7      4.5.    In hand.
Pg 7      4.6.    In hand.
Pg 7      4.7.    In hand
Pg 7      4.8.    Completed.
Pg 7      4.9.    In hand.
Pg 7      4.10.   In hand.
Pg 8      4.11.   In hand.
Pg 8      4.12.   In hand.
Pg 8      4.13.   In hand.
Pg 8      4.14.   Tenders are being sought for this work.
Pg 8      4.15.   In hand.
Pg 8      4.16.   Noted.
Pg 8      5.1.    Canpleted.
 'g 8     5.2.    In hand.
Pg 8      5.3.    Canpleted.
pg 8      5.4.    Canpleted.
Pg 8      5.5.    Completed.
Pg 8      5.6.    In hand.
Pg 8      5.7.    Husband & Co. have conducted a survey on the platform on behalf
                   of the television canpanies. No adverse canments received.
Pg 9 5.8.         Consulting with television canpanies to ascertain their
                   technical requirements for their cameras.
Pg 9 5.9.         In hand.
Pg 9 5.10.        In hand
Pg 9 5.11.        Noted.
Pg 9 1            This will be looked at in light of Pg 9 5.11.
Pg 9 2            Eastwood and Partners are investigating on our behalf.
Pg 9 3            Completed
Pg 9 4            Completed
Pg 9 5            completed
Pg 10 6           Completed
 >g 10 7          In hand.
 'g 10 8          Completed
Pg 10 9           Completed
Pg 10 10          In hand
Pg 10 11          Health and Consumer Services Dept, are caning back to us on this
                   point after liaison with the Fire Service.
Pg   10    12     Completed
Pg   10    13     These have been moved.
Pg   10    14     In hand.
Pg   10    15     In hand.
Pg   10    16     In hand.
Pg   10    17     In hand.
Pg   11    18     Canpleted.
Pg   11    19     Canpleted.
Pg   11    20     Canpleted.
Pg   11    21     Canpleted.
Pg   11    22     Canpleted.
Pg   11    23     Canpleted.
Pg   11    24     Completed.
Pg   11    25     In hand.
Pg 11 26          Completed.
                                            continued . . .
   pg   11   27       Canpleted.
   pg   11   28       In hand.
   pg   11   29       Completed.
   pg   11   30       In hand.
   pg   11   31       In hand.
   pg   11   32       In hand.
   pg   12   33       In hand.
   Pg   12   34       In hand.
   Pg   12   35       In hand.
   pg   12   36       We are looking at this situation.
   Pg   12   37       In hand.
   pg   12   38       Toughened glass was installed.
   pg   12   39       In hand.
   pg   12   40       Completed.
   pg   12   41       This matter has been dealt with Pg 3 3(c) applies.
   pg   12   42       Removed.
   pg   12   43       In   hand.
   Pg   13   44       In   hand.
   Pg   13   45       In   hand.
   pg   13   46       We   are investigating ownership of these boundaries.
   Pg   13   47       In   hand.
   pg   13   48       In hand. Pq 6 2.2. applies.
   Pg   13   49       In hand.
   pg   13   50       In hand.
   pg   13   51       In hand.

   As can be
   will keep you advised as to the progress on outstanding matters.

   Yours sincerely,




X'-tT.H. MackrelT
 — SSCTe£ary~"
                                       \ | Sheffield Wednesday FC
 i
 I STAND          NLW       STAND     NLW          BARCLAYS LEAGUE DIVISION ONE
 ?ROW                       ROW       19           OWLS -V- NORWICH CITY
 I SEAT                     SEAT       13          19TH AUGUST 198?
 i
                                                   Kick Off 3.00prn
     ENTRANCE           ft ENTRANCE         ft    NTH LEPPINGS WING
     GANGWAY            ft GANGWAY,         ft    GANGWAY ft                           ROW:    io
         ADULT                  JUV & OAP         JUV & OAP            ADULT           SEAT:    13
     £     7 . QO           £__ 4 . OO           £    4 . OO       £   7. O O
     TO B E G IV E ft U P   TO BE GIVEN U P                    THIS PORTIQNTO BE RETAINED




                                                     Sheffield Wednesday FC
                                                 YOU ARE REQUESTED TO      i £ k I q FF
                                                 POSITION 45 MINS. BEFORE KICK OFF

                                                  BARCLAYS LEAGUE DIVISION ONE
i STAND          WS 2       STAND    WS2
                            ROW      27           OWLS -V— EVERTON
ROW
                            SEAT      58          30TH AUGUST 1989
;s e a t
                                                  Kick Off 7.30pm
                        c   ENTRANCE      C      WEST STAND VISITOR
 entrance
                                                                                       ROW:    27
                        W GANGWAY           W    GANGWAYW
     GANGWAY
                                                                       ADULT           SEAT:    58
                                JUV & OAP         JUV & OAP
         ADULT
                            £      4.00          £    4.00               .
                                                                       7 00
     £     7.00
     cjessei
    S h e ffie ld W edn esd ay F.C. pic
        Hillsborough S h effield
              A,                                                                                        sz
                                                                                                      O)
            /* L .                                                                                 CO 3               CO
                                                                                                                       I.        :   CO
                                    .crP'NGS lANE                                                  —  O
                                                                                                                      .CD        UJ CC
                                                                                                   <2 o               ■q5        I - UJ
       /'                                                                                          E -O
                                    I^Wcv.l               \              /'SHOTS                   E=                 C/3        <
                                                                                                                                 CC —I
                                                                                                                                       - I

                                jncs»efe; s;i.'.o«nc                        ONLY                                                 n UJ
                                                                                                   O)                            9-    to

                                                       2*
                                                       Z
                                                       )C
                                                                                                   o c5 £ £
                                                                                                   ? >2 O)
                                                                                                   roc'*" o
                                                                                                                      ro         LL UJ
                                                                                                                                 0 5
                                                                                                                                       s<
              ;U 4 ir.J                                                                                                          UJ
                                                                                                   5 °                           CC
                                                                                                                                       cc
                                                                                                   51 (D
                                                       >S S                                        05                            1 o
                                                                                                            ro                   UJ o
                                                                                                   1%                            m cc
                                                                    j       Entranceto             I- 12                           Q .
                                     CPlCS ICC?                 /       Sports Hal! & t o m             .Q
                                    -r'MjnkZ cut            /             Stand Car Pant                O

                                     F fM S T .j-if =iGAO A c !




     S h e ffie ld W edn esd ay F.C. pic
         H illsborough S h e ffie ld

                                        LEPPINGS LANE
                                                                                                        4<E2-oO             CO
                                                                                                                            k.
                                                                                                                            Q)

                                                                                                                            “o
                                                                                                                                      UJ
                                                                                                                                             (/)
                                                                                                                                             cc
                                                                                                                                             UJ
                                                                             VISITORS                   E^                  CO        Si
                                                                                                                                      DC
                                     Uncovered standing                        ONLY                                         Q)               UJ
c                                                                                                       Ui     E
                                                                                                                                      a .
                                                                                                                                             (/)
                                                                                                        2 ro E 03E                    u. UJ
                                                                                                                                      0 s
                                                                                                                                      UJ 5
                                                                                                        -                   Ui
                                                                                                        03       C
                                                                                                                                      cc <
                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                        s °                              cc
                                                            >
                                                            H a
                                                                        x                               05
                                                                                                          (D
                                                                                                                                      1 o
                                                                                                                 03                   UJ O
                                                                                                        Q)       C
                                                                                                                                      m cc
                                                                                                                                         CL
                                          SPlQN KOP
                                                                                 Entrance t t
                                                                             Sports Hal! & North
                                                                                                                            o
                                        Cov^ed                                 Stand Car Park                    o
                                       HOMl FANS ONLY




                          To C'ty        PEN1STCNE ROAO * 6 1 .
          The officer
    dealing w ith this
  correspondence is:
          Telephone:
                  Fax: (0 7 4 2 ) 7 3 5 0 0 2



      Your reference:
                                                                                                                   C O U N C I L
       Our reference:


                Date:

                                                                                                                   D epartm ent o f Land & Planning
                                                                                                                   Director
                                                                                                                   R. D. Jones   m rtp i



                                                                                                                   Building Surveyor's Division
                                                                                                                   The Building Surveyor
                                                                                                                   K. W . G. Blount        p p ia a s f ia s c d ip a f m b im



                                                                                                                   Town Hall
                                                                                                                   Sheffield
                                                                                                                   S1 2HH

                                                 ''Y

                                                         s     j

                                                                                       —    ■/           * " ■
                                                  y

                         a                 yc                                     3 G»vv/£r— <                   o V


                                                         / £       *         -         -                                                                                ^          .
                             6Y f * <

                         u         -
                                                                       0 /       iWi-t              ^                                             ^

                             t?                                                                              )         > ' f                  So


                             (Am       9 ^

                             ^                                                   - * - «                « * ■               "                                       “ 7


                                                                                                                                                                                 /J A<
                     v jL                                          ^                                                                                              W o UtoJi J
                                                       i ^ i e c ^ 0^ *                    7^ - c - e J
                             A*f/


                                                   7
                                                                                               f\                « W                                                              >4
                                                                                                                                 J —                             /J.

                                                                                                 ^o/c                                              -cot/                    y
                                                                                                                       -        j 'r




    Please address all                                                                                                                                                   Ixxal Aiuhoru\
  com munications to
                                       D e p a r t m e n t o f Land a n d P l a n n i n g                                                                      BUILDING
The Building Surveyor
quoting the reference                                                                                                                          ljA(            CONTROL
        stated above.                           BUILDING           SURVEYOR'S          DIVISION
                                                                                                                            Sch 9162
                                            CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM
r      • The A c t i n g Head o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n                   A l l Members o f t h e M u n ic i p a l E n t e r p r i s e
                                                                           To
         and L e g a l D ep a rtm en t                                          and G e n e r a l S e r v i c e s P o l i c y W ork ing Group

Date             S e p te m b e r , 1989
R ef       ^
•r     -
Tel. Ext
                   ~   M rs. Woodhead.
                                                                            Ref.
                                                                                            C*V.        m.

           Re:    S a f e t y o f S p o r t s Grounds

           I e n c l o s e a n o t e o f t h e m e e t i n g w h ic h t o o k p l a c e on t h e 1 s t S e p te m b e r ,   1989
           f o r your in fo r m a tio n .     I f y o u h a v e an y com m ent, p l e a s e l e t me know.




           2MS/JS




                                                                                                I
 NOTE OF MEETIHG OF MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES POLICY
 WORKING GROUP ON THE 1ST SEPTEMBER. 1989

 Members m et t o c o n s i d e r t h e c o n t e n t o f a r e p o r t w h ic h i t w as i n t e n d e d t o
 su b m it t o t h e M u n ic i p a l E n t e r p r i s e and G e n e r a l S e r v i c e s C om m ittee on t h e
 1 1 th S e p te m b e r , 1989 r a i s i n g a number o f i s s u e s c o n c e r n i n g s a f e t y o f
 s p o r ts grou n ds.          T h ere w as a c o n s i d e r a b l e d i s c u s s i o n c o n c e r n i n g th e
 o u t s t a p d i n g m a t t e r s from t h e re co m m en d a tio n s o f L ord J u s t i c e T a y l o r . The
 g e n e r a l f e e l i n g o f members w a s t h a t t h e C i t y C o u n c i l s h o u l d b e d o in g a s
 much a s p o s s i b l e t o e n f o r c e t h e term s o f t h e r e c o m m e n d a tio n s and t h a t i n
 i n s t a n c e s w h ere no r e s p o n s e o r an u n s a t i s f a c t o r y r e s p o n s e h a s b een
 r e c e i v e d fr o m t h e v a r i o u s f o o t b a l l c l u b s , t h e n t h e C o u n c i l s h o u l d be
 g iv in g s e r io u s c o n s id e r a tio n to th e i s s u e o f p r o h ib it io n n o t i c e .             I t was
 c o n c lu d e d t h a t t h e b e s t way fo r w a rd was f o r a v e r b a l r e p o r t t o be made t o
 th e G e n e r a l P u r p o s e s P a n e l , t o b e t a k e n a s an e m e r g e n c y i t e m , on t h e 4 th
 S ep tem b e r 1989 s e e k i n g t h e P a n e l ' s a p p r o v a l t o w r i t e t o t h e r e s p e c t i v e
 c l u b s c o n c e r n i n g t h e o u t s t a n d i n g m a t t e r s and t o e n a b l e members t o g i v e
 c o n s i d e r a t i o n t o t h e i m p o s i t i o n o f a tim e l i m i t i n r e s p e c t o f th em . The
 Head o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and L e g a l D ep artm en t c o n f ir m e d t h a t t h i s w ould be
 done.

T u rn in g t o p a r a g r a p h 4 , " m a t t e r s f o r c o n s i d e r a t i o n " , i t was f e l t t h a t t h e
G e n e r a l P u r p o s e s P a n e l s h o u l d be v i s i t i n g t h e r e s p e c t i v e s p o r t s g r o u n d s
d u r in g S e p te m b e r .      I t was f e l t t h a t i t may be u s e f u l t o h a v e a v a i l a b l e
some e x p e r t h e l p i n t h e form o f B u i l d i n g S u r v e y o r s , E n v ir o n m e n t a l H e a lth
e x p e r t s , F i r e and P o l i c e O f f i c e r s t o a s s i s t members and t h a t members
s h o u ld a l s o be p r o v id e d w i t h a c h e c k l i s t o f i t e m s w h ic h h a v e b e e n
c o m p le t e d and t h o s e w h ich r e m a in e d o u t s t a n d i n g t o e n a b l e them t o c o n s i d e r
them on s i t e .           T h e re was a l s o some d e b a t e a b o u t t h e l e n g t h o f tim e i t
w ould t a k e t o v i s i t e a c h gro u n d and i t was f e l t on b a l a n c e t h a t a t l e a s t
h a l f a day w ou ld be r e q u i r e d f o r e a c h .

 T here was a l s o som e d i s c u s s i o n a b o u t members f u n c t i o n i n t h e f u t u r e and
 t h e g e n e r a l c o n c e n s u s t h a t members w is h e d t o b e more i n v o l v e d i n m a t t e r s .

 The e m erg e n c y p r o c e d u r e s w ere d i s c u s s e d and i t was g e n e r a l l y a g r e e d t h a t
• i t was a p p r o p r i a t e f o r em erg en cy p r o c e d u r e s t o be d e l e g a t e d t o t h e A c t i n g
 Head o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and L e g a l D epartm en t i n c o n s u l t a t i o n w i t h t h e C h a ir
 o f t h e G e n e r a l P u r p o s e s P a n e l and t h e C h a ir a n d / o r D e p u ty C h a ir o f MEGS.
 I t was f e l t t h a t members s h o u l d be in fo r m e d i m m e d i a t e l y a f t e r w a r d s and a
 G e n e r a l P u r p o s e s P a n e l m e e t i n g c a l l e d im m e d ia t e ly t o d i s c u s s t h e m a t t e r .

The m e e t i n g t h e n w en t on t o d i s c u s s t h e q u e s t i o n o f r e s o u r c e s .       Members
w ere a n x io u s t o e n s u r e t h a t t h e r e was some c r o s s r e f e r e n c i n g w i t h t h e
p o s t s s o t h a t c o v e r was p r o v i d e d f o r e a c h o f t h e C h i e f L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r s
and a l s o w i t h t h e L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r s .     The q u e s t i o n o f f u n d i n g o f t h i s was
d isc u sse d .       The A c t i n g Head o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and L e g a l D e p a r tm en t
i n d i c a t e d t h a t i t w ould n o t be p o s s i b l e t o fu n d t h i s e n t i r e l y from t h e
a n n u a l f e e s r e c o v e r e d from t h e s p o r t s g ro u n d s o r fr o m t h e e x i s t i n g b u d g e t
o f t h e A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and L e g a l D e p a r tm e n t.    I t w ou ld t h e r e f o r e be
n e c e s s a r y f o r a d d i t i o n a l f u n d i n g t o b e made a v a i l a b l e .   I f t h e s e p r o p o s a ls
a r e a c c e p t e d i n p r i n c i p l e , t h i s m a t t e r w i l l be g i v e n f u r t h e r
c o n s id e r a tio n .




 2MS/JS
                                                                                                 Sch 9 1 6 2
    R 3719
                                        C ITY OF S H E F F IE L D — M E M O R A N D U M
                                                                     All Members of the Municipal Enterprise
From 7 he A c t in g Head o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n        To and General Services Policy Working Group
        and Legal Department

                                                                                               fz I L
Date    ®th SePtember» 1989
Ref
_     ’ 4004 - Mrs. Woodhead.
Tel. Ext.                                                        Ref.


        Re:    Safety of Sports Grounds

        I enclose a note of the meeting which took place on the 1st September, 1989
        for your information.  If you have any comment, please let me know.




        2MS/JS
NOTE OF MEETING OF MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES POLICY
WORKING GROUP ON THE 1ST SEPTEMBER. 1989


Members met to consider the content of a report which it was intended to
submit to the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Committee on the
11th September, 1989 raising a number of issues concerning safety of
sports grounds. There was a considerable discussion concerning the
outstanding matters from the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor. The
general feeling of members was that the City Council should be doing as
much as possible to enforce the terms of the recommendations and that in
instances where no response or an unsatisfactory response has been
received from the various football clubs, then the Council should be
giving serious consideration to the issue of prohibition notice. It was
concluded that the best way forward was for a verbal report to be made to
the General Purposes Panel, to be taken as an emergency item, on the 4th
September 1989 seeking the Panel's approval to write to the respective
clubs concerning the outstanding matters and to enable members to give
consideration to the imposition of a time limit in respect of them. The
Head of Administration and Legal Department confirmed that this would be
done.

Turning to paragraph 4, "matters for consideration", it was felt that the
General Purposes Panel should be visiting the respective sports grounds
during September.  It was felt that it may be useful to have available
some expert help in the form of Building Surveyors, Environmental Health
experts, Fire and Police Officers to assist members and that members
should also be provided with a checklist of items which have been
completed and those which remained outstanding to enable them to consider
them on site. There was also some debate about the length of time it
would take to visit each ground and it was felt on balance that at least
half a day would be required for each.

There was also some discussion about members function in the future and
the general concensus that members wished to be more involved in matters.

 The emergency procedures were discussed and it was generally agreed that
■it was appropriate for emergency procedures to be delegated to the Acting
 Head of Administration and Legal Department in consultation with the Chair
 of the General Purposes Panel and the Chair and/or Deputy Chair of MEGS.
 It was felt that members should be informed immediately afterwards and a
 General Purposes Panel meeting called immediately to discuss the matter.

The meeting then went on to discuss the question of resources. Members
were anxious to ensure that there was some cross referencing with the
posts so that cover was provided for each of the Chief Licensing Officers
and also with the Licensing Officers. The question of funding of this was
discussed. The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
indicated that it would not be possible to fund this entirely from the
annual fees recovered from the sports grounds or from the existing budget
of the Administration and Legal Department. It would therefore be
necessary for additional funding to be made available. If these proposals
are accepted in principle, this matter will be given further
consideration.




2MS/JS
    From The Acting Head of Administration        To Councillor J. Butler
         and Legal Department                        Councillor Ms. J. Fiore
                                                     Councillor Ms. P. Nelson
    Date 6th September, 1989
    Ref. FW
    Tel. ExfcOOU - Mrs. Woodhead.                 Ref.



         Re;   Safety of Sports Grounds

         I think Frances Woodhead has already mentioned to you an invitation I have
         received from South Yorkshire Police to a meeting to be held at Niagara, South
         Yorkshire Police Sports and Social Club, Wadsley Bridge, Sheffield on Monday
         18th September, 1989 at 2.00 p.m. An agenda is to be circulated in due course
         but it is proposed to discuss the issue of safety of sports grounds generally
         and particularly the written agreements which have been entered into between
         the Police and the Football Clubs. Mr. Julian Ward, my Principal Solicitor
         will attend the meeting, together with David Bownes, the Chief Licensing
         Officer. I understand that you have said that you would like to attend the
         meeting. I will let you have a copy of the agenda in due course. Mr. Ward
         will contact you to make arrangements to attend the meeting.




         2MS/JS




#
South Yorkshire Police
                                                PO LICE H EA D Q U A R 1
                                                SN IG HILL
                                                S H E F F I E L O S 3 8LY
                                                TE L E P H O N E ( 0 7 4 2) 1
                                                TELEX 547996




Mr M Webster                                            ACC(OPS)/TFB/HMW
Acting Head of Department                               5 September 1989
Administration and Legal Department
Town Hall
Sheffield
SI 2HH




Dear Mr Webster

Safety at Sports Grounds

I refer to your letter dated 21 August 1989 which we have already discussed
on the telephone and, as I mentioned, it would be impracticable to invite a
representative from the Local Authority to every meeting which is held
between the Police and the Football Clubs.  Some of these meetings are
arranged at an hours notice and the discussion may only last for 10 minutes
or so.

You will remember that I mentioned a meeting to be held between the Police
and the Local Authorities in South Yorkshire on 18 September at which the
points you make in your letter could be considered further.

Yours sincerely




A/Assistant Chief Constable
Operations
                                                                                                                                 rx /
                                                    KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                               SOLICITORS
                                                    Incorporating Branson Bramley & Co.

A. H. GREGORY                  N.   T. HAWSON                                              OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE.
C. J. PRYCE                    C.   CONNELL
P. A. SEALEY                   A.   J. COOMBE
K. L. WEBSTER                  C.   M. M. AYRE                                                     ST. JAMES' ROW.
M. A. PLATT

                                                                                                            SHEFFIELD.
C o n s u lta n t:
A. H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                     S1 1XA.

                 Mr M Webster                                                              TELEPHONE 0742-722061

                 Acting Head
                                                                                            MDX NO. 10537
                 City of Sheffield
                                                                                            FAX NO. 0742 - 700813
                 Legal & Administration Department
                 Town Hall                                                                  FAX NO. 0742 - 750243

                 SHEFFIELD
                                                                                              1st September                1989

                                                 YOUR REF:                                 WHEN YOU TELEPHONE OR CALL PLEASE ASK FOR:
OUR REF:


                AHG/VS/                                                                      MR GREGORY




                 Dear Mark                                                                                       0 4. SEFT
                 Hillsborough - Inquiry by DPP                                                    ^              _


                Thank you for your letter of the 24th August.

                I will be happy to represent any Council Officer or
                Council Member whom the Police may wish to interview
                as part of their criminal investigation.  I think
                the only matter of relevance that you need to know
                at the moment is that I will be on holiday from the
                7th to 21st September.

                I agree with you that it is unlikely that proceedings
                will be taken against Council Officers and even more
                unlikely that they will be taken against Council Members.
                However, I think it is a very prudent move to have any
                such individuals represented.

                Yours sincerely__________



                A H GREGORY __
                KEEBLE HAWSON




                             THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
