           ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                     755

Case No.      Licence Type                   Decision
75/95         Hackney Carriage and            Refuse on the grounds that the applicant is not a fit
              Private Hire Driver’s          and proper person by reason o f the circum stances now
              Licence                        reported.
( n o t e : (a) Councillors M cDonald and Macfarlane entered the meeting during the consideration of
Case No. 76/95 and, therefore, took no part in the decisions relating to Cases Nos. 71/95 and 76/
95; (b) Councillor Hesketh entered the meeting during the consideration o f Case No. 75/95 and took
no part in the decisions relating to all the above cases; and (c) Councillor Mrs. Chadwick left the
meeting at the end o f the above item.)

  At this point in the proceedings, the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
(4) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS LICENSING
The Capitol, Matilda Street
   The City Solicitor and Head o f Administration, submitted a report on an application from The
Capitol, M atilda Street to renew its Public Entertainments Licence in respect o f 7.00 p.m . until 2.00
a.m. the following morning, Sunday to Thursday and 7.00 p.m. until 6.00 a.m . the following morning
on Friday and Saturday. The relevant Authorities had been consulted on the proposal and no adverse
com m ents had been received.

   Resolved; That the public and press, the applicant and officers o f the City Council involved in
the application relating to The Capitol, Matilda Street, be excluded from the meeting before further
discussion takes place on the grounds that, in view of the nature o f the business to be transacted,
if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them o f exempt information
described in paragraphs 12 and 13 o f the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local
Governm ent (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to (a) legal matters and advice and (b)
proposed action under any enactment by the Authority.
  The C ity Solicitor and Head o f Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
aspects o f the application relative to The Capitol.

  At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
   Resolved; That (i) in light o f the concerns now raised by the Sub-Committee regarding the need
to ensure that free access to drinking water is available in the C ity’s nightclubs, the City Solicitor
and Head o f Administration be authorised to grant a Public Entertainments Licence in respect of
The Capitol for a period o f 12 months with respect to the hours o f 7.00 p.m. to 2.00 a.m. the
following morning Sunday to Thursday and 7.00 p.m. until 6.00 a.m. the following morning Friday
and Saturday, subject to the submission of a report to this Sub-Committee indicating that there is
either satisfactory free access to drinking water in the C ity’s nightclubs or measures were being
taken by the Council to ensure that an appropriate condition was included within Public Entertainment
Licences requiring nightclubs to ensure that free access to drinking water was available; and

    (ii) all future applications for Public Entertainment Licences be granted, subject to the submission
o f the above-mentioned report on free access to drinking water in City nightclubs, hereinafter
referred to as the “proposed report on free access to drinking water in City nightclubs” .

( n o t e : Councillors Lawton, Mrs. M idgley and Mrs. E. Smith left the meeting following consideration
o f the above item.)

K ik i's , Charter Square
   The City Solicitor and Head o f Administration submitted a report on an application from K iki’s,
Charter Square for the renewal o f a Public Entertainments Licence for the hours 7.00 p.m. to 2.00
a.m . the following morning Sunday, 10.00 a.m. until 2.00 a.m. the following morning M onday to
Thursday and 10.00 a.m. until 6.00 a.m. the following morning Friday and Saturday. An Officer
from the Directorate o f Environmental Services and Standards informed the Sub-Committee that
certain minor improvements were required to the premises and work was being carried out on these
im provements at the present time.

   Resolved: That the public and press, and officers o f the City Council involved in the application
relating to K iki’s, be excluded from the meeting before further discussion takes place on the grounds
that, in view o f the nature o f the business to be transacted if the public and press were present there
would be a disclosure to them o f exempt information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 o f the Local
756                   ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Inform ation) Act 1985
    relating to (a) legal matters and advice and (b) proposed action under any enactment by the
    Authority.
      The City Solicitor and Head o f Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
    aspects o f the application relative to Kiki’s.

       At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
      Resolved: That the City Solicitor and Head o f Administration be authorised to grant a 12 m onths’
    Public Entertainm ents Licence in respect of K iki’s, Charter Square, with respect to the hours 7.00
    p.m. until 2.00 a.m. the following morning Sunday, 10.00 a.m. until 2.00 a.m. the following morning
    M onday to Thursday and 10.00 a.m. until 6.00 a.m. the following morning Friday and Saturday,
    subject to the completion of the minor improvements now reported and to the submission o f the
    proposed report on free access to drinking water in City nightclubs.

    (note: Councillor Mrs. Midgley returned to the meeting prior to consideration o f the undermentioned
    item relating to the consideration o f an application for a Public Entertainments Licence from the
    Icesport Centre, Queens Road.)

    Icesport Centre, Queens Road
       The City Solicitor and Head o f Administration submitted a report on an application for the
    renewal of a Public Entertainments Licence in respect o f the Icesport Centre, Queens Road for the
    hours o f 10.00 a.m. until 10.00 p.m. each day o f the week.
        Resolved: That the City Solicitor and Head o f Administration be authorised to grant a Public
    Entertainm ents Licence in respect o f the Icesport Centre, Queens Road for a period o f 12 months
    subject to the receipt o f satisfactory reports from the inspecting authorities and to the submission
    o f the proposed report on free access to drinking water in City nightclubs.
    (note: Councillor Mrs. E. Smith returned to the meeting during the consideration o f the application
    for the renewal o f a Public Entertainments Licence for the Icesport Centre, Queens Road and took
    no part in the decision.)

★   (5) AMUSEMENT a r c a d e p e r m it s
       The City Solicitor and Head o f Administration submitted a report containing details o f current
    applications for amusement arcade permits at premises at the former Palace Cinem a, M anchester
    Road, Stocksbridge and 17, 19 and 21 Matilda Street.

       Resolved: That the applications now submitted for the granting of amusement arcade perm its at
    prem ises at the former Palace Cinema, Manchester Road, Stocksbridge and 17, 19 and 21 M atilda
    Street be deferred pending the applicants being invited to attend the next meeting o f the Sub-
    Com mittee to discuss their applications.
★   (6 )   h a c k n e y c a r r ia g e a n d p r iv a t e h ir e l i c e n s in g — in s u r a n c e c o v e r

      The Sub-Committee received and noted a report o f the City Solicitor and H ead o f Administration
    indicating that, following the decision o f this Sub-Committee at its meeting held on 3rd March, 1995
    (page 22 o f the printed minutes) to remove the longstanding Council requirem ent that all Hackney
    Carriages and Private Hire Vehicles be insured on a fully comprehensive basis, few people had taken
    advantage o f the policy change and the majority o f licensees had maintained comprehensive insurance
    policies.
    ( n o t e : C ouncillor Hesketh left the meeting during the consideration o f Item                            ( 6 ) —“Hackney   Carriage
    and Private H ire Licensing—Insurance Cover”.)

★   (7) s a f e t y o f s p o r t s g r o u n d s —v is i t s t o d e s ig n a t e d s t a d ia
       The Sub-Committee received and noted a report o f the City Solicitor and H ead o f Administration
    outlining the arrangements and procedure to be implemented on occasions when visits o f inspection
    were carried out by members o f the Sub-Committee to the Bramall Lane and Hillsborough Football
    Stadia and the Owlerton and Don Valley Sports Stadia.
       Resolved: That the City Solicitor and Head o f Administration be requested to submit to this Sub-
    Committee, a report on the health and safety enforcement issues, including crowd control, which
    had been taken into account in the staging of concerts given by the Rolling Stones and Bon Jovi
    at the Don Valley Stadium this Summer.
                ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                          757

( n o t e : During the consideration of the above item the Chair (Councillor D. Jones) left the meeting
and Councillor Mrs. W hite occupied the Chair.)
★   (8 )   s a f e t y o f s p o r t s g r o u n d s —Sh e f f ie l d   We d n e s d a y   fo o tb a ll club

Balustrading to Vomitories in South Stand Upper Gallery
   The City Solicitor and Head o f Administration submitted a report referring to his decision to
approve a proposal submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf o f Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club to provide balustrading around the vomitories o f the South Stand Upper Gallery at
the Hillsborough Football Stadium which failed to meet the standard prescribed in the Guide to
Safety o f Sports Grounds. It was explained in the report that if the balustrading had been installed
at the height recommended in the Guide this would create localised sight line problem s for people
seated in two rows o f the South Stand and that Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, in accordance with
previous practice, had approached the City Council with a request to reduce the height o f the
balustrading in these localised areas from 1.1 metres to 900 mm. The Safety o f Sports Grounds
Advisory Group at its meeting on 20th September, 1995 had approved the proposal.

   Resolved: That confirm ation be given to the decision o f the City Solicitor and Head of
A dm inistration in approving the proposal submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf
o f Sheffield Wednesday Football Club with respect to the proposed height o f balustrading to
vom itories in the New South Stand Upper Gallery and as detailed on Plan 18315/54B now exhibited.
Ground Re-levelling Works to the Western E nd o f the South Stand
  The City Solicitor and Head o f Administration submitted a report referring to his decision
approving a proposal submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club to undertake ground re-levelling works to the western end of the South Stand and
provide a small staircase in front o f turnstile block 24-26. The proposal had been approved by the
Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group at its meeting held on 20th September, 1995.

   Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the decision o f the City Solicitor and Head of
A dm inistration in approving the proposal now submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners to
introduce a small stairway to the western end o f the South Stand as detailed on plan No. 18315/
210D now exhibited; and

    (b) the fact that representatives of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group would, as part
o f the ongoing inspection o f the South Stand Development Works, carry out an inspection o f this
area when the works have been completed, be noted.
Review o f General Safety Certificate
   The City Solicitor and Head o f Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
consultation with the Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in authorising the issue o f an
amended General Safety Certificate in respect o f Sheffield W ednesday Football Club following the
annual review o f the Certificate undertaken during the close Football Season 1995. The report stated
that the opportunity had been taken to update the Certificate with regard to stewarding provisions
and amendments to facilities and capacities throughout the ground, particularly the South Stand
development.

   Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action o f the City Solicitor and Head of
Adm inistration in authorising (i) the issue o f a new General Safety Certificate on the lines now
reported in respect o f Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and (ii) the revocation o f the Certificate
previously issued in respect of the Hillsborough Sports Ground; and
  (b) the City Solicitor and Head o f Administration be requested to take all necessary action to
advertise the review o f the Certificate in accordance with the Safety o f Sports Grounds Regulations.

( n o t e : l.(a) At the end o f that part o f the above item relating to ground re-levelling works at the
western end o f the South Stand, Councillor D. Jones re-entered the meeting and occupied the Chair
for the rem ainder o f the meeting; and

   (b) Councillor Mrs. E. Smith left the meeting during that part o f the above item relating to the
Review o f the General Safety Certificate of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
   2. Item s 4(b) and (c) on the agenda relating to applications for Public Entertainments Licences
in respect o f (a) The Club, Effingham Road and (ii) The Niche, Sidney Street were withdrawn from
consideration by the Sub-Committee.)
    758              ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE


           Meeting o f the Licensing Sub-Committee held 26th October, 1995. Present— Councillors D.
         Jones (Chair), Ayris, Ms. Bowden, Mrs. Midgley, Mrs. Newton and Mrs. White.
         ( 1 ) APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

            Apologies for absence were received from Councillors McDonald and Mrs. E. Smith.
    ★     (2) AMUSEMENT a r c a d e p e r m it
            The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report (a) outlining the legislation
         governing the issue o f amusement arcade permits, (b) detailing the administrative procedures for
         dealing with applications for amusement arcade permits and (c) containing details o f an application
         from NAMCO Operations Europe Limited for a permit at Unit 60/61, the Oasis, Meadowhall Centre.
         The applicant and his Chartered Surveyor attended the meeting and stated that it was intended that
         the prem ises would be run as two discrete areas. There was to be a Grand Casino Area where those
         under 18 years o f age would be prohibited and a wonder-park family orientated activity area, with
         video games, simulators etc.. This would be aimed primarily at those under 18 years o f age although
         unaccom panied children would not be permitted to attend the premises during School hours and
         uniformed staff would ensure compliance and proper supervision in both Units.

            Resolved: That the public and press, the applicant and his Chartered Surveyor and Officers from
        the City Council involved in the application relating to an amusement arcade perm it be excluded
        from the meeting before further discussion takes place on the grounds that, in view o f the nature
        o f the business transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to them
        o f exempt information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 o f the Local Government Act 1972, as
        amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to (i) legal matters
        and advice and (ii) proposed actions under any enactment by the Authority.

           The C ity Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
        aspects o f the application relating to the amusement arcade permit at the Oasis, Meadowhall Centre.

           At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.

           Resolved: That the application now submitted for an amusement arcade permit in respect of
        prem ises at Units 60/61, the Oasis, Meadowhall Centre, be granted for a period o f three years.
★        (3) PUBLIC e n t e r t a in m e n t s l i c e n s in g
        The Club Sheffield, Effingham Road
           The City Solicitor and Head o f Administration submitted a report on an application for the
        renewal o f a public entertainments licence in respect of The Club Sheffield, Effingham Road. The
        report stated that the hours applied for were 10.00 a.m. until 2.00 a.m. the following morning
        M onday to Thursday, 10.00 a.m. until 4.00 a.m. the following morning Friday and Saturday and
        10.00 a.m. until 1.00 a.m. the following morning on Sunday. At its meeting on 23rd June, 1995,
        this Sub-C om m ittee considered an application from The Club Sheffield to vary its public
        entertainm ents licence to extend the opening hours on Friday and Saturday nights from 2.00 a.m.
        until 4.00 a.m. and, taking into account the objections of a neighbour, the Sub-Committee granted
        the extended hours for one occasion only in each of the months o f July, August and September, 1995.
        The closing date for receipt o f objections to the current application was 28th September, 1995, and
        on 10th October, 1995, an objection to the later hours was received from the resident who had
        previously lodged objections in respect o f the premises.

            The prem ises had recently been substantially refurbished and a representative from the Directorate
        o f Environmental Services and Standards stated that they were in good condition and no com plaints
        at the time of inspection had been received from the objector about noise nuisance. He further stated
        that the noise insulation works carried out at the premises were satisfactory.

           The applicant and his Solicitor addressed the Sub-Committee and stated that with regard to the
        application to extend the opening hours, no specific objections had been received regarding the three
        occasions when The Club Sheffield was open until 4.00 a.m. and on those occasions, clients had
        dispersed from the premises gradually throughout the night.

           Resolved: That the public and press, the applicant, his Solicitor and Officers from the City
        Council involved in the application relating to The Club Sheffield be excluded from the meeting
        before further discussion takes place on the grounds that, in view o f the nature o f the business to
        be transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to them o f exempt
