                                    DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONM EN
                                    2 MARSHAM STREET LONDON SW1P 3E
                                               01-276 300©
                                    My ref:
                                    Yourref:               ADMW(STR%ON * LEGAL
                                                              DEPT,, SHEFFIELD^
                                                             HEAD dF jA ^ IS J A N T
                                                               tiepT. I   HEAfi-
                                                                                     L.S.
                                                                                                 |K
                                                           B       1 2 APR 1989
                         C .P.U . CH£f tXtCUTiVc           I    O .S.M .t   LIB   j ELNS   PSO
                                     SHEFFJRO     C.P.O.   GS
                                                                                           oTj
                           M.T.
                           RB     12 APR 1989               0 8 I-'AR ,989
                                                   PUB
                         STRAT
                                  R.E.U. P.E.C.U.
                           U.P.                   < Y o


            \u.


Thank you for your letter of 16 January about Sheffield City
Council's letter of 6 January concerning the proposed national
membership scheme for football supporters.  I am sorry not to
have replied sooner.

It may be helpful if I first explain the background to the
national membership scheme. Following the disturbances involving
England supporters at the European Football Championships, and
the many serious incidents during the 1987/88 domestic season,
which saw the unacceptable high level of over 6,000 arrests at
Football League matches, the Prime Minister met the football
authorities on 6 July to discuss further measures to tackle
hooliganism associated with football. The football authorities
were invited to introduce a national membership scheme on a
voluntary basis but they refused. Accordingly we announced that
proposals for legislation to give statutory backing to such a
scheme would be brought forward, as part of the Government's
package of measures to tackle football hooliganism.

I invited the National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs
and the Football Supporters Association to submit written
comments to the working party I chaired which reviewed the
principles   of  the   national  membership scheme.     I  met
representatives of both organisations on 6 December to discuss
the scheme and I am ready to have further meetings as the Bill
goes through its parliamentary stages.

The Football Spectators Bill was introduced into the House of
Lords on 16 January.    The Bill's purpose is to deal with the
problems of hooliganism associated with football.    It proposes
that everyone who attends a designated football match in England
and Wales should be a member of the scheme, or otherwise
authorised by the scheme, and that designated matches should be
played only on licensed football grounds. A member would be able
to go to any designated match. Those who are convicted of a
relevant offence will be disqualified from membership of the
scheme and the scheme itself will allow for the Football
Membership Authority to ban others who misbehave at football
matches.    The Bill also gives the courts powers to impose
restriction orders on convicted hooligans to prevent them
travelling to specified matches abroad.
The Bill does not prescribe the contents of the membership
scheme. Rather, it provides for the Secretary of State for the
Environment to appoint a body, to be known as the Football
Membership Authority (FMA), to draw up the scheme in detail and
submit it to the Secretary of State for approval.   The Football
Association and Football League have decided that they will work
together in the establishment of a joint body to be recommended
to the Secretary of State for designation as the FMA arid I
welcome their decision.
To help answer the many questions put to us about the scheme we
have produced the enclosed question and answer briefing paper
which you may like to forward to the Chief Executive.   You will
note that the particular points raised by the City Council are
covered on pages 3 (costs of the scheme), 4 (attendances), 7 - 8
(problems inside and outside       the grounds) and 11 (civil
liberties).
I welcome the measures which the clubs and the police have taken
to deter football violence. But their effect has been to contain
the problem not to cure       it.The Government accepts that
hooliganism is not a problem confined to football but all too
often the game provides a focus for trouble both at home and
abroad.  The activities of the hooligan continue to tarnisl. the
image of the game and physically endanger law-abiding people.
Introduction of the membership scheme will provide, for the first
time, an effective and comprehensive procedure to keep hooligans
away from football matches. I am confident that it will lead to
the link between violenceand football being      broken and that
going to a football match will become a far more enjoyable
occasion than it has been for many years.




                                               COLIN MOYNIHAN




Bill Michie Esq MP
The Football Spectators Bill
Questions and Answers
The Bill
What does the Bill do?
•   It proposes two new measures in the campaign against football
hooliganism
       (1) it provides the statutory framework for a
           national membership scheme for football
           spectators and
       (2) it provides the courts with power to impose
           restriction orders on convicted hooligans to prevent
           them travelling to key matches abroad.

What are the aims of the Bill?
•   Taken with the package of anti-hooligan measures in place since
the 1987 February Agreement, the Bill will provide the means to
break the link between football and hooliganism.       Football will
cease to be a focus for violence. For the first time there will be
an effective way to keep the troublemaker out of football matches at
home and to prevent the convicted hooligan from travelling to
matches abroad.

How will the hooligan be kept out of matches?
•   Spectators would only be able to attend designated matches if
they have a valid membership card which can be checked at the
turnstile    or are specifically made exempt under the scheme.
Troublemakers, inside and outside the ground, would be banned from
membership.


But why legislate to introduce a membership scheme?
•   We hoped that the football authorities would bring in a scheme on
a voluntary basis.     Unfortunately they have said that the clubs
would not agree to this.

Why is the Bill being introduced in the House of Lords?
•    Nothing unusual in this.   To ensure Parliamentary business is
dealt with    effectively and efficiently the timetable requires a
number of Bills to be introduced in the House of Lords.


Department of the Environment                                      1
Why doesn't the Bill spell out the details of the scheme?

• The Football Membership Authority will be responsible for running
the scheme.    It should be for them to produce a workable and
effective scheme.   The Government is prepared to be flexible on
matters of detail provided that the scheme meets the legislative
requirements.

What sort of bans will there be - and how long?
• Mandatory bans are proposed for anyone convicted of a football
related offence. These bans would be for 5 years in the case where
the penalty is a custodial sentence and 2 years in other cases.
   The Bill also proposes that the scheme should provide for the FMA
to be able to impose discretionary bans of its own.       The period
would be determined under the scheme but it is likely that it would
be for a maximum of 2 years.

What if people defy a ban and try to go to a match?
•   Anyone attempting to do so would commit a criminal offence.

How will the courts know what a football related offence is?
• There is already a definition in the Public Order Act 1986. Most
cases will be straightforward.       There would be a degree of
interpretation involved for the courts within the framework set out
in the Bill.

Will those convicted of other criminal offences be banned?
•   The Bill applies to football related offences only.

What happens if a club does not install a scheme or operate it
properly?
• The Bill proposes that there should be a licensing authority.
A licence could be withdrawn from a club and this would mean
spectators would not be allowed into a match.

What if the FMA fails to run a scheme properly?
•   The Bill proposes that the Secretary of State should have the
power to terminate its contract and appoint another body to take on
the task.

Will the Bill apply to Scotland and Northern Ireland?

•   NO.




2                                   Department of the Environment
Why?
•   As with UEFA, the Government agrees that English league and
international football faces a specifically grave problem.  The
measures are therefore directed at the 92 league clubs.



The Scheme
How will the details of the scheme be decided?
• It would be for the FMA to draw up the detailed scheme and submit
it to the Secretary of State for approval.

Which matches will be covered by the scheme?
• The Secretary of State will designate the matches to be covered
by the Scheme by Order. It is intended that all matches involving
clubs in the Football League should be designated.

Will the scheme apply to matches in which a League team plays a non-
League team?
•    It is intended that arrangements should be made so that
supporters of non-League clubs should not be required to produce
membership cards for these matches.  The licence arrangements will
apply.

Will I need to be a member to go to Wembley?
•   We will be discussing this issue further with the FMA and the
Wembley authorities as the detailed scheme is worked up.

When is it proposed to introduce a scheme?
• Our target date for introduction is Spring 1990. The key issue in
settling the timetable is the need to install the right technology.


Who pays?
•   It has always been made clear that football should finance any
scheme. There are considerable commercial opportunities in a
membership list of millions.   A number of companies have already
offered to set up and run a scheme at no cost to clubs or
supporters.
  Even without commercial development,    a leading company has said it
could put a scheme in place at a cost    to the member of about £3 per
annum.   This is less than some clubs    already charge their members;
for example, Tottenham Hotspur charges    £5.



Department of the Environment                                       3
     If the    football authorities and the clubs take a positive
approach to    marketing, financing a scheme would not be a problem.
In addition,    the Football Trust might be prepared to consider any
requests for   assistance from the smaller clubs.

How will the casual supporters be affected?
•   Joining a scheme will be a simple process.       It would mean
completing a single form with a few personal details and providing
two photographs.   It is hoped that supporters will appreciate this
is a very minor inconvenience in the context of ridding the game of
hooliganism.
  The Government would like to see a means of allowing a casual
supporter to obtain a membership card on the morning of the match,
provided that this would not threaten the integrity of the scheme -
this is something for consideration when the scheme is worked up in
detail by the FMA for approval.

What effect will the scheme have on attendances?
• There might be a small short term downside effect on attendances
but as the scheme becomes more effective in keeping out the
troublemakers, more people will be attracted to attending games.
Many previously deterred by the threat of hooliganism will come back
into the game.

Will the supporter with no club affiliation have to nominate a club
allegiance?
• Most people would wish to be associated with a particular club to
benefit from the advantages which club membership will of'ier.
However those with no club allegiance may be able to join the scheme
without nominating a club.

Will there be exemptions from membership?
•   The Bill proposes that the scheme should provide for certain
groups to be exempt.   For example these could include accompanied
children in family enclosures and    disabled people in designated
areas.
    Where guests visit a match at the club's invitation, the clubs
must be responsible to the licensing authority for their behaviour.

How will foreign visitors be able to attend matches?
•   There are several possibilities for the FMA to consider:
          they could join the scheme;
          they might be guests of the club;




4                                    Department of the Environment
           or, they could be asked to produce proof of
           identity like a passport, to secure temporary
           memberships

It is likely that the second option will be preferred.

Will Scottish and Northern Irish supporters be able to jcin the
scheme?
• Yes. Anyone in the UK wishing to attend a designated match will
need to be a member.

Why not apply the Luton scheme nationwide?
•   Different grounds pose different problems.
     What has worked well in Luton could not be successfully
transferred to the whole country.   Look at London for example with
its mix of catchment areas for different clubs.
   A scheme at an individual club cannot provide the security which
a national scheme backed by legislation could offer.
     Dramatic effect on attendances by only permitting football
supporters to attend their own club when it is playing at home.

What is the attitude of the Police to the    proposal to introduce a
scheme?

•    The Police were represented on the working party by the
Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO).     They   agreed the
report and welcomed the principle of a scheme.         The Police
Federation, having first welcomed the principle, have since voiced
reservations.
     A meeting with the Federation has taken place and further
meetings will be held to ensure that their concerns are taken into
account in working out the details of the scheme.

What do the football authorities think of the scheme?
•    The football authorities have made      clear   all   along   their
opposition to the principle of the scheme.
    They co-operated on the Minister for Sport's working party and
have,   since the publication of its report, confirmed their
willingness to continue to co-operate with the Government in
producing a workable scheme.

   They wanted to see tougher action in some areas, e.g. they would
have liked to see convictions for any form of violence in society
leading to membership bans.




Department of the Environment                                         5
The Card and the Technology
Where will I be able to get a membership card?
•    This is for the FMA to consider but the Government hopes
application forms would be freely available - from the FMA, the
clubs and perhaps other agencies.

Will Scottish and Northern Irish supporters be asked to give their
national allegiance?
• Yes, it is proposed that anyone joining a scheme, from wherever
they come, would be asked to fill in a standard application form.


How long will the card last?
•   This is something the FMA would look at.  The working party
recommended that cards should be valid for two or, more likely,
three seasons.

What happens if a supporter loses his card?
• He should report the loss to the FMA.     It is proposed that the
card would then be invalidated at every ground.   The FMA will wish
to consider whether clubs should be able to issue temporary
membership cards, valid for one match only to their guests and
members whose cards were lost, stolen or damaged.

Will my card entitle me to go to any Football League match?
• Yes, a member would need and be allowed only one card but with it
would be able to go to any ground. Any scheme would be a national
one.

How can you stop forgeries?
• No system can be impervious to forgery and fraud. The Government
believes that an electronically readable card supported by a
photograph will add a further layer of deterrence against hooligans,
on top of the measures already taken.

What happens if a supporter tries to use a card more than once at a
match - by handing it to a friend?
• Technology is available to ensure a card is only valid      once p^r
match and cannot therefore be passed back to someone else      to use.
We would wish to see that this is a feature of any scheme.    The Bill
proposes that attempting to enter the ground without          a valid
membership card should be a criminal offence.




6                                  Department of the Environment
What additional time will be required at the turnstiles?
•   Potential suppliers of the technology say that some systems
would mean no extra time would be necessary to check the card at the
turnstile.  It could be done in no more than the time it presently
takes to part with tickets or to pay for them.

What about checking photographs on membership cards?
•   It would be impractical to expect turnstile operators to check
photographs on entry.     The police advise that a photograph is
essential to deter fraud and assist detection if there is trouble.

What about last minute crowds?
•   There are problems now at some big matches with last minute
crowds.    The scheme need not affect the problem at all if
appropriate technology is chosen.   If people were to enter the
ground a little earlier for the big games, this would be no bad
thing.

What happens if the equipment breaks down?
• One of the features of the technology to be employed will be the
need for it to be robust.    In the event of any equipment failure,
the scheme should provide for the local police in consultation with
the club   to decide on appropriate arrangements. It could be open tc
the local police to allow a match to go ahead without the normal
arrangements for checking membership cards, but attempting to obtain
admission to the match without a valid membership card would remain
a criminal offence under the licensing arrangements.         Like all
details of the scheme, this matter will need to be considered by the
FMA when it is drawing up its proposals.

Inside the Ground
Is not the problem now outside rather than inside grounds?
• It is not true that hooliganism is no longer a problem inside
grounds. Arrest figures season after season are out of all
proportion to all other sports.
   22% of people interviewed in a National Opinion Poll published in
the Mailon Sunday on 27 November said they had been caught up     in
violence   inside the grounds, and 28% outside.


Has there been any trouble inside the grounds this season?
•   Yes,serious incidents have continued this season on a scale
comparable to last season. And it is not just incidents, the police
view remains that many matches "provide the focus for aggressive and
provocative behaviour with the threat of violence never far below
the surface".


Department of the Environment                                     7i
What other measures have been taken inside grounds?
• The police presence, segregation arrangements, strengthening of
the law on public order, including exclusion orders and tight
controls on .alcohol*
   Enforcement has been much assisted by Closed Circuit Television
(CCTV) now in place at most league grounds.        Better quality
equipment has meant that ringleaders can be identified and rooted
out.
    The Public Order Act 1986 provided new offences of disorderly
conduct and for possession of'fireworks or smoke,bombs at matches.

What will the effect of the scheme be on segregation?     Will friends
be able to sit together?
•   Segregation as now would remain a matter for the club and the
local police.     The membership scheme need have no effect on
segregation arrangements.

What effect will the scheme have on the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act?
# It is important to avoid any overlap between the requirements of a
certificate issued under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act and a
licence under the national membership scheme.


Outside the Ground
How will the scheme help solve the problem of hooliganism outside
the grounds?
• The scheme would end football as a focus for hooliganism outside
as well as inside the ground.      It would remove the match as a
central focus for the activities of hooligans.   If they cannot get
into a match they will not travel to one - a point amply
demonstrated under the Luton scheme.

What other measures are being taken to tackle the problem outside
grounds?
A great deal has and is being done.    Tough measures are being taken.
•   The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Act 1985 established
firm controls on the sale and possession of alcohol at grounds and
on football special coaches and trains.
• The Public Order Act 1986 provided the courts with the power to
make exclusion orders prohibiting attendance at certain matches by
convicted football hooligans. This has proved useful but exclusion
orders are of only limited effectiveness.


8                                     Department of the Environment
•   Police effectiveness and intelligence    has been strengthened,
e.g. the improved exchange of information between forces; better
liaison between the police and the football authorities.
• Advice has been issued on the enforcement of the law on the misuse
of alcohol and on the need to ensure swift justice following
incidents of hooliganism.




Abroad
What does Part II of the    Bill do?
• It proposes that when someone is convicted ofa football related
offence, the court may also impose a restriction order requiring him
to report to an agency in England or Wales when certain matches take
place abroad. Restriction orders would run for the standard length
of two years, or five years if the offender is sentenced to
immediate imprisonment.   In any case, the court must be satisfied
that a restriction order would help to prevent or reduce violence
or disorder at matches abroad.

Who will be 'the agency'?
• No decision has yet been taken, which is why the Bill leaves the
matter open-ended.   The police would be one possible candidate for
some or all of the functions, and we are discussing this with them.

How will someone know when to report?

• He will have to report initially to the agency within 30 days of
the restriction order being made. Thereafter the agency will inform
him when and where    to attend.   Someone subject to an order must
keep the agency informed if he moves house, and can apply to change
to supervision in another location.

What if he does not report?

•   Failure to report will be a criminal offence.

Can he appeal?

•    As with any conviction or sentence, a defendant may appeal
against imposition of a restriction order.    In addition the Bill
provides for application to have the order set aside, once it has
been in force for 12 months; and for someone to ask the agency to
waive a particular reporting,requirement where there are special
circumstances to justify his exemption by virtue of which he would
not attend the match. These are sensible provisions, to avoid the
reporting requirement acting unjustly.



Department of the Environment                                    9
Convictions abroad?

• There is at least as much reason why a conviction abroad for
football hooliganism should lead to a restriction order being made.
The Bill allows for application to be made for an order in England
or Wales where someone resident here has been convicted of such an
offence abroad. Relevant countries (and offences) must be specified
in advance by the Secretary of State.     This should be seen as a
facility, for other countries to use if they wish to present us with
evidence of these convictions.

Why not withdraw someone's passport?
• The objective of Part II of the Bill is to prevent hooligans from
travelling to specific football matches abroad - not to impose a
much wider ban on any travel abrpad.

When will the restriction orders come into effect?
•    As soon as arrangements for the reporting agency are finalised.



The FMA
Who will be appointed to run the Football Membership Authority?
• The Football Association and the Football League have said they
wish to establish a joint body which they would recommend to the
Secretary of State for designation as the FMA.

    It will be open to other organisations and individuals to seek
appointment as the FMA.

Who will notify the FMA of those convicted?

• The Bill proposes that the court should inform the FMA and the
police of a relevant conviction.


Will supporters be able to      appeal   against   bans   imposed   at   the
discretion of the FMA?

• The Bill proposes that the scheme should provide for an appeals
tribunal to be established.

Can people rejoin the scheme on expiry of their ban?
• Yes.    But it will be open to the FMA to extend the period of
disqualification under their discretionary powers,  by rejecting an
application to rejoin provided it has reason to do so. There would
be the right of appeal.



10                                  Department of the Environment
Civil Liberties
How will civil liberties be safeguarded?
•   A scheme would not interfere in civil liberties. It is not the
case that everyone has the right to enter a football ground. Clubs
refuse entry to thousands of unwanted spectators now. Hooliganism
does infringe the civil liberties of others - shopkeepers, shoppers,
the general public and property owners in town centres and near
grounds and not least the genuine football supporter.

Why not make everyone carry a national ID card?
•   That is a subject for a different, wider debate.   A typical
national ID card could not be used to     keep hooligans Out of
football.


Surely the commercial development of a scheme will infringe civil
liberties?

•   In developing the commercial potential of a scheme, the FMA and
the clubs would have to act in line with the principles of the Data
Protection Act - members would have the right to see and challenge
the accuracy of any computerised information held about them and
appropriate security precautions would be taken to safeguard that
information. No details of convictions will be held on the cards.




Department of the Environment                                   11
                                DEPARTM ENT OF THE E N V IR O N M E N T
                                2 MARSHAM STREET LONDON SW1P 3EB
                                           0 1 -2 7 6 3 0 0 0

                                My ref.
                                Your ref:




I am aware of the interest you and your constituents have shown
in the proposed national membership scheme for football
supporters. I thought it might be useful if I describe in detail
the background to the Bill, the effect of the UEFA decision of
April 11 and respond to the particular points made on the
postcards you have received.
The Bill's purpose is to deal with the problems of hooliganism
associated with football. It proposes that everyone who attends
a designated football match in England and Wales should be, a
member of the scheme,- or otherwise authorised by the scheme, and
that designated matches should be played only on licensed
football grounds. A member would be able to go to any designated
match.   Those who are .convicted of a relevant offence will be
disqualified from membership of the scheme and the scheme itself
will allow for the Football Membership Authority to ban others
who misbehave at football matches.      The Bill also gives the
courts powers to impose restriction orders on convicted hooligans
to prevent them from travelling to specified matches abroad.
The Bill does not prescribe the contents of the membership
scheme. Rather, it provides for the Secretary of State ror the
Environment to appoint a body, to be known as the Football
Membership Authority (FMA), to draw up the scheme in detail and
submit it to the Secretary of State for approval. The Football
Association and Football League have decided that they will work
together in the establishment of a joint body to be recommended
to the Secretary of State for designation as the FMA and I
welcome their decision.
While I accept that the clubs and police have taken measures to
deter football violence, I cannot accept the view that there is
no trouble inside football grounds.    The level of arrests and
ejections at football grounds both last season and during this
one are in themselves unacceptable, but they alone do not give
the full picture.    At too many matches violence remains just
below the surface. Supporters of opposing teams have to be kept
apart by physical barriers and by the employment of 5,000 or more
police every Saturday during the season.    Outside grounds, the
behaviour of rival groups of supporters makes life intolerable
both for law-abiding football supporters and for those who live
or trade nearby or wish to travel by train on the same day as a
football match.
* t




      We believe that the scheme offers the real prospect of ending
      football hooliganism both inside and outside grounds.    It will
      remove the match as a central focus For the activities of
      hooligans. If hooligans know that they will not be allowed into
      football matches, they will have no incentive to travel to one.
      This has been the experience at Luton Town with its successful
      100% home membership scheme. When the clubs adopt a positive and
      constructive attitude to the marketing and development of the
      scheme it could be of great benefit to them financially and
      enable the scheme to be introduced without any charge being made
      to members.
      Introduction of the membership scheme will provide, for the
      first time, an effective and comprehensive procedure to keep
      hooligans away from football matches.    I am confident that it
      will lead to the link between violence and football being broken
      and that going to a football match will become a far more
      enjoyable occasion than it has been for many years. Indeed, I
      believe that many people previously deterred by the threat of
      hooliganism will return to football.
      I welcome UEFA's recognition of the progress that is being made
      in dealing with football hooliganism.   By the beginning of the
      1990/91 season (UEFA's target date for the possible readmission
      of English clubs to European competition), our intention is that
      the Football Membership Scheme will be up and working and powers
      to prevent convicted hooligans from travelling to key matches
      abroad will already have been introduced.
      With determined action by the Government and the support of the
      football authorities and fans, football can stay firmly on the
      road to recovery.  By the time of readmission we will have the
      mechanisms to control hooliganism both at home and abroad.




                                                        J




                                       COLIN MOYNIHAN
