    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                              1217

  Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
  (b) the revised arrangements contained in the report for the holding of the Conference be
approved.
(3) SOUTHERN AFRICA RESOURCES CENTRE
  Resolved: That (a) the Chair of this Panel (or his nominee) be appointed as the Council’s
representative on the Southern Africa Resources Centre; and
  (b) attendance by a member of the City Council at meetings of the Southern Africa Resources
Centre be recognised as an approved duty for the purpose of the payment of allowances under
Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act, 1972.
(4) LOCAL AUTHORITIES AGAINST A PARTHEID
  The Panel received the minutes of a meeting of the National Steering Committee of Local
Authorities Against Apartheid held on 15th December, 1989, and, arising therefrom —
  Resolved: That (a) a contribution of £750 be made to the funds of the Local Authorities
Resource Unit on Apartheid for the year 1990;
  (b) an all-party delegation of not more than 8 members of the City Council to be nominated by
the Chair of this Panel together with 2 officers be appointed to attend a national lobby of
Parliament to be held on 27th February, 1990, in connection with the Southern Africa Coalition’s
proposed week of action;
  (c) attendance by members of the City Council at the national lobby be recognised as an
approved duty for the purposes of the payment of allowances under the provisions of Section
177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act, 1972;
  (d) attendance at the national lobby by up to 10 representatives of the black community and
appropriate sports organisations be sponsored by the City Council;
  (e) arrangements be made for a “sign in” event condemning apartheid to be held on the Town
Hall steps on Wednesday, 21st February, 1990, and the Lord Mayor be requested to consider
inviting prominent persons including sports personalities to participate in the event; and
  (f) arrangements be made for an exhibition mounted by the Anti-Apartheid Movement to be
held on Council premises during the Southern Africa Coalition’s week of action in February,
1990.
(5) NELSON M ANDELA RECEPTION COMMITTEE — BRITAIN
  The Panel received papers on the proposed establishment of a Nelson Mandela National
Reception Committee—Britain and the representative of the Anti-Apartheid Movement
reported on the Movement’s proposals for local activities to mark the occasion in the expected
event of Nelson Mandela’s release from detention.
   Resolved: That (a) the Lord Mayor be requested to convene a Sheffield Reception Committee
to organise events in connection with the release of Nelson Mandela;
  (b) authority be given for a celebration to be held on the Town Hall steps and for the flag of the
African National Congress to be flown on the Town Hall at the time of Nelson Mandela’s release;
and
  (c) Nelson Mandela be invited to visit Sheffield to see the buildings and places, etc. named in
his honour.
( 6 ) COUNCIL AID
  The Panel received an invitation for the City Council to affiliate to Council Aid, an
organisation of local authorities whose objective is to encourage the provision of informatory and
educational services on issues affecting developing countries and participation in linking and
campaigning activities with a view to securing greater equity in international relationships.
  Resolved: That the City Council take up membership of the organisation Council Aid at the
current annual membership fee of £50.
( 7 ) SEMINAR ON TRADE LINKS WITH THE SOVIET UNION
  The Panel considered an invitation for the appointment of delegates to a Seminar to be held in
Glasgow on 12th and 13th March, 1990, on the development of trade links with the Soviet Union
through town twinning.
1218       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      Resolved: That (a) the Chair of this Panel and an International Officer be appointed as
    delegates to attend the Seminar now mentioned; and
       (b) authority be given for the Council to meet the reasonable expenses to be incurred in
    attending the Seminar by Mr. Bob Walkden, the Researcher/Interpreter who is carrying out a
    study for the Sheffield Chamber of Commerce into trading opportunities in the Donbas area of
    the Ukraine.
            In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act,
    (n o t e :
    1972, as amended, the Chair of the Panel (Councillor Pye) decided that the above item should be
    considered as a matter of urgency in view of the need to book places and accommodation before
    the next meeting of the Panel.)
    (8 )   REQUESTS FO R FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
       The Principal International Officer reported on applications for financial assistance.
     Resolved: That (a) a grant of £210 be made towards the cost of a visit to Bochum, West
    Germany, from 14th-21st April, 1990, by 11 students and 3 staff of All Saints School, Granville
    Road;
      (b) a grant of £180 be made towards the cost of a visit to Bochum, West Germany, from
    5th-10th March, 1990, by 12 members of Wincobank Young Women’s Group; and
       (c) a grant of £100 be made towards the cost of a visit from 11th March-19th May, 1990, by a
    member of the Sheffield Esteli Society to Esteli, Nicaragua to participate in a project studying
    infant epidemiolgy.

7 General Purposes Panel
reso lv ed       :   That the following minutes be approved—
      Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 5th February, 1990. Present— Councillors Butler
    (Chair), Hussain, Lamb, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.
    Also in attendance— Councillors Cromar, Walayat and Whitfield.
★   ( 1 ) SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
    Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
      The Panel received and noted the minutes of a meeting of the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Advisory Group held on 6th December, 1989.
    Responses o f the Police to Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Recommendations
      Further to his report to the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd January, 1990, the Head of
    Administration and Legal Department submitted a further report on responses of the Police to
    Lord Justice Taylor’s interim recommendations arising from the Hillsborough Disaster.
      As the South Yorkshire Police had not found it possible to be represented at the meeting, the
    Panel deferred to their next monthly meeting consideration of the report now submitted.
    Visits by Members o f the Panel to Sports Grounds
      Further to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd January, 1990 (page 1089
    of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a further
    report on proposed arrangements for the members of the Panel to attend football matches at
    Hillsborough (Sheffield Wednesday) and Bramall Lane (Sheffield United) Sports Grounds.
      Resolved: That approval be given for the proposed arrangements contained in the report now
    submitted for members of the Panel to attend football matches at the Hillsborough and Bramall
    Lane Sports Grounds.
    Hillsborough Sports Ground—Cracks to West Stand
       The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing copies of a
    letter from the South Yorkshire Police drawing attention to the existence of cracks in the
    concrete structure at the West Stand at Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday), a
    copy of a memorandum from the Building Surveyor indicating that the cracking did not present
    any problem from the structural safety aspect and arrangements had been put in hand for
    appropriate maintenance work in the area, and a copy of a letter to the South Yorkshire Police
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                           1219

confirming a procedure for reporting to the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group or the
General Purposes Panel observations of defects at Sports Grounds such as those referred to in the
letter from the South Yorkshire Police.
  The Panel noted the contents of the report now submitted.
Hillsborough Sports Ground—Proposed New Wheelchair Ramp
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal of
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to provide a new access ramp for the disabled at the
Hillsborough Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of a memorandum from the Building
Surveyor, a letter from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service and letters to the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club and their consultants regarding the proposal.
  Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration
and Legal Department, in consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in approving the proposal for
the provision of a new wheelchair ramp at Hillsborough Sports Ground as detailed in Plan No.
12186/1, subject to the carrying out also of the works requested by the Building Surveyor in his
memorandum to the Head of Administration and Legal Department now submitted of 6th
December, 1989; and
   (b) the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be required to produce details of their proposed
stewarding arrangements for the accommodation of disabled persons.
Hillsborough Sports Ground—Inspection o f South Stand R oof
   With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd February, 1987
(page 1180 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
a report enclosing a copy of the half-yearly report from the Consulting Engineer to the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club on the condition of the South Stand roof at the Hillsborough Sports
Ground. The report also enclosed copies of letters to the Club and the Consultants.
  Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted of the Consulting Engineers to the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on the condition of the South Stand roof at Hillsborough
Sports Ground be noted; and
  (b) the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be required—
     (i) under the terms of the General Safety Certificate for the Ground to carry out by 30th
     April, 1990, the works detailed in items 2, 3 and 7 of the summary to the report of the
     Consulting Engineers;
     (ii) to adjust by 28th February, 1990, the guy ropes to the commentary boxes on the South
     Stand roof; and
     (iii) to undertake by 30th April, 1990, appropriate repairs to or the removal of the
     commentary boxes.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground—Amendment o f General Safety Certificate
   The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on action taken
to amend the General Safety Certificate issued to the Sheffield United Football Club to
allow 12,960 spectators on the Spion Kop at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground, an increase
in spectator capacity of 1,920. The report enclosed a copy of a notice of amendment of the
General Safety Certificate and a copy of a letter to the Sheffield United Football Club
drawing attention to work required to be carried out to barriers at the Ground.
  Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of
Administration and Legal Department, in consultation with Councillor Mrs. Nelson, in
amending the General Safety Certificate issued in respect of the Bramall Lane Sports
Ground; and
  (b) the remedial works to barriers mentioned in the letter to the Sheffield United
Football Club now submitted be required to be carried out by 28th February, 1990.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground—Storage o f Liquified Petroleum Gas
  With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November,
1989 (page 946 of the printed minutes) to approve, subject to the agreement of the Director
of Health and Consumer Services and the Chief Fire Officer, proposals for the construction
of a storage compound for liquified petroleum gas at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground
1220    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  (Sheffield United), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report
  enclosing copies of letters from the Sheffield United Football Club indicating that, in the
  interests of safety, the Club proposed to replace the use of liquified petroleum gas by that of
  electrical power and that, in the meantime, the Club would ensure that the caterers
  removed all liquified petroleum gas cylinders from the Ground immediately after every
  home game.
   Resolved: That the following recommendations of the Safety of Sports Grounds
  Advisory Group, set out in the report now submitted, be implemented by the Sheffield
  United Football Club—
    (a) liquified petroleum gas should not be allowed onto the premises of the Bramall Lane
  Sports Ground after the end of the current football season; and
    (b) the Sheffield United Football Club be required, under the terms of their General
  Safety Certificate to record—
          (i) the number of liquified petroleum gas cylinders brought into the Bramall Lane Sports
          Ground each day and the number removed from the Ground each day; and
          (ii) that an independent person has checked that all liquified petroleum gas cylinders have
          been removed from the Ground after each football match.

  Bramall Lane Sports Ground—Emergency Lighting
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing a copy of a
  letter from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service which made recommendations for
  improvements to the emergency lighting system at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield
  United).
     Resolved: That the Sheffield United Football Club be required under Condition 41 of the
  General Safety Certificate issued in respect of the Bramall Lane Sports Ground to submit to the
  City Council, by 30th April, 1990, schemes for improvements and extensions to the emergency
  lighting system at the Ground which take full account of the comments made by the Fire Service
  in their letter to the Council dated 21st December, 1989.
  Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton)—Works to Greyhound Terrace
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing a letter from
  the Consulting Engineers to Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited giving details of proposed
  upgrading works to the Greyhound Terrace at the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton).
    Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposals for the carrying out of upgrading works
  to the Greyhound Terrace at Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) as detailed by the Company’s
  Consulting Engineers, Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, in their letter to the Council of 15th
  December, 1989, subject to any requirements of the Building Surveyor in the matter; and
    (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to consult with Mr.
  Strange of Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on the requirements for inspection and survey of the
  Greyhound Terrace Bar.
  ( n o t e : At this point in the proceedings, the Panel expressed their concern at the poor attendance
  of members of the opposition parties at meetings of the Panel when important items relating to
  the safety of sports grounds were being considered.)
  (2) W ORLD STUDENT GAMES
    The Panel received and noted a report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department
  on safety certification and safety licensing requirements for the facilities in the city which were to
  be used for the World Student Games in 1991.
  (3) CITY HALL
    With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 30th October, 1989
  (page 808/809 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department
  reported further on the situation regarding the structural safety of the City Hall roof and that a
  ceiling certificate had now been issued in respect of the building.
       The Panel noted the information now reported.
