                               X25£/f/'//0

HILL^MOUCfH 8T/Wvrt IZjfcTiy?
 gcw\(7T& fiszm.rs potk *e©u
k eascc       h * i ~ & 0 -*




 Gt 27 7/7.
            CL/EB



             2nd January, 1989,



Messrs. Keeble Hawson,
Solicitors,
Old Cathedral Vicarage,
St. James Row,
Sheffield,
SI 1XA.

gor the attention of Mr. Gregory

Dear Sirs,

Hillsborough Disaster

X enclose herewith copies of the reports to Committee relating to Safety of
Sports Grounds. You should now have a full set of Agendas, written reports
where submitted and subsequent resolutions. If you require any further
information or assistance then no doubt you will let me know.

I should be grateful if you could confirm whether or not you want copies of
every report that goes to Coaaittee relating to Safety of Sports Grounds.
You will appreciate that reports go virtually every month if not more
frequently in relation to on-going work at the grounds. These reports do
not necessarily refer specifically to the Hillsborough Disaster.

I look forward to hearing fro® you on this point.

Yours faithfully,




Head of Depajfiaeai


Enc.
MSlAAP/JL




                                               734059-«rs. Bashforth
                           H E F F I E L D     C I T Y     C O U N C I L

                                     GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
                     (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL PURPOSES PROGRAMME)

               Meeting to be held on Monday, 7th August, 1989 at 2.30 p.m.
                                     In the Town Hall


                     PUBLIC INSPECTION
                              — ••i '  OF
                                        ' DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO
                                                                r■■ MEETING    ^

        (a)   The documentation and items to be -discussed in public at the meeting may,
              in the first instance, be inspected at the Local Government Information
              Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield 1. The Service is open between 1i.30
              a.m. to 1.00 p.m. and 2.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m. - Monday to Friday. For
              further details telephone 734750.                 .      .

              Certain information may not be available for publlc7;ltispection.

        (b)   For items (If aayj marked * it is anticipated that the press and public
              may be excluded from the meeting-

^       (c)   If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not available to the press
              and public or not available until the start of the meeting for the reasons
              shosra. .
                 f



                                             A G E N D A

        1.    EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
              To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude the press and
              public.

        2.    SHEFFIELD COffilUNITY HEALIH COUNCIL

              (a) To report that^ under the authority given by this Panel at its
              meeting held on 3rd April, 1989, Councillor Lamb has been appointed
              as a member of the Sheffield Community Health Council to serve for
              the period ending 31st August, 1990, in place of Ms. J. Smailes.

               (h)            To appoint a jjerson to serve on the Sheffield Community Health
    }         Council for the period ending 31st August, 1992, to fill a vacancy
              arising from the resignation of Hs. J. Duggleby.

        3.    FILM CERTIFICATION
              Requests of the Senior Film Officer for permission to exhibit

              (a) Films not certificated by the British Board of Film
              C las sif ica tiottj-

                       "A Page of Madness"
                       “Aelita"'
                       "Mechanisms of the Brain"

              (b) As a film in categpry "PG", the following film which is
              currrently classified in category "A":-

                       "The Animals Film"                     (Copies herewith - "A")

        4.    PROVISION OF INFORMATION FROM LICENSING RECORDS
              The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to report
              verbally-
SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
The Acting Head of Administration and legal Department to report
verbally.

AMUSEMENT CENTRE
The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to report
verbally on an individual case.

LOCAL GOVERNMENT (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT 1972
The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to report
verbally on court proceedings.

HACKNEY CARRIAGES AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING       .
(a) To consider applications for the grant of haclcney carriage
vehicle licences.

(NOTE: Copies of the minute of the General Purposes Panel
May, 1989, relating to a Study on Taxi Quality is Sheffield and -£he
relevant report are attached.        (Copy herewith — *,JBir) %
                                 ■■




(b) The Acting Head of Administration and Legal'Department to report
verbally on individual cases.



(NOTE: It is expected that the public and press *»i 11 be excluded
from the meeting during the consideration of items 6» 7 and tJ as the
relevant reports will contain exempt information as described in
Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended hy the
Local Government (Access to Information} Act 1985,* as follows:—

Item             Paragraph            Reasga

6 and 7          12                   Relating to 'l^gal matters and
                                      advice.

8                7 and 12             Relating to the financial and
                                      business affairs of other
                                      persons and legal matters and
                                      advicey-
                   S H E F F I   E LD     C I T Y   C O U N C I L


                     MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL -
             (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                                 held 7th August, 1989         '-‘j


      PRESENT:   Councillors Butler (Chair), Hussain, P. H. Jackson, Lamb,
                 Mrs. Mulhearn, Mrs. E. Smith and White.




(1)   TOWN HALL EXTENSION - REPLACEMENT OF AIR CONDITIONIN(|pJ[JIPMHJT
                Further to the decision of the Municipal                and
      General Services Programme Committee at its meetiJig:3l«itf';on 3rd
      August, 1989, the Director of Land and Planning submitted'a report
      on the invitation of tenders for the replacement           conditioning
      equipment in the Town Hall Extension.        *                      >
      RESOLVED: That tenders for carrying out the necesaaa^-fsw»sSci3se-
      invited from the four contractors named in the report aow subnittjsd.
                                                          - -■ - 1 .
      (NOTE: In accordance with the provisions of Section jLBOS(-43(b) ef
      the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local S overnneaflE
      (Access to Information) Act 1985, the Chair of the Panel (Councillor
      Butler) decided that the above item should be considered as a master
      of urgency in view of the fact that the information contained in the
      report had not been available when the agenda was being prepared.. )

(2)   SHEFFIELD COMMUNITY HEALTH COUNCIL
                The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
      reported that (a) under the authority given by the Panel at _fcts
      meeting held on 3rd April, 1989 (page 1558 of the printed minutes)
      Councillor Lamb had' been appointed to serve as a member of t3ae
      Sheffield Community Health Council for the period ending 31st
      August, 1990, in place of Ms. J. Smailes; and (b) M s . J. Dngglaby.
      appointed by the City Council to serve on the Sheffield ConaBuoity
      Health Council for the period ending 31st August, 1992, had now
      resigned.
      RESOLVED: That a person to be nominated by the Chair of this ’  Panel,
      be appointed to serve on the Sheffield Community Health Council far
      the period ending 31st August, 1992, to fill the vacancy nor
      reported.

(3)   PROVISION OF INFORMATION FROM LICENSING RECORDS
                The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
      reported that his Department had been requested to supply lists of
      licensees in various categories for use by commercial enterprises.
      RESOLVED: That the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
      Department be instructed not to issue any such lists of licensees
      without the specific authorisation of this Panel.
 Meeting of the General Purposes Panel                         Page 2
 (Municipal Enterprise and General Purposes Programme) 7.8.-89



 SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
           The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
 reported verbally on the publication of the interim report of the
 Right Honourable Lord Justice Taylor into the disaster which
 occurred on 15th April, 1989, at Hillsborough Football Ground and
 stated that full reports would be submitted to the Panel.
           The Panel noted the verbal report and requested that the
 written reports be made available as soon as possible.

  AMUSEMENT CENTRE
            Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting
  held on 3rd July, 1989, the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
 Department reported verbally on his investigation into a petition
 containing 48 signatures objecting to the presence of an,amusement
„ arcade at 383 South Road, Walkley, and to the possibility of any
  gambling or gaming licences being granted in respect of rthe
..premises.                                                      ~
            The Acting Head of Administration and Legal"Department
  reported that no facilities requiring .the issue ~o£ "a llicence by the
  City Council were provided in the premises concerned. "
            The Panel requested that this information be communicated
  to the petitioners.

 EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
 RESOLVED: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting
 "before discussion takes place on the following application for the
 .grant of Hackney Carriage Vehicle Licences on the grounds that, if
 the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to
 them of exempt information as described in Paragraphs 7 and 12 of
 "Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the
 Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to the
 financial and business affairs of other persons and legal matters
 and advice.

 HACKNEY CARRIAGE VEHICLE LICENCES
            The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
 reported verbally on an application for the issue of two Hackney
 Carriage Vehicle Licences (Case Nos. 41/89 and 42/89). The
 applicant attended the meeting to support his application.
            The Panel, having considered the report of the Acting Head
 of Administration and Legal Department and bearing in mind the
 decision made at their meeting held on 2nd May, 1989 (page 27 of the
 .printed minutes) that, on the basis of the report on the study
 commissioned by Sheffield Taxi Trade Association into the quality of
 the taxi service in Sheffield and, without prejudice to any future
 decisions to be made by the Panel, the City Council (a) remained of
  the opinion that there was no significant unmet demand for taxi
  services in Sheffield and (b) held the view that, subject to legal
  requirements, it was unlikely that any application for an additional
 Hackney Carriage Vehicle Licence submitted to the Council within the
  next 12 months would be successful, they
 RESOLVED: That the applications now submitted be not granted.

 At this stage m the proceedings, the public and press were
 re-admitted to the meeting.
r7
5   /
                   Municipal Enterprise and General Purposes Programme) 7.8.89




            (8)    FILM CERTIFICATION
                             The Senior Film Officer submitted a report on three films
                   which had not been certificated by the British Board of Film
                   Classification and one film which had been so classified in the
                   former category "AA" which he wished to show under the conditions
                   relating to category "PG".
                   RESOLVED: That authority 1>e given for the following films to be
                   exhibited under the conditions appropriate to the categories
                   indicated:— -

                   Title -of Ff.lffl                        Category

                   "A Page of Madness"'                     "15"

                   "Aelita"                    .            "PG”
                                                                        1
                                                                        ...
                   "Mechaaisas of the Brala"                "18"

                   "The jBia*2s ?JL2st"                     '•PG"

            (93    EXCUI5XG8 OF THE PUBLIC AHD PRESS
                   RESOLVED: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting
                   before discussion takes place on the remaining items of ^business on
                   the grounds that, if the public and press were present, there would
                   be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in
                   S c h e d u l e 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the
                   Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, as follows

                                          Paragraph                 Reason

                                          7 and 12                  Relating to the
                                                                    financial and business
                                                                    affairs of other persons
                                                                    and legal matters and
                                                                    advice.

                   11                     12                        Relating to legal
                                                                    matters and advice.

            (10)   HACKNE? ’CARRIAGE VEHICLE LICENCE
        )                     The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
                   reported verbally on an application for the issue of a Hackney
                   Carriage Tehicle Licence (Case No.          and stated that the
                   applicant lhad indicated by letter that he was unable to attend the
                   mectjaig.
                   RESOLVED^ That consideration of the application now submitted be
                   deferred in order to give the applicant a further opportunity to
                   attend "before the Panel.

            (11)   LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
                             The Panel noted a verbal report of the Acting Head of
                   Administration and Legal Department that, in proceedings held at
                   Sheffield Magistrates' Court on 13th/14th July, 1989, the Council's
                   prosecution of the operators of a shop at                    on the
                   grounds that
            S H E F F I E L D      C I T Y    C O U N C I L

                       GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
       (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL PURPOSES PROGRAMME)     .

  Meeting to be held on Thursday, 17th August, 1989 at 2.00 p.m.
                         in the Town Hall


        PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETING

       The documentation and items to be discussed in public at the meeting may,
       in the first instance, be inspected at the Local Government Information
       Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield 1. The Service is open between 11.30
•/'"?t'a.m. to 1.00 p.m. and 2.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m. - Monday to Friday. For
     " further details teleohone 734750.                      oh-:'

  Certain information may not be available for public inspection.

  For items (if any) marked * it is. anticipated that the press and public
  may be excluded from the meeting.

  If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not available to the press
  and public or not available until the start of the meeting for the reasons
  shown.

                                A G E N D A

  EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
  To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude the press and
  public.

  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
  Report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department on the
  issue and amendment of General Safety Certificates.
                                                 (Copy to follow)
      REPORT OF THE ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
                        TO THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL_______ __


SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - ISSUE AND AMENDMENT OF SAFETY
CERTIFICATES___________________________________________


PURPOSE OF REPORT                                         /      \
      T q V v i s e "members of interim action which lias          in
respect o f t h e issue of a general Safety Certificate to ^fffield United
Football, Club pic., and in respect of the amendment of theZgeneral Safety
Certificate issued by South Yorkshire County Council to Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club pic.                                 „
          •' t '




INTRODUCTION                        ^ ..                                ''' ' ^
       Members have .already been made aware of the fact. .thai\|£prd Justice .
Taylor published his interim .report upon the Hillsborougfi'^tsaster on 4th
August,. =1889. A copy of the interim recommendations of I^cd;,'Justice
Taylor are attached at Appendix A. A number of t        h      e     ;; . ....
recoaaendatlons are specified as requiring implementation.before:• <
ccmnenceaeot of the 1989/90 Season. These items are asterl'slcea- in the
 Interim recommendations. The official date for commencement of the
 1969/90 Season is the 19th August, 1989. However, it w a s Q t a m to the
attention of the Council that a football match was to take place at
 Sheffield United Football Club on Saturday, 12th August, 1989. In view of
 the fact that a Safety Certificate had not been issued to Sheffield United
 Football Club, urgent consideration was therefore given to .the matter on
 Friday, 11th August, 1989. Additionally, consideration was given to the
 serving of a notice of amendment of certificate in respect of Sheffield
 Wednesday’Football Club.

SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB
      When it came to the attention of officers that a pre-season football
match was to take place at Sheffield United Football Club on 12th August,
consideration was given to whether an interim safety certificate should be
issued to the Club prior to a match taking place. Members are referred to
recommendation 14 of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations which states
that where a sports stadium has been designated under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 and a safety certificate has not yet been issued, the
Local Authority should proceed forthwith to issue a certificate. In the
light of this recommendation, a general safety certificate was issued by
the Chief Executive on 11th August, 1989. A copy of the certificate
issued is attached at Appendix B. This contains what can be best
described as basic safety provisions and particularly incorporates those
recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor which he considered should be
implemented immediately.
      Condition 7 specifies the number of first-aid attendants which are
considered necessary taking into account Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations in this respect.
      Condition 7(c) also requires the attendance of the medical
 p r a r t i f t on<»r as rpr:omrn(»nH(a<i bv T.ord J u s t i c e T a y lo r .
              . u *>-yj ' i ■ <
                              . N—,■ ... j „c <-* h w.^-a* v wu.cii u i. -j *. <dl c c;nciciiic t; or c ns
 ambulance service where appropriate, again as recommended by Lord Justice
 Taylor.
             Conditions 22-28 also take account of Lord Justice Taylor's
 recommendations. The capacity levels have also been amended. Members
 will appreciate that this is one of the key issues considered.
         SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
                There is already in force a Safety Certificate in respect of
         Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. This certificate was issued by South
         Yorkshire County Council. A notice of amendment of the Safety Certificate
         has therefore been served. The Notice of Amendment was served as a matter
         of urgency to give the Club the aaxlraua available time tocomply with its
         requirements. This was served upon the Club on 11th A»gri»l||pl989. The
         first football, natch is to take place at Sheffield’Wednesday' Club on 19th
         August, 1989. The amendments and additions reflect the recdnsBendations of
         Lord Justice Taylor which he required to be implemented before:the
         commencement of the new football season. A copy of the notice of
         amendment is attached at Appendix C. The amendments relate to first-aid
         provisions and capacities at the ground. The additional- conditions
         incorporate the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor;                 „s.
                 Members of the Advisory Group and representatives f«m^heffield i-
         Wednesday Football Club have<had lengthy discussions;abouttthe -use of the
         north west terrace at the Sports Ground, ^ e terrace is fdivided_into an
         upper and lower area.' It is considered that i t l ^ ^ a w o n a b l ^ s a f e to use -
         the upper/area but .no use -should T»e made of the flower :nrea..at.the moment.
         One option would be      pTOhibit^thefiJse of the aatire ;W r t h rW s t terrace.
         However, the upper portion is considered to be ’  reasbnaibly ;*afe and the
         police have indicated that for operational purposes they-'would :like to 'be
         able to utilise a part of the upper portion of the terrace i\ jThe                *;
         suggestion 1ms been aade 1>y them as a result of the interim- '                ,v
         recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor since it is suggested in the
          interim report that the police should have contingency plans to deal with
          the problem of large numbers of ticketless fans arriving at football
         grounds. If use is made of that portion of the ground, fans:will gain
         access by turnstiles servicing only that area and the perimeter gate at
          the back of tie area will remain open during the match.- There is no
          access to the pitch area from the portion of the stand which is proposed
         to be in use.                                  ..
                 The amended Safety Certificate envisages that use will be made of
          both the upper and lower areas of the north west terrace. It is therefore
          n ecessary t0 iasse & further notice of amendment either specifying that ao
          use of the west terrace should be made or amending the capacity and
          Condition 10 to reflect the fact that only the upper area should be used.
                 A copy of -the Sheffield Wednesday General Safety Certificate is to
          be found at Appendix -5.

          GENERAL I5SBES
               The whole issue of Safety of Sports Grounds will be the subject of a
         detailed report to the Policy Committee at its meeting in September,
         1989,

         RECOMMENDATIC85S
               The Panel Is recommended!—

          1.       To confirm the action of the Chief Executive in issuing an interim
                  Safety Certificate to Sheffield United Football Club.

          2.       To confirm the action of the Chief Executive in amending the current
                  certificate for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

             3.   To authorise the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
                  to issue a further notice of amendment in respect of the certificate
                  issued to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (as amended) as
                  follows:-


MS1ABR/PGT
(i)     Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further
        amended to state that the maximum capacity for the upper area
        of the north west terrace shall be 2,300.

(ii)    Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further
        amended to specify that the ma.ximum total capacity for the
        Sports Ground shall be 43,724.

(iii)   For the sake of clarity, additional Condition 10 of the
        amended Certificate shall be amended to reflect the fact that
        only the upper part of the terracing of the north west
        terrace shall be used.



        August, 1989                     MARK WEBSTER           v,'
                                         Acting Head of Administration and
                                         Legal Department,?T6wn Hall,
                                     '   SHEFFIELD 'SI 2HH:;kVf: .


        •>to                                           a^^Spiws:
                            ,               .   . . . . . .



                            .
                   ; =          "v                                  ■   :       -

                            -■                                ■ ■ ■ ■ . . -f'-vi .

MSLABR/PST
                               CHAPTER 24 - THE RECOMMENDATIONS

  315. The recommendations which follow are the minimum necessary to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at ShefTieid and other
information I have received. They complement the recommendations which Mr Justice Poppicweil set out
after his inquiry at Bradford.                                                             ,
   316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season Starts-Therest should be
started forthwith and completed as soon as possible.                                   ■ ssfcW,

Maximum Capacities for Terraces                                                              ■            '
       1.    Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contaiaed. the Safety Certificate
     should specify the maximum number o f spectators to be admitted to-each such pen o r are*.

     A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained’' notwithstanding that it has agateorgates affording access to
     another peri or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shot.           .                             ;■

*■    2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordancew itiiC hapter! 6 o fth e Green
     Guide (“the Green Guide figure”) subject to the following qualifications:-                   f t '® :

     (a) in arriving at “th e Green Guide figure’Yproper and realistic allowance m ast bem ade for alltactora

         in paragraphs 221 and 222 of th eG teen G a iie                        ~ ^

     (b) after assessing “the Green Guide figure4*, a dednedon of 15% should be n a d e to improve the safety
         margin.

       3. Arrangements should b ea u ties-                                            .»

     (a) to limit the number of spectators enterinaeaeh seffnrontained pen or arealo the maximum capacity
         figure assessed in accordance with Recommendaaan'2 above either electrtnricaily, mechanically, by a
         ticketing arrangement, by cotmtn&or otturmacitaafi                           <-              •

     (b) to dose off further access to sudi.pen or area whenits maximum capacity is about to be reached.


Filling and Monitoring Terraces
 ★     4. There should be a written agreement between th e dub and the police setting out their respective
     responsibilities for crowd safety and control and inrarricniar for the filling of each self-contained pen or
     other terraced area and the monitoriqg of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
     variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

 *     5. At each match, there should be on thejKrim etertrack.lor each self-contained pen or other terraced
     area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) ora§ police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
     sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area far posslble overcrowding or distress throughout the
     period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so^appointed should be in addltion'to any other steward
     or police presence. He should have ready access to th^police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
     below, and by radio to the control i


 Fences and Gates
        6. All police officers and stewards with duties In relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
      duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fuilv,brjefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
      crowd densities, to the recognition of signs o f distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
                                                                     i0 enable stewards and officers to recognise
      uuierem cruwa densities.

 *      7. Ail gates in radial or perimeter fences ofj>ens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
      different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “Emergency Exit".



                                                           57
*        8. Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open durinx the period
        when spectators are on the terrace.

★         9. There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
        a police officer authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowding.
        The officer so authorised in respect of each gate shouid be identified for each m atch and known to be so by ail
        stewards and police officers in that vicinity. H e should be able to make radio contact with the control room
        either himself or via an officer close at hand.                                 ,

★        10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment shouid be provided by the club at each gramad where there
        are perimeter fences to permit the immediate rem ovalof enough fencing to rekase.nanrincBof spectator* ff
        necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be-used -by peace, the foe
        brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it shouid be trained to do so. Whether to use stsiMald&eadecisiaMCa
        nominated senior police officer at the ground.
                                                                                        ..   ■J-feV; ;• ' «•
Crush Barriers                                    :: -     ■*             *'■ ■                                ■■ ’        : '
           11.. All crush barriers shouid be visually inspected immediately for signs r f i « i w i w i.A y t o r iw ft—d
        to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repairedor replaced. ?

          12.     The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be rev iw td immeSaody te ensure d a t it
        complies with the criteria-contained in Chapter 9 o f the Green Guides If it d o esg « ..i1 « assessment oftfce
        maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, ini                           £r.y.
        reflect the fact.                                                   ■                      ^
                                                                                  ill                                 ::
    Safety Certificates
          13.     There shouid be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by th ese^ seeB S felocalasthw m .
        which shouid consult the ciub in respect of which the Certificate is issaed. dwgwSne.’tfce’lire service.the
        ambulance service and the building authority. Such a review should indude aw                     stadium.Ita
        object shouid be to ensure that the operative conditions o f the Certificate are im plied-w tth and to add or
        substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a m t & r v f urgency MSuimni. ^>e findings and
        recommendations in this report.

          14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium desiginin'if wirgrrn le 1975 ActTar
         which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued shouid proceed forthwith to rem edy th e stm anoa.

           15. Every' Safety Certificate shouid be reviewed by the local authority a tlea si w e e .annually and each
         Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


            16. Each local authorin’ should review its arrangements for issuing. nwniwraaf. ea&rrutg. reviewas.
         amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists « ris provided an
         accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local autiiwiry are regularly aad
         effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
         with the local authority's rules.

            17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an AdvisoryGroup consisting,
         of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire ana ambulance services, of
         the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters’ ciub. The Advisory Group's terras of
         reference shouid encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and shouid reqiiire reotiarvisits to the
         ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should Slave a chairmanfrom th e local authorm.
         and an effective procedure. Its resolutions shouid be recorded and it should '"be required to-produce regular
         written reports for consideration by the local authorin'.


    Duties of each Football Club                                                                   -
    *      18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured.thereafter, regular
         inspections shouid be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
         anticipated.                                                                         ,
        19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it shouid be such
      as to ensure, that ail the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
      turnstiles within one hour, if that cannot be done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced
      accordingly.

        20. Turnstiles shouid be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be
      reached and arrangements shouid be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
      operators for this purpose.

        21. Closed circuit television shouid be so installed as to enable crowd densities outsidethe pound, within
      concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match..

        22. AH signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
      reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
      and clear and shouid be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their.appropriate viewing


        23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with
      the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket sa b s
      should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground. .        ,*««(}

★      24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time shoald be reviewed
      by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for
      admitting spectators to the ground.                                                                   • :

        25. Each ciub should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as to the provision o f pre-aMdi
      entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


Police Planning
★       26. The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or a n t
      shouid nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football dub and local aath —ily
      concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

★       27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing o f aU
      officers on duty there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and. itaoy
      is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

★       28. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium s hould enable the police to copewith
       any foreseeable pattern in the arrival ofspectators at a match and in their departure. It shouid provide for
     , sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside thegromd.

★       29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
       Crowd safety shouid be the paramoantconsideration in dedding whether to exercise it.

          30. There shouid be available in the police control room the results of all dosed drcuit television
       monitoring outside and inside thegroundaad the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
       at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
       in the interpretation and use of these data.


    Communications
         31. There should be sufficient operators in the policecontroi room to enable ail radio transmissions to be
       rproivoH           i>wj           TH* rviin svsfem «houid be such as to give operators in the control room
                                                                          •
       used, where necessary, to prevent owsraw ding of the airwaves. Consideration shouid be given to
       sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.
      32. To complement radio communications. there shouid be a completely separate system of land lines
    with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

      33. Within the control room, there shouid be a public address system to commuaicate with individual
    areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
    announcements should be preceded by a lood signal to ratrfr the attention of tH*rmnwi       higli level of
    noise in the grouad. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on every pragRueune said for every
    match.

      34. Use shouid be mmde where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
    Consideration shouid aiso be given to the use by police officers of a simple code ofhantisigm risto indicate to
    the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


Co-ordination of Emeretscv Services
★      35. The police, fire aadambalarice services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
    liaison concerning crowasafety at each s a i a m .                                  ^    v

★     36. Before each m ash ar a desigaa& i stadium, the police should ensurethat tb e ik e service and
    ambulance service ore <p»*n foil d etails iM st t i e event, including its venue.itstxaung, theaam ber of
    spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit.-and any anticipated orjputentiaidiflicuities
    concerning the control or movement o f d xt crowd. Such details should be,readily available in the control
    rooms of each of theem esencv services.                                                            -

★     37. Contingency p b as for the airivai ar each designated stadium ^of emergency *efaides irata ail three
    services shouid be reviewed. They shnwhi iariad e routes      .access, rendezvouspomts. aad accessibility
    within the ground itselL                                                              -. .

★     38. Police officers posted ar the entrances to th e ground should bebriefed as to the contingeacy plans for
    the arrival of emergency services and shoeidlbe inibnned wbea such services are              to where and why
    they are required.
                                                                     ■   ■ w : f? ■         . "j   '* .■•■•iT'   '

                                                                  r'"i    i-          -I-               —   < V -
First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambnlaaees
★     39. There should be at each stadium at each match atieusttme trained first aider per 1.000spectators. The
    ciub shouid have the responsibility for seeming such attendance.

      40. There should be ar each stadium oueorm ove first aidroom s-The number of such rooms and the
    equipment to be maintained within them saooid b e specified by the local authority after taking professional
    medical advice and shouid be made a r e q a n s e iiia f any,Safety CerflScaBe.

★     41. The club shouid employ a medical pracsdoaer toltepresent at each match and available to deal with
    any medical exigency at the ground. H e should b e m in ed and competent in advanced first aid. H e shouid be
    present at the ground at least an hour before luck-off and shouidremain until half an hour after the end of the
    match. His whereabouts should be known m those in the police comnri room and he should be immediately
    contactable.

★     42. At least one fully equipped arabaiaace from the appropriate ambulance authorin' shouid be in
    attendance at all matches with an expected crowd o f5.0004>rmeie.

      43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance Tor matches 'wherelarger crowds are expected should
    be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
    requirement of the Safety Certificate.                .      "t
City of Sheffield         Metropolitan District



Ourrafaranca                                             Chw#-Ex«eutiv«
                     FW/DMB
                                                         Ian L PoOmora
Your rafaranea       DC/ABP                              Town Matt.
                                                         ShaffiaM SI2HH
Oat*      k          11   th A u g u s t, 1989           Tetepnona 73*000



       Sheffield United Football Club Pic,
       Bzamall Lane,
       SHEFFIELD.
       S2 4FU
                                                               • *r'.
                                                                ••V         *■
                                                               '--v          '
       Dear Sirs,

       Re: Safety of Sports Grounds - Hillsborough Tnrm-iW

       The City Council has decided that in view of the reconwradations of Xord
       Justice Taylor pursuant to the Inquiry into the Hillsborough 'Disaster', irt’t*
       appropriate for an interim Safety Certificate to be issued to ^effiaeS.
       United Football Club.                                                     "■

       I, therefore, enclose for your attention, a copy of t3» Saxetry Cer'CiS.sauGe
       which has been issued. You will note that it contains "bosxc saSeagr
       provisions and also incorporates the recommendations of:,Xnrd Justice Tkyloi"
       which he considered should be implemented immediately-

        The Council is in the process of reviewing the conditions which shouldiss
        attached to the Safety Certificate and it is likely that this will
        concluded in the near future and you will be issued with a new final ^aie'ty
        Certificate.

        I should also say that in the intervening period, it is lilcely that
        amendments will be made to the Certificate you have been issued with todaf
        and you should, therefore, regard the Certificate as temporary-

        Please acknowledge receipt of the Certificate.

        Yours faithfully,




        Chief Executive




        H36AAR/JJJ
                           SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


                     SRFETT OF SPORTS G3CUNDS ACT, 1975
                         CTUERAL SAFETY CEKTIFICMg


Address of premises for which           Sheffield United Sports Ground,
this Certificate is issued              Bramall Lane, Sheffield

Occupier of the premises                Sheffield Unitad Baotfoall Club
and Holder of this Certificate          Liisitad

Use of the premises in respect          Football batches- ,; *
of which this Certificate is issued     Religious Ca w entiogs.
                                                              .


1.     This Certificate is issued ly Sheffield City Council In respect of
       the prem ises described above/ being a Sports ISmund designated by
       Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds :Ast, 1975 as a
       ground requiring a Safety Certificate.              ^ l=-

2.     The terms and conditions set out in the Schedules attached hereto are
       hereby imooasd*

3      The terms and conditions "herefcy imposed are those which the Sheffield
       City Council consider necessary or expedient to secure reasonable
       safety at the Sports ISround when it is in use far an activity in
       respect of vdnch -t±as'"Csstificate is issued.

4.     The words used in tMs. Certificate and the Schedules attached hereto
       have the meaning assigned to them by Schedule 1 to this Certificate
       and Section 17 of 'tisfrScc-

5.     The Schedules and'Plan attached "hereto all fonn part of this
       Certificate.

       This Certificate ccnmences on the    12th       day of   August      One
       thousand nine hundred and -eighty nine for an indefinite period.




       Data                              Signed

                          'f                      Chief Executive on behalf
                                                  of and duly authorised by
                                                  the Sheffield City Council.
                             SCHEDULE   1

                           SHEFFIELD CITY CCUNCIL


Interpretation of General Safety Certificates' issued by the Council

Word/Phrase              Meaning

T5se Act                 The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 including any
      «»                 modification or re-enactment thereof and any
                         subordinate legislation made thereunder.

Authorised Officer       Any police officer, any officer of the South
                         Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority, or any
                         officer of the Sheffield City Council who is
                         authorised in writing.

The Certificate          Hie written General Safety Certificate issued by
                         the Council under the Act to the Holder of which
                         this interpretation document forms part.

The Council              The Sheffield City Council.

The                      The current edition of the "Guide to Safety at
                         Sports Grounds" published by HM Government or any
                         succeeding code or guidance produced by HM
                         Government.

The Haffiiar .V          The person to whan the general safety certificate
                         has been issued.

Specified Activity       Any sporting event (including football matches) and
                         airy any religious event and any public
                         entertainment for which a licence issued by the
                         Council is in force.

Spectator                Has the meaning assigned to it by the Act.

The ^orts Ground         Sheffield United Sports Ground.
                                        SCHEDULE 2

                   Safety of Scorts- Grounds Certificate Conditions

 General Safety


1.The Holder shall appoint in writing at least one Safety Offlea: who has fall
  authority to (a) take responsibility for safety at the ground and (b)
  implement and supervise safety measures. A Safety Officer shall (a) be in
  charge of the Sports Ground and the Holders Employees and (b) be in
  attendance at the Sports Ground and in direct personal caimunication with a.
  central control point during a specified activity.


2.The Holder (and the- Safety Officer(s)) shall take all necessary.precautions
  for the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to the Sports Ground and,
  shall ensure that all responsible persons (as defined in Section 12(2) of
  the Act) are completely familiar with their duties under that Act and thisi
  certificate.                                                        ...


3.Where for reasons of safety the Council gives notice to the Holder that tte
  Sports Ground or.any section or sections of it roust not be used for the
  accommodation of spectators the Holder shall not permit any areas so
  indicated to be used.                                                     f:


4.The Holder shall provide and maintain such signs or notices of such type, ,
  size and design as the Council may from time to time require for reasons aa£!
  public safety. The Holder shall ensure that the signs or notices so      ■
  required are clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all taaes^jV..


5.The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no materials t i b a f c j i . ’
  are capable of being used as missiles are accessible to spectators.              ’,
                                                                                     •   ,'t   :'/


                                                                            -4 :
6.Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act the Holder skall
  not cause or pezmit the Sports Ground or any of its installations to be     I;
  altered (which term shall exclude minor remedial works which do not in any­
  way affect the safety of the Sports Ground) in any manner whatsoever witiactit
  the prior written consent of the Council. In addition, no temporary        .i;
  structure shall be installed without the prior written consent of the     - .
  Council. The Holder shall supply the Council with copies of such plans, .
  specifications and calculations as the Council may reasonably require to
  enable any application for such consent to be considered and shall carpigr .1
  with any conditions attached to that consent.                               5-


7. (a) The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Sports Ground to the :
  ?*fc.isfaction of the Council a suitably equipped first aid ream and shall' >t
  a x i . i u x actenuance of such number of qualified first aid attendants'as} ;'
  the Council may require but in any event there shall be in attendance at ;-i'.^
  least one first aid attendant for every 1,000 spectators. The attendants
  duties shall only relate to the administering of first aid.

  (b)   The first aid rccxn shall be capable of being lit by both the general
  lighting anc the emergency lighting and shall be easily identified by meats
  of signs.                                                      .     "
        (c) The Holder shall employ at least one medical practitioner (in addition
      ■ to any medical practitioner anployed to treat players) to be present at each
        Specified Activity and available to deal with any medical exigency at the
        Sports Ground. He/she shall be trained, and competent in advanced first aid.
        He/she shall be present at the Sports Ground at least one hour before kick .
        off and must remain until half an hcur after the end of the Specified
        Activity. The medical practitioner must be immediately contactable and
        his/her whereabouts kncwn to the Police Control Poem.

       (d) The Holder shall arrange with South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
       Service for the attendance of at least one fully equipped ambulance at a
       Specified Activity where 5,000 or mere spectators are expected to attend.

 8. All press personnel shall be capable of irrmediate identification by means of
    distinctive•dress.
                                                            .v    1    -




      9.In the event of a spectator being injured in the Sports Ground, the Holder
        shall (within 72 hours of the injury occuring) submit to the Council a full
        written report on the circumstances of the injury. The Holder-'shall also
        supply such additional infonnation as the Council may require.


10.    The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every specified activity of a
       Chief Safety Steward and such number o f Safety Stewards as are specified in
       Schedule 3.


11.     The Holder shall ensure that the Safety Stewards are:-
        (a) fit and capable to carry out their duties;

       '(b) properly trained and.instructed;

        (c) readily identifiable by dress;

        (*d) provided with written instructions as to their tasks/duties.

        (e) aged between 18 and 55 years unless in the circumstances of a particular
        case the Council' permit an older or younger person to be employed.

12.     The written instructions given to stewards must include the following tasks
        and duties. Stewards must:

        la.) Under the direction of the Safety Officer or the Chief Steward prevent
        overcrowding by ensuring the crowd limits in various parts of the Sports
        Ground are complied with.

        (b) Prevent spectators, as far as possible, fran climbing fences and other
        structures (e.g. floodlight pylons), and frcm standing on seats. Where by
        virtue of the seals of the incident stewards are unable to prevent this,
        they must immediately report the matter to the nearest Authorised Officer or
        i.0    Clu.e£ St-awarc cr th-e iafaty Officer.

        (c) Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear.

        (d) Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence among spectators
        which may affect spectator safety, reporting their findings to the Chief
        Steward cr the Safety Officer.
       (e) Knew the location of and be able to operate effectively the
       fire-fighting equipment at the Scorts Ground.

       (f) Know the location of the first aid roan and any first aid equipment kept
       elsewhere.

       (g) Be fully conversant with any methods or signals used to alert staff that
       an emergency has arisen.

        (h) Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and suspect packages,
      ' reporting such findings innediately to the nearest Authorised Officer or the
        Chief Steward ar the Safety Officer.

       (!) Canply   promptly wife any instruction given in an emergency by an
       Authorised   Officer, the Chief Steward or the Safety Officer-
       (j) Remain   at their allocated locations as instructed unless authorised or
       instructed   to do otherwise by an Authorised Officer, the Chief Steward or
       the Safety   Officer.     #

       {k) Report to the Safety. Officer any damage or defect which is likely to
       pose a threat to spectator safety eg. a damaged crush barrier.

       (1) -Open the exit doors/gates and secure them in the open position on the
       initiation of the -snergency procedure or when instructed to do so by the
       Safety Officer, the Chief Steward or an Authorised Officer.


13. Tralnigg--esegcisss organised by the Safety Officer relating to the duties of
    stewards snail be held at least once every three months. A written record
    of the exercises shall be kept.

14. ;£21 -exit “dears and gates for use by spectators in both ordinary evacuation
     anS emergency evacuation situations shall be manned by Stewards in
     accordance with schedule 4. The other duties detailed in schedule 4 shall
   . be carried out by stewards .


15.    Hie holder shall mate arrangements with the Chief Constable of the South
       TSorkshire "Police for the provision of special police services on the
       occasion of a specified event at the Sports Ground for the purposes of
       naintaining lawful and orderly behaviour amongst spectators, and the
       services shall be determined by the Chief Constable and he and his officers
        shall be .allowed full access to all parts of the Sports Ground.


16.    The.holder shall notify in writing the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
       "Bailee at least 28 days before any specified activity takes place.


17.    The Council reserves the right to require any specified activity to be open-
       only to spectators having purchased tickets in advance of the specified
       activity and to specify the date and time of catmencement of the specified
       activity.

       Spectator Areas

18.    The Holder shall ensure that all doers, gates and turnstiles throughout- the
       Sports Ground are maintained in cocd working order at all '-times.. Particular
      attention shall be paid to doors, gates and turnstiles in spectator ingress
      and egress routes and also to pitch perimeter gates. The Holder shall not
      cause or permit any exit doors or gates to be altered in type, design or
      netted of operation without the prior consent of the Council in writing.


19.   The means of ingress and egress and the gangways in the Sports Ground shall
      at all times be kept unobstructed .


20.   All floor surfaces and steps throughout the Sports Ground which are
      available for use by spectators shall have even and non-slip surfaces and
      shall be kept unobstructed unrestricted and free Iran trip hazards.
      Adequate drainage shall also be provided -where iscesssry. ;ii ..'


21.   The entrances to and exits from the Sports G round and the means of access to
      those entrances and exits shall be as specified in the plan which forms part
      of this certificate.


22.   The Holder shall provideand maintain suitable arei sufficient cutting
      equipment to enable perimeter fencing to be renowed quickly if necessary in
      the event of an emergency. ‘The ’Holder shall snsiire that stewards {a) are
      properly trained in the use of this cutting equoxment and (b) use the
      equipment when directed to do so b y the South Yorkshire Police-


23 . The Holder shall inspect earn rat-rtgtrn** and measure its potential rate of
     flow and shall ensure thar-sadn .turnstile is and remains capable of
     admitting spectators at the anticipated rate and shall provide a report to
     the Council of the results :d£ such inspection by 15th August, 1939.

24.   The Haider shall enter into a written agreement with the Chief Constable of
      the South Yorkshire Police setting out the respective responsibilities of
      the Club and the Police" for crcwd safety and control. The agreement shall
      specify responsibilities fear     filling of all terraced areas of the Sports
      Ground and the monitoring ox spectators in sudh areas to avoid overcrowding.
      A copy of the agreement shall be supplied to the Council by 16th August,
      1989. Any variation of the agreement shall be agreed in writing in advance
      and the Council notified of the'variation.


25.   All gates in radial or periinet^r fencing shall be painted in a different-
      colour from the rest of the fencs* and marked ‘"energency exit".


26.   All gates giving access frasi the.'terraces to the pitch shall be kept fully
      open during, a Specified Activity/ •



      signs of corrosion. Any'barrier^found to^be affected by a significant
      degree of corrosion shall be repaired cr replaced by 16th August, 1S89.

      (b) The Holder shall iumadiately review the layout of barriers in each
      terraced area to ensure that it carplies with the criteria contained in
      Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.
               (c) The Holder shall notify the Council in writing of the results of the
               inspection and review carried out pursuant to conditions 27(a) and (b) by
               16th August, 1389.


        28.    The Holder shall irrmediately review the signposting for spectators both
               inside and outside the Ground and any information printed on tickets. The
               Holder shall notify the Council of the results of this review and of its
j   ;          proposals in this regard by 15th August, 1989.

        29.    Vehicles shall not be admitted to the Sports Ground except as authorised by
               the Council and specified cn the. plan.


               Fire Safety                                               n^r.z.^z.7

        30.     The Holder shall jjrovide and maintain a public address system which shall be
        ._      audible in all parts of the Sports Ground to the satisfaction of the
               "Council.


        31.    "The Holder shall institute and maintain a fire warning system to the       •
               satisfaction pf the Council-


        32 . ’Hie Holder shall provide and maintain at least such fire fighting equipment
              in such locations as the Council may frcm time to time specify.


        33. "Except with the consent of the Council in writing the Holder shall not
            ^pennit the storage in the Sports Ground of any flaninable, explosive, toxic
            or corrosive liquid or compressed substance -{except fire extinguishing and
            drinks- dispensing apparatus). The Holder shall comply with any conditions
            •attached to such a consent.


        34. "Except with the prior written consent of the Council the Holder shall at all
            times maintain the Sports Ground in a clean condition and shall not permit
            any accumulations of rubbish or any other materials whether combustible or
            not*


               lighting and Electrical Installations

        .35.    The Holder shall ensure that all parts pf the Sports Ground to which
               ,spectators are admitted are illuminated to a sufficient standard to enable
                such persons ,to enter or leave the Sports Ground safely.


        36.     The Holder shall provide to the satisfaction of the Council a system of
                emergency lighting which-shall, in the event of a failure of the general
                lighting be sufficient to enable spectators to leave the stadium safely.



                The emergency lighting shall (a ) be powered by a source independent of the
                mains electricity supply and (b) cane into operation -irrmediateiy on the
                failure of the mains lighting and (c) remain in operation for at least three
                consecutive hours when activated.
37.   The electrical Installation for the Sports Ground shall be constructed and
      maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition. 'No alteration which
      significantly affects the installation shall take place without the prior
      written consent of the Council.


38.   Throughout each specified activity the electrical installation shall be
      supervised by a canpetent electrician who shall investigate, rectify (if
      possible) and report to Safety Officer any defects which arise in the
      installation.


      Capacity

39.   The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part of the
      stadium at any one time shall not exceed the number specified in schedule 5.


      Inspections, Tests and ‘Records

40.   Where any condition in this certificate requires written records to be kept
      such records shall be jproduced on denend to any authorised officer.


41.   The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
      safety, require the "Bolder to carry out such works and/or inspections as may
      be specified in the--notice. The Bolder shall comply with any requiranent or
      conditions specified In that notice.


42.   If a significant defect is suspected or discovered pursuant to the normal
      use of the Sports Ground car any inspection or test carried out under the
      terns of this certificate the Bolder shall immediately notify the Council
      and take steps to correct the defect.


43.   The Holder shall arrange xor the tests and inspections listed in Schedule K,
      to be carried out and lor .records to be kept or reports to be supplied to
      the Council in accordance with the terms of the schedule. Where reports are
      required to be supplied to the Council, they shall be supplied as soon as
      possible on completion of the inspections/tests.


44.   Without prejudice to Section S of the Set or any regulations made thereunder
      the Holder shall maintain written records showingr-

      (a) the number of spectators admitted to each part of the Sports Ground for
      each specified activity;

       (b) the names and addresses of the stewards arrlcyed bv the holder;

      (c) the- nanes-of the-stewards cn duty at each specified activity and details
      of their duties;

       (d) details of the training exercises organised by the Holder for stewards
       in accordance with Condition 13 - the record shall show which stewards
       attended each exercise and the content of those exercises.. ■
Guidance to "Holders

The Council may fran tics to time issue written guidance to holders on
safety matters. The halcar must pay due regard to any such guidance.




                 ■


                 - > r :'



                 i:
                     a-
                  <r-
                 ■ lv

                     Sy

           ■    '
                        SCHEDULE 3 - (XMDITICN NO. 10

The number of Safety Stewards on duty at each specified activity shall not
be less than S3.

                        SCHEDULE 4 - CCNDITiaSf NO. 14

The Safety Stewards carry out the duties set out belcw:-

No. of Stewards          Duties
                         Manning-of Final Exit Gates

     1                   :'A' (Shoreham Street)

    11                   'B' to 'L: (John Street)

     2                   'M' and 'N' (Bramall Lane)

     2                   'O' (Brartall Lane)

     2                   'R' and 'S' (South Stand)

                         Control and Directions of Spectators. :

     6                   Bramall Lane Stand

     3                   Bramall lane Terrace

     9                   John Street Stand

     2                   John Street Terrace (Timber Section)

     2                   John Street Terrace (Concrete Section!

     4      .            Spion Kop Main Area

     1                   Spion Kop Disabled/Childrens Area

     9                   South Stand

                         Patrolling the Scorts Ground and Dealing- with
                         Emergencies ■etc.

     2                   John Street Stand

      1                  Bramall Lane Stand

      1                  South Stand

                          Manning Internal.'Gates

      <                   "-                      t-.r:    i John Street" ‘
                          ‘ierrace

      4                  Gates between John Street Timber Stand and Terrace
                          (Nos.2-5)                     ■ '

      1                  Gate between the two parts of. the ‘
                                                            Jchri Street
                          Timber Stand-and Terrace-(No.9)        •.
                       SCHEDULE 5 - CCNDITICN NO.39


The number of spectators admitted to a specified activity shall not exceed
37,196.        ‘ '

The number of spectators admitted to each of the sports ground, listed
below, shall not exceed the maximum numbers shown.

Area                    Maximum No. of Spectators

South-Stand (Seats)                7,348

Bramall Lane
    Seats                         2,358                 - ...
  ' Terrace                       5,660

John Street
   Timber Section Seats           1,200
   Concrete Section Seats         1,490
   Bramall Lane End               1,340
   Kop End                        2,050

Spion Kop
   Southern End                   3,700
   Main Kop Area                  10,850

                                  37,196




HB7AAB/JS
Our Ref:         GHM/J3/D34                                            j M r. 1 _    ?^rr~^-n   P P °-

16th August 1989                                                       | .r   J ^6    AUG 1989 |     pijn
                                                                                                4-
M r . I.L. Podmore,                                                    ;
                                                                       •
                                                                       ----- j H.E.U. <Rr.C.U.j          /
Chief Executive,                                                       L -'-p- I      I       iH        /''I
City of Sheffield,
Town Hall,
Sheffield.
SI 2HH                                                                            viv>-
                                                                              .   —
                                                                                  v
Dear Sir,                                                                             *

Re:         Safety Certificate - Hillsborough

I am in receipt of your letter dated 11th August 1989.

With regard to the iters in Appendix 2 where a responsehas                    been reguested;

No. 3)        A copy of a report fraa Mayor Turnstiles is enclosed. 'A replacement
              for Turnstile 50 which is situated at PenistoneRoad is on order-

No. 4) A copy of the Agreement is enclosed.

No. 7) A copy of the necessary letter fran Dr. Eastwood is enclosed,.

No. 8) Amendments to the signposting of the ground and the printing of the
        tickets have.been undertaken to"the satisfaction of the South
        Yorkshire Police and Fire Service.

I would point out the amended ground capacity figures are, in fact, incorrect.
The area of the Lower North West Terrace is in fact Pen 6, part of the West
Terrace which is excluded from use (Appendix 2 No. 10) The capacity for the
North West Terrace should therefore be 2,300.

Finally, I would refer to the penultimate paragraph of myletter dated 28th July
1989 to your Administration and Legal ‘Department.* Last week* the Working Party
approved the Police request that access to the North Stand should be via
Penistone Road using turnstiles 77—86. Our concern over this rolicv was
confirmed in the findings of the interim Report (Para 290). l”would therefore
confirm my request nor a written ruling on this matter crior to Saturday's ~.acch.

Yours faithfuHv.                                                              .



tTTH. MackrelT

-WiSDoro-jsrv Shettieic So :SW . Te'ecncne- <07-12! 343122
"etecrarrs. W ecnesaav Snetveid6. Teisx N o.:—-7703 WED.NES
“ ax Nc 0 7 4 2 337145 S s c : s te r e c in £ n a :a n a No. 6247=

C.ta;rman     MeGe«. Secretary G r* Macxre*< 5C.CA Manawr ^ At*r*sor
                           INSPECTIONS AND TESTS REQUIRED


                                  INCIDENCE        WRITTEN    WRITTEN REPORT
GENERAL
                                                   RECORD     REQUIRED TO SE
REQUIREMENT
                                                   REQUIRED   SUPPLIED TO
                                                              COUNCIL



                                  At least            No.     .Yes.
A competent person shall
inspect the structures which      once every
form part of the Sports           12 months.
Ground.            >.


A competent person shall          Before and          Yes.
carry out a general visual        after each
inspection of the Sports          specified
Ground to ensure compliance       activity.
with the relevant Safety
Certificate Conditions.


                                   At least                    Yes.
A comnecenc person shall
examine the electrical             once every
installation of the Sports         12 months.
Ground.


                                   At least                     Yes-
 A competent person shall
 test and inspect all fire         once every
 appliances (including             12 months.
 extinguishers, hydrants
 and water supplies)


                                   At least                     Yes.
 The emergency lighting and
 fire warning (including           once every
 the Public Address) systems       12 months.
 shall be tested/inspected
 by a competent person.


  The esersancy lighting            Not less           Yes.

  competent person.                 hours not more
                                    than six hours
                                    prior to a
                                    specified
                                    activity taking
                                    place
                                      -2-


GENERAL                        INCIDENCE         VRI7TSN ■      WRITTEN REPORT
&EQUHB1ENT                                       2EC3RD         REQUIRED TO BE
                                                 REQUIRED       SUPPLIES TO
                                                                COUNCIL



All the fire warning
detection public address
                               Noc less than -
                               three hours nor
                                                 Yes.                             J
and other communication        more chan six
systems shall be tested        hours prior to
by a competent person.         a specified
                               activity
                               caking place.


All lighting systems           Noc more          T oe.
(excluding the emergency       chan c»ency
lighting) shall be tested      foar hours
b£ a competent person.         prior to a
                               specified
                               acri-5±xy
                               Caking place.


All doors, gates and           NoC more          ■Ties-...
turnstiles throughout the      chan eaggry
SCadium shall be tested        four actors
by a competent person.         .priorso  a.
                                specified
                               actia±£y
                                Caking place.



Z5Z of the crush barriers      25Z in each                      Yes.- report to
and handrails in the Stadium   period of 12                     include details
shall be tested by a           months- Once                     and results.
competent person in            a barrier err
accordance with the Guide.     handrail is
The Council shall be           tesced ic shall
nocified in advance of the     noc "be tesced
da tes of tes ting.            again ;{unless
                               specifically
                               required by the
                               Council) within
                                three and a half
                               years after firsr
                                casting* ,but shall.’''
                               be tesced again
                               within four and a'-.il :;
                               half years of thst >f
                                dace*




                                                    : ; P ' :
               1W*




                     i/>


      i



          CO




.-i
City of Sheffield          Metropolitan District                                               x.




Our rrf* n n e »                                                   Chief Executive
                         FW/DMB                                    lan L Podmw*

Your r«f«f«ne*           GHL/JB/D34/3630                           Town Hail.
                                                                   S heffield S1 2HH
Oat* '        k                                                    Teieoncne 7 3 4 0 0 0
                         11th August, 1989



          URGENT

          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Pic,
          Hillsborough,
          SHEFFIELD.
          S6 1FW                                                            FZ8ST CLASS POST


           Dear Sirs,

           Re: Safety of Sooxts Grounds - "Hillsborough

           I enclose, for your attention,, HSotice of Amendment of the Safety
           Certificate. "The amendments axe as enumerated in Appendix 1 and additional
           conditions are as enumerated ih; Appendix 2. The amendments and additions
           reflect the recotmaendadons ox.Lord Justice Taylor «hlch he required Co be
           implemented before the commencement of the new 7ootta.ll Season.

           You will, therefore* appreciate, Chat the issue of thisr.Uoci.ce should be
           regarded merely as an interim ■temporary measure. Tt is likely that further
           amendments will be required shortly. In any event, tie Council is in the
           process of drafting a completely new set of Condi cions. It is hoped that
           these will be in force in the.near future.
                                                   ''•I.?''-..                   -



           Please acknowledge receipt of this Ufotice-
                                                   •-v?.*••                          ’
           Yours faithfully,                       "IV




                                                   :Ml -":
            Chief' Executive                       :     ■'

            Enc.




                                                              W'
                                                   - a &!■?'■




            KB6AAQ/JJJ
                           SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


                     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1973

NOTICE OF AMENDMENT OF GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE ISSUED OS 21 ST DECEMBER
1979


TAKE .NOTICE THAT THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE ISSUED* TO SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED IN RESPECT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM, PESISTDSE
ROAD, SHEFFIELD SY SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ON 21 ST DECEMBER 1979 IS
HERE3Y AMENDED AND ADDED TO

The amendments are as specified in Appendix   1 and Appendix 2

THESE AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS ARE ISSUED BY THE SHEFFIELD CITY CGUWCI2. IS
RESPECT OF THE PREMISES DESCRIBED ABOVE BEING A SPORT GROUND DESI5SA.IE3 'B5T
ORDER UNDER SECTION 1 OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 AS A SP0S35
GROUND REQUIRING A SAFETY CERTIFICATE.                  ‘

The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which Sheffield ”Ci:gr
Council consider necessary or expedient is secure reasonable saiety at the
Sports Ground when it is in use for an activity in respect of vainii tSajs
Certificate is issued.


The amendments and additional conditions shall come into operation on TSm
12th day of August, 1989.



Dated the 11th day of August 1989.




                             Signed .

                                     Mr. Ian Podmoxa.,
                                     Chief Executive on behalf o£
                                     and duly authorised by The
                                     Sheffield City Council
APPENDIX 1 - AMENDMENTS


Current Provision                          Amended Provision

I.   Schedule L - Interpretation Provisions

(a) The* Act - means the Safety            (a) The Act - means the Safety of
of Sports Ground Act 1985                  Sports Grounds Act 1985 including any
                                           modification or re—enactment thereof
                                           and any subordinate legislation mass
                                           thereunder

(b) The County Council - means             (b) The Council or the County, Council -
the South Yorkshire County                 means the Sheffield City Council
Council

(c) The Stadium - means the                (c) The Stadium or Sports Ground - -means
Hillsborough Stadium,                      the Hillsborough Sports■Ground, 'Fenistoiie
Penistone Road, Sheffield                  Road, Sheffield          •r


     Schedule 2 - General Terms and Conditions

(a) Condition 8(2).                        (a) Condition 8C23.- 1
The Holder shall ensure that               The Holder shall essploy at least oas
during every specified activity            medical practitioner (in addition ta airy
a physician employed or retained           medical practitioner employed to tass*t
by the Holder is available to              the Holders employees}' to "be nresesr at
attend at the First Aid Room if            each Specified Activity and available tr
requested and that his                     deal with any medical exigency at *txm
whereabouts are known to those             Sports Ground. Se/sfce shall be trained
in the Police Central Control              and competent in advanced first as£L.
Room at the Sports Ground.                 He/she shall be present at the'Sports
                                           Ground at least one hour before Ttica: off
                                           and must remain until half an hoax after
                                           the end of the Specified Activity. T b e
                                           medical practitioner -must be immediatelj
                                           contactable and his/her whereabouts "knows
                                            to the Police Contirol Hota.

(b) Condition 8(3)                         (b) Condition 8(13)
The Holder shall arrange for               The Hoider shall arrange for
the attendance at every                    the attendance at every
Specified Activity of such                 Specified Activity/of such
numbers of qualified First Aid             numbers of qualified "First Aid
assistants as the County Council           assistants as the County Council
shall require but without                  shall require bat without
prejudice to the foregoing the             prejudice to the foregoing the'
Holder sna.ll e n s u r e that a : «very   H o l i e r s h a l l ens ur e that at every
specitiea ac.iviLy L.iere is ac            s p e c i f i e d a c t i v i t y there is at
least one First Aid assistant              least one First Aid assistant
for every 2,000 spectators.                for every 1 ,000 spectators-
      Current Provision                     Amended Provision

      3.   Schedule 3.

The number of spectators admitted to the    The number of spectators admitted to the
Sports Ground and to the various areas of   Sports Ground and to the various areas of
spectator accommodation within the Sports   spectator accommodation within the Sports
Ground shall not exceed the following       Ground shall not exceed the following
figures:: -                                 figures:-

Spion Kop                 16,850            Spion Kop                    IS 2X0
South Stand Upper          5,567            South Stand Upper             5,567
South Stand Lower          3,310            South Stand Lower             3,310
West Stand                 4,465            West Stand                    4,465
North West Terrace                          North West Terrace            1     }
North Stand               9,882             North Stand                   9,882

Total Crowd Capacity      50,174            Total Crowd Capacity         {di




                                             V
                                                 A'QkTH                        (i4S/4.a )
                                                 NOCnt    iv isr   uxin/u h-a^A*)           i>tO
                                          APPENDIX 2 - ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS


   1.    The Holder shall arrange wich Souch .Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
         for the attendance of at least one‘fully equipped1 ambulance at a Specified
         Activity where 5,000 or more spectators ara expected to attend.


   2.    The HoAder shall provide and maintain suitable and sufficient cutting
         equipment to enable perimeter fencing to be removed quickly if necessary in
         fee event of an emergency. ' The Holder shall ensure that stewards (a) are
         properly trained is the use of this cutting equipment and (b) use Che
         equipment when directed co do so by che Souch Yorkshire Police.


   3.    The 'Holder shall inspect each turnstile and measure its pocencial rate of
         flow and shall ensure that each turnstile is and remains capable of
         admitting spectators aC the anticipated rate and shall provide a r epor C to
         th)S Council of the results of such inspection by 16th August, 1989.

  ■A.    The Solder shall ea<Sar into a written agreement with the Chief Constable of
         titjs South Yorkshire--...Salice setting out the respective res.ponsibilities pf
         tl» Club and the PolXce for crowd safety and control. The agreement shall
         specify responsibilities for the filling of all terraced areas of che_ Sports
         ■Ground and the monlbsring of spectators in such areas to avoid overcrowding.
         & copy or the agreement shaill be supplied co the Council by 16th August,
                  Any variation of the agreement shall be agreed in writing in advance
         and the Council notified of the variation.

   5»       jga-gas in radial or perimeter fencing shall be painted in a different
         cfifbur from the rest ot the fence and marked "emergency exit".

   6.    I2L1 agates giving access from the terraces to the pitch shall be kept fully
         OfHBfi during a Specified Activity.

   7.        tThe. Holder shall immnediately visually inspect all crush barriers for
         s'igtts of corrosion. Any barrier found to be affected by a significant
         dejgree of corrosion shall be repaired or replaced by 16th August, 1989 .

          (bl The Holder shall immediately review the layout of barriers in each
          terraced area to ensure that it complies with the criteria contained in
         ’Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.

         _£c) The Holder shall notify the Council in writing of the results of the
          inspection and review carried out pursuant to conditions 27(a) and (b) by
          iWtn August, 1989.

    8.   '“The Holder shall immediately review the signposting for spectators both
          i n s i d e and o u t s i d e the Ground and any i n f o r a a c i o n p r i n t e d on t i c k e t s . The
          S o l d er s h a l l n o t i f y t h e Counci l of the. r e s u l t s of t h i s revi ew and of i t s
          p r o p o s a l s in t h i s r e g a r d by the 15th August, 1989.

    9.    The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
          safety, require the Holder co carry ouc such works and/or inspeccions as nay
         "be specified in Che nocice.  The Holder shall comply wich any requirement or
          conditions        specified       in chac nocice.

   10.       No s p e c t a t o r s h a l l be a l l o w e d a c c e s s to t h a t p a r t of tr.e S p o r t s Ground known
             as The West T e r r a c e .

R37 AAC/XS                                                        -4-
                                            South Yorkshire County Council




                        ■ SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                              GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

Address of p r e m ises for which                                 . The-Hillsbarough-Stadium,
this Certificate is issued                                          Penistone Road, Sheffield.

Occupier of the p rem ises                                         Sheffield Wednesday Football
                                                                   Club Ltd.
Holder of this C ertificate

U se of the p r e m ises in respect                                Football m atches.
of which this C ertificate is issued                               B eligious Conventions.

          This C ertificate is issued b y South Y orkshire County Council in respect of
          the .p rem ises described above, "being a S p o r t s stadium designated by Order
          under Section 1 of the Safe^r o f Sports Grounds A ct, 1975 as a stadium
          requiring a Safety CertfHesfit,

          The term s and conditions s e t out In the Schedules attached hereto     are hereby
          imposed*                     -■

 j.       The term s and conditionslM r& y Imposed are those which the South Yorkshire
          County Council consider n ecessa ry o r expedient to secu re reasonable safety at
          the ffrqrinrm when it is in u se'for an activity in resp ect of which this
          C ertificate is issu ed .

 4.       The words used in th is CesSJScate jand the Schedules attached hereto have
          the meaning assigned to them by Schedule 1 to this C ertificate and
          Section 27-of the Act.

 5.       The Schedules and P lan s attached ^hereto a ll form part of this C ertificate.

  6.      This C ertificate cp m m ^ ces,o n the twenty first day.of D ecem ber, One
                     nfoie hundred and seventy nine for an indefinite period.



                                                              Signed .
                                                                      Chief Executive, on behalf
                                                                      of and duly authorised by
                                                                                Yorkshire County
                                                                       Council.
                            SC H E D U L E I

                             Interpretation

The A ct                            means the Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975.
Authorised person                   means a person authorised in accordance with
                                    Section 11 of the Act.
The Building Authority              means the Sheffield City Council.
The Chief ConstaMe                  m eans the Chief Constable for the time being
                                    o f tile South Yorkshire P olice o r, a s the c a se
                                    m ay require, the P olice O fficer having charge
                                    o f the Stadium on the occasion o f a Specified
                                    A ctiv ity .
The C hief F ire O fficer    —      m eans the Chief F ire O fficer fo r the tim e being
                                    o f the South Yorkshire County F ire Service or
                                    his designated representative.
The C ertificate                    m eans the written General Safety C ertificate of
                                    which the Schedules and Plans form part.
The/County C ocasa?.                m eans the South Yorkshire County Council.
TbetjUide                           m eans the ’’Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds”
                                    as from time to time amended, Issued by the
                                    Home Office, or such other code o f practice as
                                    m ay be so issued.
ThelHofefer                          m eans the applicant for and person to whom the
                                     G eneral Safety Certificate has been issued and who
                                     is a ’qualified person 1 for the purposes of the Act.
Invalid Carriage                     m eans a vehicle, whether m echanically propelled
                                     o r not, constructed or adapted for use for the
                                     carriage of one person, being a person suffering
                                     from some physical defect o r (disability.
 Thebans                             m eans the document or documents attached to and
                                     form ing part of the General Safety C ertificate and
                                     signed by the person signing the Certificate and/
                                     or any other document or documents which may
   '   . "V; •                       be added to or substituted for such document or
                                     documents and signed on behalf of the County
                                     Council.
 Specified Activity                  means a football match or a R eligious Convention.


                                                                     accommodation
                                     provided for spectators at the stadium.

 The Stadium                          means the Hillsborough Stadium. Penistoae Road,
                                      Sheffield.
 Structural P a r s                   includes structures,, com ponents, installations,
                                      fabric and associated parts of the Stadium.

  V ehicles                           includes invalid carriages.
         i
        •i v
                                SCHEDULE 2

                     General Term s and Conditions

(1)     The Holder's nominee for the tim e being approved In w riting by the
         County Council shall be present whenever the Stadium is used for a
         Specified Activity and he shall on behalf of the H older ensure that
        the term s and conditions of the C ertificate a re com plied with at
        the Specified A ctivity.

(2)     The appointment by the Holder of a nom inee to attend each Specified
        „ A ctivity shall not absolve the Holder and airy respon sib le person (as
          defined in section 12(2) of the Act) from th eir obligation to take all
          reasonable precautions and e x er c ise a ll due d iligen ce to aivoid the
          contravention of any term o r condition of the C ertificate.

The Holder shall not know spectators to be adm itted to th e IStadium unless a
Specified A c tiv i^ i s taSangjaaee.

The number of spectators adm itted to the Stadium and to the sev e r a l areas of
spectator accommodation, within the Stadium shall not ex ceed the figures
specified'Ln P a r t i of'3chedn&e3.

Subject to the term s aaai conditions hereof and to the statutory controls relating
thereto, the Stadium m ay be used ancillary to a Specified A ctivity for one ot
m ore of the follows®?-;     _

 (a)     the playing o f m u sic o rsin g in g ;

 (b)     the provision of new s o r comment associated with football;

 (c)     the sa le of tickets for forthcom ing a ctiv ities, program m es, new-sheets
          and souvenirs; ;

 (d)     the sa le and consumption of refreshm ents;

 (e)     any other use ancillary to a Specified A ctivity which has the prior approval
          in writing of the" County Council.

  (1)     W here the p rio r written approval of the County Council is required under
          the term s and conditions hereof, an application for that approval shall
          be made by the H older to the County Council at le a st 21 days before the
          occurrence in a s p e c t of which it I s required.

  (2)     If -vhilst the C ertificate is In operation it is proposed to alter or extend the
          Stadium or any of Us installations in a manner mentioned in Section 3
          of the Act the "Holder sh all at lea st 21 days before the carrying out of the
          proposal is begun give notice in writing of the proposal to the County
          Council.
    (1)     The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at le a st 21 days
             (or such shorter tim e to which the Chief Constable may consent)
            prior to every Specified A ctivity the methods of adm ission to be
,           em ployed in connection with the Specified A ctivity and (In relation
             to a Football Match) the methods to be used for the segregation of .
            home and visiting supporters.
    (2)     The Holder shall refuse adm ission to, or evacuate spectators from,
             the Stadium or any part thereof at any tim e before or during a
             Specified Activity upon receiving Instructions so to do from the
             Chief Constable.

    The H older shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at every
    Specified A ctivity of an- adequate number of police officers to secu re the
    orderly and law fu l behaviour of the spectators and the number of police
    o fficers required at each Specified A ctivity shall be agreed between the
    Chief Constable and the Holder at le a st 21 days (or such shorter tim e to
    which the C hief Constable may consent) before a Specified A ctivity takes
    p la c e .
    p.)        Subject to such interim arrangem ents as may be agreed by the County Council,
                the Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
               o f th e County Council a suitably equipped F irst Aid Room. The fir st
                aid room shall be adequately signed and shall be capable of being lit
                by the em ergency power supply referred to in paragraph 12 of this
                Schedule.

     (2) ^ T he Holder shall ensure that during every Specified A ctivity a
           p h ysician employed or retained by the Holder is available to attend
           at the F ir st Aid Room if required and that his whe readouts are known
           to th ose in the P o lice Central Control Room at the Stadium.

     (3)    The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity
             of such numbers of qualified F ir st Aid assistan ts as the County Council
             shall require but without prejudice to the foregoing the Holder shall
             ensure that at every specified activity there is at le a st one F irst Aid   ^
             a ssista n t for every 2, 000 sp ectators.

     The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified A ctivity of such
     number of Safety Stewards as may be required by Part 2 of Schedule 3, and
     shall ensure that the Safety Stewards shall be (a) fit and capable to carry out
     th eir duties (b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by d ress (d)
     provided w ith written instructions as to their general duties in order to carry
     out the following

      (1)     Manning of exits as indicated on the plans

      (2)     Control ana direction of spectators entering using or leaving the
              Stadium

      {SS     Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency including
              raising an alarm and extinguishing any sm all fire.
       Training e x er c ise s relating to the action to be taken in the event of an
       em ergency shall be held for Safety Stewards and Staff em ployed at the
       Stadium at le a st once every three months.

10. ' The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked on the Plans,
      ail doors and gates which form an egress route between any spectator
      accommodation and the public highway, or other open space outside the
      stadium, shall be so secured as to open immediately and e a sily from the inside
      and shall be manned at all tim es by at le a st the number of stew ards required
      by Part 2 of Schedule 3. All such doors or gates shall be opened by the
      stewards responsible and secured in the fully open position a± a tim e before
      the end of a Specified A ctivity agreed between the Holder and the Chief
       Constable and at any other tim e on evacuation of the Stadium o r a part
      thereof on being ordered .so to do by a police officer in uniform o r by the
      sounding of the alarm .                                          • ?i‘’

11.     (l)     The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief
                F ire O fficer exit signs com prising white letters on a green background
                over a ll ex its from the Stadium and all exits from spectator
                accommodation therein and shall ensure that such exit sig n s may be
                illum inated by both the main and em ergency lighting sy ste m s. Such
                supplem entary illum inated signs in such locations as the Chief Fixe
                O fficer may require shall also be provided by the H older.

        (2)     The Holder shall ensure that the corridors, gangways and sta irca ses
                indicated on the Plans may be illuminated when required during a            ia •
                Specified A ctivity by both the main and em ergency lighting sy ste m s.

        (3)     The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be
                 illuminated whenever adequate natural light is deficient during a
                 Specified A ctivity or as directed by the Chief Constable.

         (4)    A ll means of ingress to and eg ress from the Stadium and to and from
                 any Spectator Accommodation therein shall be maintained free from
                 obstruction and with non-slip and even surfaces and in particular
                 sta ir coverings shall be secured and maintained so that they do not         >•-*
                 constitute a source of danger.                                              ■f -v-


 12.     (1)     Subject to such interim arrangements as may be agreed by the Chief Fire O fficer,
                  the Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief
                 F ire O fficer a separate em ergency power supply for providing           if*
                 e lectricity sufficient to light all em ergency lighting throughout the      *
                 Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the communication system s .
                * within the Stadium, such em ergency power supply to be operable                   v
                  independently of the main power supply and to come into automatic.       ■'
                  operation within ten seconds of the failure of the latter and to be    • -        •
                  capable cf ir.ainta.ining the necessary power output for a minimum of ' . ■
                  three hours from the failure of the main power supply.                 .

          (2)    At lea st once in each' period of 12 months the Holder shall supply to
                 the Chief F ire Officer a report as to the condition of the emergency
                         Power Supply certified by an Independent E lectrical Engineer.

                          On the dav of a Specified Activity and not le s s than 3 hours prior to
           (2)            S  ctHnmenceoient the em ergency power supply s hail b etested to '
                          a period of 30 m inutes. Any defect revealed in this test shall be
                          rectified before the commencement of the Specified A ctivity.

                          A competent electrician employed or retained by the Holder shall be
           m
                          p resen t during a Specified A ctivity.

                          T he Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
i3-        a)
                          <sf the Chief F ire Officer a fire warning sy stem .  —

                          T he fire warning system shall be tested periodically to the satisfaction
            (2)
                                                     as may be                                               ,
14-            the Holder shall provide and maintain-at the Stadium to the satisfaction of th                ^
            Chief Constable

            m              A P o lice Central Control Room which shall be provided with such
                           ancillary equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

                            Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention room
               m
                            and for adm inistrative purposes.

                            A public address system audible in all parts of the Stadium. The Po^i_c®
                            sLall have the right to use the public address system for police purp
                            in priority to its use for any other purpose.

                            The Holder shall at all tim es maintain all structural parts of the stadium
                 (!)        t a l c e d order and to the appropriate and relevant standards m the G^de
                            and in all ca ses to the satisfaction of the Council.

                   (21        The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance repair and
                              renewal to the Stadium as may be required from tim e to tim e by the
                              County Council.

                   Tile Holder shaU at all tim es maintain all operational parts of the Stadium
  IS .             (including thej^lw t^cal^ad ^oi^mim^aUOTS inswl^ati^ns^ai^all^ernergency^

                   c Z         "       f a ? “ d e S L r s u c h m aStenance repair or renewal as may from
                   £ T to      U m e   b e necessary to maintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.


      ,.           T ,„ J o in e r shaU nlace within the Stadium, at such positions as may be specked
                   by'the Chief Fire’otficer, u r g e n c y procedure notices wtuch        o,
                    maintained legible and unobstructed in those positions.

      18            (11        The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium shall be
                    ‘          restricted to those areas indicated on the Plans unless otherwise
                               ^proved for emergency purposes by a P o lice Officer in uniform.
         The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the
         satisfaction of the County Council the a ceess routes for em ergency
         vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that m em bers of the P r e ss , T . V. and radio services
having a ccess to the public and playing areas of the Stadium are identifiable
as such.

T elevision cam eras and portable equipment shall be placed only in such
positions as may be agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable.

(1)      liq u id refreshm ents may be sold o r distributed at the Stadium only in
         containers constructed from soffcplastic or other soft m aterial, or as
         allow ed by the L icensing J u stic e s.    -r-

 (2)     JNo accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other m aterials which
         In the         of the Chief Constable are capable o f use as m issile s
          ahaii be perm itted to rem ain In any part of the Stadium to which
         sp ectators haye a c c e s s .

y /i ai»>»munia»on nf Tla-m-mahle rubbish, dirt, surplus m aterial or goods shall
be perm itted to rem ain in any part of the Stadium except in a place and quantity
a ^ ssw e d in w riting by the Chief F ire O fficer.

 H oIlanxm ablejjases o r liquids shall be stored or used in any part of the
         orifhout the jjr io r w ritten approval of the Chief F ire O fficer.

 The S o ld e r shall arrange lo r the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified
                 T n g ^ j ^ ^trM ctural or Civil) In the presence of a representative of the
 County C o u n c il within 7 months of the date of the C ertificate and at lea st once In each
 jje r io d o f 12 months th ereafter and the Holder shall as soon as possible after
  each inspection supply to the County Council a C ertificate by the said
  Chartered "Engineer a s to the current compliance or non-com pliance with good
  engineering and butlding p ractices and with the relevant B ritish Standard
  Specifications and Codes of P ractice and with the appropriate provisions and
  r e c o m m e n d a tio n s of the Guide of a ll structural parts of the Stadium excluding the
   crash b a rriers and handrails*

   (1}     The Holder          arrange for all crush barriers and handrails within the
           S   t a dto be, tested
                       i u   m     i naccordance with the appropriate provisions of the
           Guide by'a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil)
           In the presence of a representative of the County Council within 2 jnonths
           of the <|ate of this C ertificate and for the resuits thereof to be notified
           in writing; to the County Council as soon as possible thereafter.

               The Holder sh a ll ensure that noc more than 7 months after the date of this
               Certificate and thereafter not le s s than once in each period of 12 months
               a representative sam ple of crush barriers and handrails amounting to not
               le s s    20% of the total number of such barriers and rails is tested in
         accordance with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
         (Structural or Civil) in the p resen ce of a representative of the County
         Council and the results thereof notified in writing to the Countv Council
         as soon as possible thereafter.                                     ucu^cu.
 (11)    a record shall be kept of those crash barriers and handrails tested in
         accordance with sub-paragraph (2)(1) alone and a barrier so tested shall
         not be tested again within a period of 4^ years thereafter.

The Holder shall within 7 months of the date of this certificate and thereafter
               once in each period of 12 months supply to the Chief Fire Officer
the certificate of an independent E lectrical Engineer as to the current
com pliance o r non-compliance of the e lectrica l installation'within the Stadium
with Section E of the I .E .E . R egulations or other sections or Regulations for
the tim e being in force relating to the E lectrica l Equipment of Buildings.

(i)     The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium fire fighting
        equipment of such type and in such positions as may be re-" ’^ bv ^ e
        Chief F ire O fficer.                              r * r . ^ !(. Dj « a

fli)    The Holder shall arrange      for all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and
        other w ater supply within   the Stadium to be inspected and tested as
        appropriate at least once    in each period of 12 months by a comnetent
        person to the satisfaction   of the Chief F ire Officer.

The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be made
available for inspection at all reasonable tim e to Authorised Persons:

(1)     A record of the numbers of sp ectators admitted to the Stadium during
        a Specified Activity and to each area of Spectator A:commodation
        therein mentioned in Part 1 of Schedule 3.

(2)     A record of any accident or incident occurring w hilst the Stadium is in
        use for a Specified A ctivity which causes injury to a spectator, such
        record to include the name, address, and' age of the spectator5
        injured, the nature of the injury and how it was caused, as far as can
        be ascertained by diligent inquiry, and the location of the incident.
                  *             S»aI1 P! ° Vide a w ritten reP°rt ^ the County Council within
        48 hours of all such accidents or incidents.

(3)     A record of the training and instruction given and the ex ercises held in
        accordance with the requirem ents of Paragraph 9 of this Schedule such
        record to induce the date and tim e and duration of the instruction or
        ex er c ise , the name of the person giving instruction, the nature of the
        instruction or exercise, and the nam e(s) of the person(s) instructed.

(4)     A record of all inspections, te sts, maintenance, repairs and renewals
        carried out at the Stadium.
 The Stadium shall be maintained with the fa cilities and structures including
 all crush b a r r ie rs, entrances, exits and means of a c ce ss to the entrances
 and exits in the number, s iz e , position and strength existing at the date
• of the C ertificate and indicated on the plans and no alteration shall be made
 thereto unless prior notice in writing is given to the County Council in
 accordance with paragraph 5(2) of this Schedule.

No spectators shall be allowed to use the Stadium in conditions of extrem e
wind and/or snow loadings acting singular or in combination and in
particular:-

 (1)     No spectators shall be allowed to use the stadium in wind
         speeds in ex cess of 100 K m .p .h . at 10m above ground le v e l
         and this prohibition shall be effective when m ore than one gust o f
         ana speed of at lea st 3 seconds duration is recorded in.the area tsf
         the stadium in the 30 m inutes im m ediately prior, to She tim e of fb»
         enquiry mentioned in (2) to the local_m eteorological o ffice .

 (2)     The wind speed in (1) shall be ascertained by the S o ld er b y enquiry
         to the local m eteorological office by telephone not m ore than 30 *
         m inutes before the adm ission o f spectators to the stadium; and
         the wind speed given shall be recorded at once in abook^esat
         for the purpose.

 Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Counral .shaH
 have the right at any tim e to require the Holder at h is own expense to arrange
 for the conduct of any inspection or te st which the County 'CcincJH m ay jcxjnsiSer
 to be n ecessa ry in the interests of securing reasonable safety af tJae ' ; '
 Stadium when it is in use for a Specified A ctivity.                 .    ;
                         SC H E D U L E 3

                              PART 1
                         Crowd Capacity

The number of spectators admitted to the stadium and to the various areas
of spectator accommodation within the stadium shall not exceed the following1
figures: -

Spion Kop                              16,550
South Stand Upper                           5*567
South Stand Lower                           3,3 1 0
W est Stand                             4, 465
W est T errace                          7, 200
North W est TeTraee                     2 .5 0 0
North Stand                             *9,882

       Total Crowd Capacity            50 ,1 7 4



                          .   3Msa-;-r.
                                    \ j      i             .



                         Safety Stewards

The minimum number o f Baler? Stewards required to r each function shall
be as follower-
                                        ».                 _ .p.


 (1)     Jfenniaf^I«e 5t    S     t       e   w    a      r        d      s      *2 ?er m ats :
 (2)     Control and direction o f spectators              ^                      ^ exit)
           entering or leaving the 'Staiiuzm               M           S tew ards^ per vomitor
 (3)     Patrolling the Stadium and deallag
           with any emergency iiictuding raising;              ^
                                                                                    ,.*!«r South
           an alarm and extinguishing any sm all T o e                 Stewards • *-■
                                                                                      .taud)
 The Stewards shall be distributed a s follows.—

 Section of'Sta'dicm                    ’ TTumber required for each function
                                              1           2          3
      r




                   S H E F F I E L D    C I T Y   C O U N C I L

                      MC&T1MG OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES P&NFT.
              (MUNICIPAL ENt &KPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                              held 17th August, 1989


           PRESENT:   Councillors Butler (Chair), Hussain, Xanto, Jtoscrop, Mrs.
                      Mulhearn, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Ites. Walton and
                      White.



           •SAFETY OF SPORES {303HDS                   5. ?
                       The ifcting Head of Atoini gtrat.ioni and         Department
          ' submitted a report,* an the issue and amendment*. ofGeneral Safety
            Certificates under tie provisions o f t h e Safety ^ ^ o r t s Grounds
          - Alt 1975. .- •     -                                              ■
( )                                      Beal .of the S o u A ^ b d c a ^ ltoUce
            attended the nesting to give the "Police observations <hi the
            proposals contained xa the report and Mr. X. T. Sddy, a Director
            of the Sheffield Stednesday Football d u b and Dr. Eastwood,
            Consultant Engineer., attended the seeting to give the observations
            of the Football Ciofa.                                  ■v>
                       T3ie Chair asked for a “letter dated 16th August, 1989, fran
            the Sheffield Wednesday Football d u b requesting a written ruling
            prior to the coning Saturday's match on the question of access to
            and capacity in tie Horth Stand at the Hillsborough Football Ground,
            which letter lad not been circulated to matters of the Panel before
            the day of the aeetirg, to b e considered as an urgent item.
            RESOLVED: That (a) in accordance with the provisions of Section
            100B(4) (b) of the Tijcai TSovemnaent Act 1972, as amended by the Local
            Government (Access to Inforcnatian) act 1985, the request in the
            letter now submitted from Sheffield "Wednesday Football rinh be
            considered as a mefixer of urgency in view of the impending
            caimencenent of the Football Season;
                        (b) canfjbnaatian be aiven to the action taken by the Chief
            Executive in (i) issuing to the Sheffield United Football Club an
  J         interim Safety Certificate under the ^provisions of the Safety of
            Sports Grounds Act 1975 and (ii) amending the current Safety
            Certificate issued to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, all in
            accordance with.the details contained in the report and copy
            documents now subnrfcsac^
                       (c) the^cting Stead of Administration and Legal Department
            be authorised to issue a further “Notice of Amendment in respect of
            the Certificate issued "to the Sheffield 'Wednesday Football Cl^b (as
            amended) as follows
                       (i) Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further
            amended to state that (A) the maximum capacity for the upper area of
            the North West Terrace at the Hillsborough Football Ground shall be
            2,300 and (B) tie maximum total capacity permitted in the North
            Stand shall be reduced to 9,700 ana the maximum total capacity
            permitted in the Hillsborough Football Ground shall be 43,542; and
                      (ii) for the sake of clarity, additional Condition 10 of
            the amended Certificate shall be amended to reflect the fact that
            only the upper part of the terracing of the North West Terrace shall
            be used;
Meeting of the General Purposes Panel                        Paqe 2
(Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme) 17.8.89



           (d) approval be given to the proposed arrangements now
 reported for the. upper part of the North West Terrace at the
 Hillsborough Football Ground to be used on a contingency             « as
 and when requested by the Police.
           (e) having heard the representations of Chief Inspector
 Beale on behalf of South Yorkshire Police and the representations of
 Mr. Addy and Dr. Eastwood on behalf of the                itoinoajgy
 Football Club concerning the use of the North Stand {!) iar-raew of
 the need for segregation of football supporters and taking account
 of the operational plans of the Police, the North Stand-shall &e
 filled only through turnstiles located in Penistone Road; arai (ii)
 taking account of the undertaking by the Sheffield, Wednesday
 Football Club to provide two aridi•Honal t u m H Icc-{ruTTKawt-ljr
 serving the Spion Kdp Terrace) to serve tbeHorl&jStaKi, "the
 capacity for the North Terrace shall be J3educed.~to^,700; ;
           (f) the Acting Head of Administzatimidn^TjUeggLL Dopartanent
 and representatives of the South Yorkshire                -h »
Wednesday Football Club be requested to                                of tte
.Hillsborough Football Ground par-Hrailar-i
 functioning of the North Terrace until -tta*     «rf fropt;c«fl-»sn- 1989,
 and report back to this Panel on the oatccneofsa^nonitoring;
 and                               ...... .... ~:               '
           (g) the Acting Head of Administration aiki Xflc^Uepartznerit
 be requested to make arrangments for th-is Panel to visit and
 the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Football Grounds and the rwiwi-on
 Sports Stadium in the near future.                        ,,
               S H E F F I E L D     C I T Y     C O U N C I L

                          GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL

          (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

      Meeting to be held on Monday, 4th September, 1989 at 2.30 p.m.
                             in the Town Hall



           PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETING

(a)   The documentation and items to be discussed in public at the meeting say,
      in the first instance, be inspected at the Local Goverument Information
      Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield 1. The Service,is-open between 11.30
      a.m. to 1.00 p.m. and 2.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m. - -Mon^^4;to4Fxiday. For
      further details telephone 734750.               ;.   4/*

      Certain information may not be available for public .insjjection.

(b)   For items (if any) marked * it is anticipated that the press and public
      may be excluded from the meeting.

(c)   If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not available to the press
       and public or not available until the start of the meeting for the reasons
       shown.

                                   A G E N D A

1.    EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
       To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude the press aad
       public.

1.    GAMING ACT 1968 - AMUSEMENTS WITH PRIZES
       The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to report
       verbally on the following application for the grant of a permit for
       amusements with prizes.

      Applicant               Premises                Type of Premises




      HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to report
      verbally on

      (a) an application for consent under Hackney Carriage Bylaw No.
      16(b) to install a television set in a hackney carriage; and

       (b) individual licensing cases.

      CINEMA EXHIBITION
      (a) to confirm the action taken by the Acting Head of Administration
      and Legal Department in consultation with the Chair in authorising
      the issue of a "Local 12 11 certificate in respect of the "Batman"
      film.
(b) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to report
verbally on a proposed change in the cinema licence conditions to
incorporate the recent introduction by the British Board, of Film
Classification of a film category "12". (A copy of a letter from
the British Board of Film Classification is enclosed)*.
                                            (Copy herewith - "A")

(c) report of the Senior Film Officer on the classification of the
following films!-

                                   Previous            Proposed
Title
                                   Category           Category
                                                   is:
Yield 'to the Night                "X"
Are we all Murderers?              "X"                          ■■
Gorillas In the MLst               "15"              :"12"
The Elephant B n                   "PG"               "I2« .
9 Films by George Kuchar           Unclassified
A Song of Love                     Unclassified     r " is*1 :
                                   "A"        ■:-V*
The Hands of Orlac (Mad Love)
Kiss me Deadly                     "A"                M12"     :: :
Miss Julie        ^                "A"                "12"
 Rome, Open Cit^. - '              "A"                "12"
                                              (Copies herewith -- «n"
                                                                    B")

STREET COLLECTION
The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to report
verbally on the following application:-

 A p p llc a a t         Organisation

                         Sheffield Area       4.10.89
                         Chinese Solidarity

 SHEFFIELD COMMUNITY HEALTH COUNCIL
 To appoint Mrs. Ann Hewitt to serve as a nominee of the City Council
 on the Sheffield Community Health Council, to fill a vacancy.

 SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
 (a} The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to
 report on a consent issued in consultation with the Chairs of this
 Tanel and the Programme Committee in respect of certain alterations
  to the Bramall Lane Sports Ground of Sheffield United Football Club.
                                              (Copy herewith - "C")

  (b) Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
  Department on alterations to be carried out at the Hillsborough
  Football Ground of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
                                              (Copy herewith - "D")

  (NOTE: It is expected that the public and press will be excluded
  "from the meeting before discussion takes place on items 2 and 3 on
   the grounds that, if the public and press w e r e present there would
   be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in
   paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 197 2
   as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985,
  relating to the financial and business affairs of other persons arid
   legal matters and advice).
               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 AS AMENDED                     '

                          SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

   SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB PLC. BRAMALL LANE, SHEFFIELD S2 4FU -
                        GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

Notice of consent under General Safety Certificate Condition 6 of the
General Safety Certificate issued to Sheffield United Football Club pic.

The Sheffield City Council hereby gives its consent to the removal of
three radial fences at the BragaII Lane Sports Ground. The radial fences
in question are shown on the plans attached to this notice.

This consent is issued subject to the conditions set out below: -

The works hereby approved jaust be completed by Saturday 9th September,
1989*                                 .                ...



The radial fence on the Kop   ffian

An additional support must be jjrovided for the rail of barrier-U2 at the
point where the radial fence JLs reooved.

Part of the post at the top of the radial fence is to be left in (or
replaced by new posts) in order to maintain the stability of the
balustrading to the top gangKa^w

A return barrier is to "be jjrcriiied to the end of barrier 31, returning up
the radial gangway a siarijlar -distance to that on the return of barrier 32.

The lengths of barrier which hswe either been consequently altered or were
unable to be ^previously tested due to the proximity of the radial fence
must be tested on completion of the works and reports submitted to the
Council,

The two short radial fences on the Bramall Lane Terrace      (Plan B)

Condition 5 also applies to the removal of these two fences.

NOTE The replacement of the radial fences with suitably positioned radial
barriers should be considered tgr the Club and will be considered by
Council Officers in the fairly near future. It is also recommended that
consideration be .given to the installation of two radial barriers on the
Bramall Lane Terrace set egui-distant from the centre of the goalmouth on
the Terra®.




H. M. Webster, Acting Head of
Administration and Legal Department




Date




2MS/JS"
 ! P'*'W          A
,l-**^^«r *1•t,**f'
iia.''!^.
                                City of Sheffield
                       Administration and Legal .Department



                         C O M M I T T E E    R E P O R T
                              F R O N T    S H E E T




REPORT TO:    THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL                               j


DATE OF COMMITTEE:                4th SEPTEMBER 1989                   ^
_       -■■        ■      -- --         -     '        -         ---

SUBJECT:     Sheffield'Wednesday Football Club -          ,
 Notice of Proposed works at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
 Under Section 8 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1??5_____

ORIGINATING OFFICER;
                              MR. D.M. BOWNES


LIST OF BACKGROUND PAPERS (As applicable and unless confidential/exempt*}:




             SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS FILE




             •Full details of" what constitutes confidential/
              exempt information are available on request
 REPORT OF THE ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT                3
 TO THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL                        ”---------



 SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB - NOTICE OF PROPOSED WORKS AT SHEFFIELD
 WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB UNDER SECTION 8 OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975



        Under Section 8 of the 1975 Act the Holder . of a.General Safety

Certificate must notify the Council when certain works are"proposed. Sheffield

Wednesday have notified the Council of several proposals .recently and the

Panel is asked to approve the following two proposals subject to the Officers

comments attached to this report.



(a)     The Young Owls Club Office Accommodation.

        The plans relating to this proposal will be available at the Panel

        meeting.   Messrs. Eastwoods letter outlining the development and

        the Building Surveyor’s comments are attached to this report.

(b)     The North Stand Hospitality Suite.

        Again plans of the proposal will be available at the Panel meeting.

        Messrs. Eastwoods letter is attached to this report together with

        comments from the Building Surveyor and the Fire Service.   The

        Director of Health and Consumer Services has indicated that the

        proposal should meet the relevant .requirements of the Food Hygiene

        (General) Regulations 1970.

Recommendation

        The Panel is recommended to approve the proposed works at SheffieLd

Wednesday Football Club subject to the works being completed after taking

into account the comments made by Officers.




                                        H. M. Webster
                                        Acting Head of Administration
                                          and Legal Department
Town Hall
Sheffield

September 1989
                                                                                                                                                St., Andrew* House
          EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                                   23 KJngfleld Road
 /                      (C o n s u ltin g £ n g tn « eT « J                                                                                     Sheffield S11 9AS
          Director* :                                                                                                                           Tat.: (0742) 5545S4
          W. E astw o o d               F.Eng., B.Eng.. Ph.D.. O.Eng,.
                                                                                                                                                Telex:       547266
                                        C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E..
                                        F.l.Macft.E.. F.G.S.. M.Con*.E.                                                                         Fax: (0742) 554330
          A. A. W ood                   B in g.. P*vO.. C. Eng., F.I.C.E..                                                                                               and a t:
                                        FI.Struct.E_ M.I.W.E.M., M.Con»£.
          R. C. A- E a stw o o d 3Ax.C£n9-MJ.C£-F-LSttu<xe.                                                                                     / P r e m i e r He u s*
                                                                                                                                                - 12/13 Hatton Garden
          G. S pir                      C.£ng.,
                                        S£Bg..CE«B-M^^£_*<»'-5tr«ot£.
                                                                                                                                                   London EC1N 8AM
          C. S.G f«aw «s                                                                                                                           Tel.: (01) 242 7438
                                        BJEng.. C -E flo_M .I.C £~ M .1S tructe.
          S. P ra sto n                                                                                                                            Fax.: (01) 404
          G. M. S e a m a n             a       c.£ n g _ M J.C E - F .L S truetfi.
           Conauftam :                                                                                         Our Ref:             W E /JAS/ J A N /1.15 5 7
          A . G.BurdotX                  GJR.. B.ScJEng-J- C & o -
                                        «££_FJ3tnict£,                                                         Your R«f:



           C ity of S h e f f i e l d M e t r o p o l i t a n Dis t r i c t ,                                                       5 Jun
           Administration and leg a l Department,
                                            ■


                                                                                                                                                  *-•,-f •••:
            SHEFF1EI3D-
            si 2H B ... ';:'T ■:

            F o r tiie alrfceirtion of M r . D . B o w n e s

            Deax.ier. S o w n e s * -                                                                ■-■j--

                                                S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y Football C lub pic
                                                ypn-mg o w l s C l u b - O f f i c e A c c o m m o d a t i o n

                         F l ^ a s e f i n d e n c l o s e d si x pri n t s of ou r d r a w i n g 11557/1
             show±na p r o p o s a l s for the c o n s t r u c t i o n of a d ditional o f f i c e
             accommodation for use b y                                       the a d m i n i s t r a t o r s of the Y o u n g Owls

             Club-
                         Uihe c o m ments o f the O f f i c e r W o r k i n g Party w o u l d be welcomed.
*.-"~v       A p p l i c a t i o n s for a p p r o v a l u n d e r the Town and C o u n t r y P l a n n i n g Act
-■■■■s'

             1STJ1               Building Regulations                                       1985 w ill be s u b m i t t e d in the next

              day or so.
                                                                                  Y o u r s sincerely,




               AtfOcMtes.                                                                                                           C.M. Pollard                R. K. Godden
               J.A /Strsnoe           A. J. Clough                           R. Tandy                   J. M. Wood
                                                                                                         B.Se.. C.Eng., M.I.C.E..   S.Eng.. C.Eng.. M.I.C.E..   F.S.C.A. (A ccountant
                                      iA .C J E n g ., M.C,I.B.S.E..         C.Eng., F.I.Struet.E.
                                                                                                                                    M.I.Struct.E.               & A dm inistration
                                                                                                         M .I.Struct. E.
                                      M.l.Mech.E.


                                                        An Unlim ited Com pany. Registered in England - No. 1833144
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                               S t. Andrews House
               (Consulting Engineers)                                                                                             2 3 KIngfield Road
Director*:
                                                                                                                                  S heffield S11 9AS
W. E a stw o o d              F.Eng.. B.Eng., Ph.O.. O.Eng..                                                                      Tel.: (0742) 554654
                              C.Eng.. F.I.C.E.. P.P.I.Struct.E..                                                                  Telex:       547266
                              F.I.Macft.E.. F.G.S.. M.Con*.£.
                                                                                                                                  P a n (0742) 554330
A. A. W ood                   B.£ng.. Ph.D.. C. Eng.. F.I.C.E..                                                           • .£•   f''

                              F.I.StrucX.E.. M.I.W£ JM..M.Cons£.                                                                                         MN tt:
R. C. A. E a stw o o d         8. Sc., C .Eng„         F .lS lm a f .
                                                                                                                                i P r e m i e r House
G. S p ir                     C.Eng.. FI.CE..M.1.M«e»t£.                                                                        . 12/13 Hetton Garden
C. S. G reav es               B.Eng.. OEng., M.I.CE.. M.l-StrueuE.                                                              3^ l ewdow EC1N SAN
S. P re s to n                 B.Eng., OEng.. M.l.C.E-.M.UStruaf                                                                   Tel-: (01) 242 7436
G. M. S e a m a n             B ^ c .. C.Eng., M.I.CE.. F.LStrucUE.
                                                                                                                              i # Fe*.: (01) 404

C om ultant:
A. G. B u rd e tt             GJM.. aSc.iEng.1. CEne.                                       feHM:            WE/,                       /.1.1570
                              F JC f,.fX S tro ct£ .


City of Sheffield M e tr opolitan District,
Administration and Iiegal Uepartment,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD,
S1  2HH


For the attention o f M r 13 ~’So*mes
                                                                                                                                                                  i
Dear Mr Bownes,

                                     Sheffield HeSbnesday Football C l u b pic*

                                             Iforth S t a n d - Hospitality Suites

               Please find enclosed six .prints o f our d r a w in g 11570/1
showing proposals for t h e refurbishment of three of the existing
refreshment bars into h o s p i t al it y suites, at grou nd floor level,
in the North stand.                               T he intention of the Club is that they
provide light refreshments tno alcohol w ill be available)                                                                                   for
certain season-ticket holders before, during and after a game
with television and video facilities,                                                      in comfortable surroundings.
               The comments of the Officer Working Pa r ty wo u ld be welcomed,
especially those of the South Yorkshire Fire Service.                                                                                   The work
does not contain any structural wo r k and as such we believe that
approval under section A o f the Building Regulations                                                                              1985 is not
required.               However., we will nevertheless make a submission under
section B, relating to fire, shortly-


                                                             Yours sincerely.




A ssociates:
J. A. Strange           A. J. Clough.                     R.Tanrfy                J. M.Wood                   C. M. Poiiard                 R. K. Godden
C.Eng.r F.i.Struct.E.   8.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S.E.,       C.Eng.. F.i:S t(uct£.   8.Sc., CJing.. M.4.C.E.,    8 .E ng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,   F.S.C.A. (Accou mam
                        M .I.M ech.l                                              M.I.StruSLE.                M .LS(ruct.E.                 & A dm inistration
                                                                                                                                            M anager)

                                         An Unlimited Company. Registered in England - No. 1833144
South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H.   E. Wright, M.l. FireE., F.B.I.M.                                                   West Division Headquarters
         Chief Rre Officer                                                              Wellington Street,
                                                                                        Sheffield,
                                                                                        South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                        Telephone: Sheffield
Divisional Commander         K.L.Mettam, J.P. G r a d I Fire E.                         STD (0742)727202

Our Ref:    W 2088/RW/CB                    Your Ref:

This matter is being dealt with by .,?tnO R . .W p p d h p u s e ..........             Ext. No.


     M r D. Bownes,                                                         I      f g ff .S to t o
     A d m in istratipn and Legal Department,                                                         Jk
     T own Hall,
     SHEFFIELD,           -
     S21 2HH.


      D ea r Sir,
                                             ”        \.?r/
      FIRE PRECAUTIONS; SHEFFIELD W E D N E S D A Y FOOTBALLdCLDB                              'ZOOMS Q8LS
      CLUB/HOSPITALITY SUITES                        . - ^

      Further to ypu r letter dated 9t h J u n e 193$ regaxsdiam t h e ’   Zuxfsse
      s c h e m e s , this Authority has t h e following obsezryai^uccDS*—

      1*       The Young Owls Club - Plans N o s 11557/3.

               Cpmments: No pbjectipn.                       '                          it •

      2.       Hpspitality Suites - Nprth Stand - Plans ftos 11ST0/3.

               Cpmments:-                                        *

               N p objection provided the enclosed work schedule o s
               inccrpprated intc the scheme.       One copy of t h e scheme, marked
               wi t h our requirements is retur n ed and m ust lae x e a d i a
               conjunction with the e nc lo s ed w ork schedule-

               Paragraph numbers relate to the Guide to S a f e t y at Sjports
               Grounds.

      Should y o u require any further information or assistance,, p l e a s e
      do not hesitate to contact this department at the above address.

      Yours faithfully,




      Divisional Commander


      Encs.




                            All communications to be addressed to the Divisional Commands:.
W2088/RW/CB


17.7.89


HOSPITALITY SUITE - W O R K SCHEDULE


1.     Means of Escape

(a)    The construction ou t lined in red must provide a m i n i m u m fire
       resistance of 1 hour.    Paragraph 180.

(b) The doors shown in r e d m u s t provide a m i n i m u m fire resistance
    .of 1 hour and be fitted w i t h positive self, c l o s i n g devices s o
    • that, t h e y close onto rebates of a minimum d e p t h of 25mm. I S .  ,
     901(a) is enclosed for y o u r guidance and y o u r a t t e nt i on
     brought to item 2.2 re g a r d i n g the rebates for l h o u r dooxa..

(c)    A "Fire Door Keep Shut" notice fixed on b ot h sides oi: "the
       doors at eye level.  The notice to conform to BS 5499- -

(d)     It is noted that all d ec o rative finishes to w a l l s a n d
        ceilings are to have a surface spread of flame r a t i n g of
        Class 0 w hen teste d in accordance with BS 476 : Part: 7


(e)    A n y upholstered furniture provided must satisfy the
       requirements of B.S. 5852 Part 1: 1979 and the c ri b iguifcinft
       source 5 of B.S. 5852 Part 2: 1982.

(f)    A n y curtains, drapes, artificial flowers etc m u s t b e
       inherently flame reta rd a nt in accordance w i t h the T y p e B
       performance requirements of BS 5867 : Part 2 : 1980.

(h)     A n y ventilation system that m a y be required m ust be ducted
        through the external wall,    away from the seated areas, and
        the concourse to fresh air or if it terminates in the
        concorse then to be fitted w i t h fire shutters o p er at e d
        automatically b y smoke detectors.

(i)     It is assumed that the k i t c h e n does not contain a n y fat
        frying apparatus onl y m i c r o w a v e type cookers as d i s c u s s e d on
        site and also no gas appliances.

2.     Fire A l a r m System

 (a)    The existing fire alarm s y s te m requires extending b y the
        provision of additional br ea k glass call points in t&e
        positions as indicated by a blue circle on the e n c l o s e d plan.

 (b)    The areas on the enclosed pl a n which are double line hatched
        are to be covered by a syst e m of smoke detectors c onnected to
        the fire alarm.
W2088/RW/CB


17.7.89


(c)   A ll works carried out for (a) & (b)' above to be in accordance
      w i t h BS 5839 ; 1988 and documents are to be suppli e d to this
      A u t h o r i t y b y the installer, certifying that it does c omply
      w i t h t h e above standard.      FS 926 is enclosed for you r
      guidance.

3.    Em e r g e n c y Lighting System

(a)   A l l areas on the         drawing indicated b y the y e l l o w shading are
      to b e c o v e r e d b y   a mai nt a in e d emergency lighting system
      g i vi n g a m-i niminn    duration of 3 hours and i s ;to, c o n f o r m to BS
      5266 • P a r t y 1 :       1988.    FS 911 is enclosed for guidance
       (Paragraph 167) .

(b)   I n s t al l at io n documents certifying that it does c o m p l y to the
      abo v e standard are to be forwarded to this A u t h o r i t y b y the
      installer.

4.    Fire righting Equipment
(a)   Fire extinguishers are to be installed as indicated on the
      enc losed drawing. The extinguishers should con fo rm w i t h BS
      5423 (Paragraph 173).

(b)   T he 2 g a l lo n water extinguishers are to be h ung on wall
      b r a c k e t s so that the c ar rying handle is about 1 metre above
      the floor.

{c)   The 2.5 kg dry powder and the fire blankets are to be hung on
      the w a l l so that their handles are about 1.5 m etres above the
      floor.     FS 913 is enclosed for y our guidance.
                                                                                           Sch 91 6 0
       R3719
                                 CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM
                                                             1 *.
 From          The Building Surveyor                   To      The Acting Head of Administration
                                                               and Legal Department.

 Date '   24th July, 1989                               For the attention of Mr. P.M. Bownes
 Ref.     BSD/A.Bu/JAS
 Tel. Ext      “ M r - Bufcisr                          Ref.




               Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC

       1.0 North Stand - Hospitality Suites                                  .:

       1.0 The assurance of Eastwood & Partners that no alcohol will Tie available is
               noted.                              V''™ .            V   ’        ,

       1.2     The layout and facilities in the Tcitchen areas is not shown on the plan 11570/1.
               A site inspection however has shown that existing gas services and gas
<7*>           appliances exist in xhese areas. T would prefer to see the. removal of the gas
"1             service and the appliances before their use as hospitality suites.

       1.3     A Building flegulati-an application 89/1660B was deposited with my division on
               the 8th June 1989 and -was subsequently withdrawn since it did not involve works
               to which the Building Regulations applied.

       1.4     The headroom (under the inclined beams) for persons passing from one part of the
               lounge to another is shown to be 1.55 metres rising to 2 metres. A minimum of
               1.9 metres is considered to be necessary in this situation. A revision to the
               floor layout is therefore necessary.

       1-5     I trust the Fire Authority have considered the inclusion of automatic fire and
               smoke detection systems for these suites.

       2 .0    Young Owls Club - Office Accommodation

       2.1     Drawing 11557/1 was submitted through your office.

V' V ’ 2.2     Drawings 11557/1A and 11557/2 were submitted for Building Regulation consideration
               on the 5th July 19S9 and have been subsequently vetted, but not yet formally
               determined.

       2.3     The site of the proposal at present consists of a partial walled and timber fenced
               enclosure where refuse bins are stored. Also within the enclosed area is a brick
               built gas meter house and a timber stairway which appears to be part of the means
               of escape from the first floor accommodation of both the flat and the public
               house (both presently vacant). The continuity and extent of the available roof
               area for persons to use, on-the means cf escape from the flat, neeas to be
               clarified. The barbed security fencing would not be satisfactory. If the public
               house was re-used, signing of the escape route to the metal stairway -o ground
               level would be necessary.

        2.4     I understand that the base of the metal fire escape stairway (at ground level)
                is stewarded. Since this area is available to the public on match days, it is
                necessary for the whole of the means cf escape to be clearly defined, balustraded
                and maintained in a safe condition, even though the accommodation which it serves
                may be vacant.


                                                                                       Continued ....
c
          2.




    2.5   A mechanical vent outlet from the present offices exists into the existing yard
          area. It appears that this will have to be trunked through the new construction
          to reach external air.
                                                                            i
    3.0   General

          It may be advisable for the advisory group to meet to discuss the above two
          proposals.

          It is also understood that Sheffield Wednesday wish to meet the advisory group
          as soon as possible to discuss the use of the Leppings Lane end, affecting the
          West Stand, West Terrace-and part of the North Stand-




                                            •-   ';•// ••   : •'
                       S H E F F I E L D      C I T Y     C Q U K C   I L

                         MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
                 (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                                  held 4th September, 1989


               PRESENT:   Councillors Butler (Chair), Ms. Fiore, Lamb, Mrs.
                          Mulhearn, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith and^Mrs. Waltoau



    *   (1 )   CINEMA EXHIBITIONS
               Confirmation of Action                  .
               RESOLVED: That confirmation be given to,,the jactifrftftaken by
               Acting Head of Administration and Legal,Depa3^2aM$|3Ui~!eon6ullat£axm
               with the Chair of this Panel in authorising't±etissue of a "Local
               12" certificate in respect of the "Batman”                      r

0              '
               New Category "12*
                                                                                     --s '■■■•
                         The Acting Head Of Arimtrii s f r a C I n n a n r i T - f Tynrt
               reported verbally on a proposed change in 'the-.G6uactr^8-clneaa
               licence conditions to incorporate the recent introduction by 33ae
               British Board of Film Classification of a film category ”12**         jebA
               the Panel received a copy of a press release from the Britlsi Saatsfl
               of Film Classification announcing the introduction.of the o s r
               category.
               RESOLVED: That the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
               Department be authorised to take any necessary steps to alter Use
               Standard Cinema Licence Conditions to incorporate ttie new fi3m
               category "12", outlined by the British Board of Film Class ificsataaaB.
               into the Council's cinema licence conditions-

               Film Classification
                         The Panel received reports of the Senior Film Offices-
               requesting the reclassification of a number of films for local
               exhibition.
               RESOLVED: That the requests now submitted by the Senior Film Officer
               for permission to exhibit the following films under local
               certificates as indicated be granted:-

               Title                        Previous Category           Proposed Lo*»jfT
                                                                        Category

               Yield to the Night           "X"                         "15"

               Are we all Murderers?        "X"                         "IS"

               Gorillas in the Mist         "15"                        "   12 "

               The Elephant Man             "PG"                        "   12 "

               Nine films by George         Unclassified                "18"
                Kuchar

               A Song of Love               Unclassified                    ’IS”
       Meeting of the General Purposes Panel       *                page 2
       (Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme) 4,9.89



       The Hands of Orlac       "A"                    “12"
        (Mad Love)

       Kiss me Deadly           "A"                    ."12"

       Miss Julie               "A"                    "12"

       Rome, Open City          "A"                    "12"

(2)’   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
       Bramall Lane Sports Ground
                 The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
       submitted a copy of a consent issued in consultation with the Chairs
       of the Panel and the Municipal Enterprise and General'Services
       Programme Committee in respect of the removal, of jjthree radial fences
       from the Spion Kop and Bramall Lane terraces at tlie^Bramall Lane
       Sports Ground, together with consequent ancillary%olrk proposed to
       be completed in time for the football match on Saturday, 9th
       September, 1989 and reported that the Club had how indicated that it
       was doubtful whether the ancillary work could be completed by that
       date. A representative of the Building Surveyorreported on the
       structural aspects of the work.                • ■/.ts'-U ■■
       RESOLVED: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken to
       issue the consent on 25th August, 1989, as now reported; and
                  (b)           a time limit of 15th September, 1989, be imposed for
       compliance with Condition 5 which requires (i) the testing of the
       lengths of barrier which have been altered or were unable to be
       tested previously because of the proximity of the radial fences, and
       (ii) the submission to the Council of reports thereon.
       (NOTE: A copy of the Council's letter to the Club will be sent to
       each member of the Panel.)

       Hillsborough Sports Ground
                  The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
       submitted a report on proposals of the Sheffield Wednesday Football
       Club to carry out alterations to the Hillsborough Sports Ground to
       provide (a) office accommodation for the Young Owls Club and (b) a
       hospitality suite in the North Stand. Plans of the proposals were
       exhibited at the meeting and the Panel received copies of letters
       from the Club's consulting engineers and the South Yorkshire County
       Fire Service and a memorandum from the Council's Building Surveyor
       regarding the proposals.
       RESOLVED: That, subject to compliance by the Sheffield Wednesday
       Football Club with the comments of the South Yorkshire County Fire
       Service, the Building Surveyor and the Director of Health and
       Consumer Services now reported,on condition that the Club inform the
       Council when the works are completed, approval be given in
       accordance with Section 8 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975,
       to the carrying out of the alterations at the Hillsborough Sports
       Ground referred to in the report now submitted and the plans now
       exhibited.

       Urgent Item
                 The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
       reported on correspondence which he had held with the proprietors of
       three local sports grounds regarding action to be taken to comply
       with the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report on
       the Hillsborough Disaster and stated that certain of the
       recommendations still had not been put into effect at the grounds.
    7                 (Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme) 4.9.89



                      RESOLVED: That the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
                      Department be requested to write to the Sheffield Wednesday Football
                      Club, the Sheffield United Football Club and Owlerton Sports Stadium
                      Limited enumerating the outstanding items now reported and asking
                      for an immediate reply.

                      (NOTE:    (a) in accordance with the provision of Section 100B(4)(b).
                      of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government
                      (Access to Information) Act 1985, the Chair of the Panel (Councillor
                      Butler), decided that this item should be considered as a matter of
                      urgency in view of the need to ensure the safety of the public; and
                                (b)            copies of the letters to the proprietors of the sport
                      grounds will be sent to each member of the Panel.)

             (3)      . STREET COLLECTION
                      SESOLVED: That the following application for a ‘atre^t Collection
                      permit be granted*- ^

                      Applicant          Organisation         Location     -   Date

                                         Sheffield Area     Fargate ' £        4.10.89
\       *"          ' ' ____ .
                             ___.___     Chinese Solidarity ■         /

]            {■*)     'SHEFFIELD   COMMUNITY HEALTH COUNCIL
                      2SS0LVED:    That Mrs. Ann Hewitt of 3 Drummond Crescent, Sheffield, be
        *             appointed    to serve as a nominee of the City Council on the Sheffield
4                     Community    Health Council, to fill a vacancy.

             (5)      tEGAL PROCEEDINGS
                                The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
1                     referred to his report to the Panel at its meeting held on 7th
                      august, 1989 that, in proceedings held at Sheffield Magistrates'
                      Court on 13th/14th July, 1989, the Council's prosecution of the
;                     «perators of a shop at                    on the grounds that the
                      premises were


                      RESOLVED: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the
                      Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department in requiring the
                      "Magistrates to state a case to the High Court in the above matter.

                       GAMING ACT 1968 - AMUSEMENTS WITH PRIZES
                                   The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
                       reported verbally on an application for the grant of a permit for
                       T±e .provision of amusements with prizes in premises at 490 Glossop
                       Road., Sheffield. The applicant attended the meeting to support his
                       application. The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
                       reported that, as the premises concerned were accessible to the
                       public, they did not comply with the Council's policy for the
                      ...granting or renewal of applications for permits for the provision of
                        amusements with prizes as set out in the resolution of the Panel of
                       the 5th September, 1988 (page 521 of the printed minutes).

                       At this stage in the proceedings, the Panel passed the following
                       resolutions-              v
                                                                                        v.-V



      (Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme)- 4.9.89       *"   .   .^



      RESOLVED: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting
      before a decision is made on the item now under consideration and
      the other remaining item of business relating to hackney carriage
      and private hire licensing on the grounds that, if the public and
      press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
      information as described in' paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to
      the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government
      (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to the financial and
      business affairs of other persons and legal matters and advice.

      The Panel then considered the application now submitted for the
      grant of a permit for the provision of amusements with prizes in
      premises at 490 Glossop Road.
      RESOLVED: That the application now submitted 1» refused in
      accordance with paragraph 7(b) of Schedule 9 to^t^y|»affllng .Act
      1968 as it is the duty of the Council to refuse applications which
      do not comply with the above-mentioned resolutlon|of:55th September,
      1988.      ^ :              - -v                          -7 '"

(7)   HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVAIE^2B38E:ijK®ISISC'...;               ■

                The Acting Head of. AdnflnUstration and Legal 'Department
      reported verbally on a number a if individual cases relating to
      hacknev carriage and private Ibire licensing. •The ^applicants in .
      cases       and        attended £he aeeting to .support.their cases.
      RESOLVED: That (a) application          now submitted for a joint
      hackney carriage and private l a x e licence be not granted;
                 (b) application        [now submitted for the issue of a
      private hire vehicle licence j£a respect of a vehicle more than five
      years old be granted;
                 (c) application         now submitted for a hackney carriage
      vehicle licence, consideration of which application was deferred at
      the Panel's meeting held on Ttfa August, 1989, to enable the
      applicant to attend before the "Panel, be refused as the Panel is of
      the opinion that there is nosignif leant unmet demand for the
      services of taxis in SheffleSSg
                 (d) consideration of applications                 and
      now submitted be deferred to give the applicants a further
      opportunity to attend before fee Panel-

                                                                                    )
                     S H E F F I E LD    C I T Y    C O U N C I L



                                GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
                (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

           Meeting to be held on Friday, 8th September, 1989 a* 3-30 p.m.
                                  in the Town Hall


                PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETING

     (a)   The documentation and items to be discussed in public at the meeting
           may, in the first instance, be inspected by contacting the Local
           Government Information Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield 1*
           The Service is open between 11.30 a.m. - 1.00 p-JB. .and 2.00 p.a.
           - 4.00 p.m. - Monday to Friday. For further details 'telephone
           734750. Certain information may not be a v ai 1         p ubljc-
           inspection.                            --               .

~)   (b)   For items (if any) marked * it is anticipated iSsatlSie press and
           public may be excluded from the meeting.

     (c)   If indicated in the agenda, reports sire either not'Available to
           the press and public or not available until 13ie start    the meeting
           for the reasons shown.


                                     A G E N D A

     1.    EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
            To identify items where resolutions may be moved to -exclude the
            press and public.

     2.    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
            The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Departraesst
            to report verbally.
       S H E F F I E L D       C I T Y   C O U N C I L

          MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
  (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                   held 8th September, 1989


PRESENT:   Councillors Butler (Chair), Ms. Fiore, Lamb, Ebscrqp, Mrs.
           Mulheam and Mrs. Nelson. ........

ALSO IN ATTENDANCE:
          Councillors Cranar and Whitfield.



SAFETY OF SPORTS O d U N D S                    -~:-.T               :;
          Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting
held on 4th September, 1989, the Acting Head of Administration and
Legal Department reported verbally on replies which he had received       ^|
to his letters to the proprietors of the Hillsborough and Bramall       ;
Lane Sports Grounds and the Owlerton Sports Stadium requesting
information on outstanding items of vrorks to be carried out and
measures to be taken, to comply with the recanmendations contained ia
the interim report of Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillsborough
Disaster. The Panel received copies of the letters fran the sports
ground proprietors.
RESOLVED: That (a) the information contained in the letters new
submitted from the proprietors of the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane
Sports Grounds and Owlerton Sports Stadium be noted; ■
           (b) a further meeting of this Panel be held on Friday,
15th September, 1989, to consider the outcome of the proceedings at
a meeting of the Advisory Group on the Safety of Sports Grounds to
be held on Thursday, 14th September, 1989; and
           (c) the representatives of the City Council on the Police
Authority be invited to attend meetings of this Panel when items ;
relating to the safety of sports grounds are to be considered-
                    GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
    (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME-)

Meeting to be held on Friday, 15th September, 1989 at 2.30 p.m.
                       in the Town Hall


    PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETING

The documentation and items to be discussed in public at the meeting
may, in the first instance, be inspected by contacting the Local
Government Information Service, 67 Surrey Street*7 Sheffield 1. .
The Service is open between 11.30 a.m. - l.OO p.itu and 2.00 p.m.
— 4.00 p.m. - Monday to Friday. For further details telephone
734750- Certain information may not be available for public
inspection.

For items (if any) marked * it is anticipated that the press and
public may be excluded from the meeting.

If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not available to
the .press and public or not available until the start of the meeting
for t2ie reasons shown.


                         A G E N D A

EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude the
press and public.

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
to report verbally.
            MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
    (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                   held 15th September, 1989


PRESENT:   Councillors Butler (Chair), Ms._ Fiore, Lamb, Moscrop,
           Mrs. Mulhearn, Mrs. Nelson and Mrs. E. Smith.




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
            With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its
meeting held on 8th September, 1989, the Acting Head of Administration
and Legal Department reported verbally on the outcome of a meeting
of the Advisory Group on the Safety of Sports Grounds held on 14th
September, 1989- Representatives of the South Yorkshire County
Fire Service, the Health and Consumer Services Department and the
Building Surveyor who were members of the Advisory Group and the
Managing Director and Secretary of Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd.
and the company-1s solicitor attended the meeting.
RESOLVEDi That, in accordance with the recommendations made by
the Advisory Srsngj on the Safety of Sports Grounds now reported
            (a) "the Safety Certificate issued by the former South
Yorkshire Courrigr Council (as amended by Sheffield City Council)
to the Sheffield “Wednesday Football Club in respect of the Hillsborough
Sports Ground       amended as follows
      (i) Schetfe£Le 3 shall be amended to. provide for a reduction
in the permitted capacity of the Spion Kop terrace from 18,200
to 16,800 spectators;
      (ii) Condition 5 shall be amended to read as follows
     "Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act
the Holder shall not cause or permit the Sports Ground or any of
its installations to be altered (which term shall exclude minor
remedial works which do not in any way affect the safety of the
Sports Ground) in any manner whatsoever without the prior consent
of the Council. I n addition, no temporary structure shall be installed
without thej>riar written consent of the Council. The Holder shall
supply the. Council with copies of such plans, specifications and
calculations as the Council may reasonably require to enable any
 application ;Tcr such consent to be considered and shall comply
with any conditions attached to that consent; "
             (b) further to the removal of radial fences and consequential
works at Sheffield United Football Club, Bramall Lane, in accordance
 with the. Notice of Consent issued on 25th August, 1989 and in view
 of the fact that the newly installed barriers have not been tested
 no spectators shall be permitted in the area surrounding the new
 barriers until such time as the barriers have been tested and
 found to be satisfactory; and
            (c) a'Prohibition Notice under Section 10 of the Safety
 of Sports Grounds Act 1975 be issued in respect of Owlerton Sports
 Stadium ltd. prohibiting the entry of spectators to the Stadium.
                    S H E F F I E L D    C I T Y     C O U N C I L


         MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

        Meeting to be held on Monday, 18th September, 1989, at 3.00 p.m.
                                in the Town Hall


                    PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETING

(a)   The documentation and items to be discussed in public at the
      meeting may, in the first instance, be inspected at the Local
      Government Information Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield 1.
      The Service is open between 11.30 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. and 2.00 p.m.
      to 4.00 p.m. - Monday to Friday. For further details telephone
      734750.

      Certain information may not be available for public inspection.

(b)   For items (if any) marked * it is anticipated that the press
      and public may be excluded from the meeting.

(c)   If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not available to
      the press and public or not available until the start of the
      meeting for the reasons shown.

                                A G E N D A

1.    EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
      To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude the
      press and public.

2.    MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING

3.    GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
      Minutes of the meetings held on:-
       7th August, .1989                                    (Copy herewith - "A1*)

      17th August, 1989                                     (Copy herewith - "B1*)

      4th September, 1989                                   (Copy herewith - "C1*)

      8th September, 1989.                                  (Copy herewith - "D1*)

4.    TOWN HALL AND ANNEXES
       (a)   The Director of Health and      Consumer Services to report
             verbally on a proposal for      the display of a hoarding at
             the front of the Town Hall      and a banner on the Town Hall
             Balcony in connection with      the National Health Service
             Review.

      (b)   Reports of theDirector      ofLand and Planning on

             (i)     Provision offurniture                  (Copy herewith - "E")

             (ii)    Monitoring of the revenue budget       (Copy herewith - "F")
ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
(a) Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
      Department on the* grading of Articled Clerks
                                                  (Copy herewith - "G*')

(b)   Four-monthly report on staffing.
                                                     (Copy herewith - "H*‘)

(c)   Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
       Department Qn the monitoring of the revenue budget.
                                                 (Copy herewith - "I”)

(d)   Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
       Department on Council House sales.        (Copy herewith - "J*‘)

PUBLICITY DEPARTMENT
(a) Four-monthly report on staffing.                 (Copy herewith - "K*‘)

(b)   Reports of the Chief Publicity Officer on:-

       (i)    Service Planning                       (Copy herewith - "L")

       (ii)   Christinas Illuminations               (Copy herewith - "LA")

       (iii) Monitoring of the revenue budget        (Copy herewith - "M")

       (iv)   Staffing of the Lord Mayor's Office.
                                                     (Copy herewith - "W")

CAPITAL PROGRAMME OUT-TURN 1988/89
Joint report of the City Treasurer, the Acting Head of
Administration and Legal Department and the Director of Land
and Planning.                                   (Copy herewith - "0")

TOWN HALL TELEPHONE SERVICE
Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
Department on the preparation of the internal telephone
directory.                                      (Copy herewith - "P")

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
Report of the Acting Head of Administrationand Legal
Department.                                     (Copy herewith - "Q")

MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISES
(a) Report of the General Manager, Markets, on action taken
      under delegated authority.                (Copy herewith - "R")

(b)   Four-monthly report on staffing.                (Copy herewith - "S")

(c)   Reports on the monitoring of therevenue budget       for

       (i)    the Markets Undertaking                (Copy herewith - "T")

       (ii)   the Central Transport Service          (Copy herewith - "U")

       (iii) Central Purchasing and Stores           (Copy herewith - "V")

       (iv)   Printing Services                      (Copy herewith - "W")

       (v)    the Catering Service                   (Copy herewith - "X")
(d)     Report of the Catering Officer on clerical posts.
                                                  (Copy herewith - "Y")

(e)     Report of the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer on
        clerical posts.                           (Copy herewith - "Z")

(f)     Report of the Catering Officer on the proposed payment of
        honoraria.                                (Copy herewith - "ZA")

(g)     Report of the General Manager, Markets, on the renewal of
        leases for sales units and a warehouse.   (Copy herewith - "ZB")

(h)     Report of the General Manager, Markets on the payment of
        rentals at the Castle and Sheaf Markets. (Copy herewith - "ZC")

(NOTE: It is expected that the public and press will be
excluded from the meeting during the consideration of items
10(f), (g) and (h) as the relevant reports contain exempt
information as described in Schedule 12A to the Local
Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access
to Information) Act 1985, as follows:-

Item         Paragraph           Reason

10(f)        1                   Relating to particular
                                 employees

10(g)        7 and 9             Relating to the financial and
and (h)                          business affairs of other
                                 persons and terms proposed
                                 for the disposal of property.)
                                 . City of Sheffield -... ,
                          Administration and Legal Department-


                             C O M M I T T E E                      R E P O R T
                          ■■ ■ ■■   -   F   R   O   N   T   .   .   S   H   E   E   T   '   ;




                                                                                                ■   ■




REPORT TO:                M EG S



DATE OF COMMIT"            18th SEPTEMBER 1989
                      -



SUBJECT:
                  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS



O-.G^N’ATiKG OFFICE?.: MARK WEBSTER, ACTING HEAD OF DEPARTMENT


LIST OF 3ACKurOUr»T ~APZP.5 (As applicable anc unless confident!al'exempt*;:




              INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                  * :Uil cs^aiis cf wr.a* cor.s“i-u~es cor.fider.~ial ■
                     exer-.p* ir.ferna.ior. are available on request
      REPORT OF ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL DEPARTMENT CONCERNING
      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS TO SPECIAL MEETING OF THE MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE
      AND GENERAL SERVICES COMMITTEE

1.    Purpose of Report

      To update members upon the action taken as a result of the Inquiry of Lord
      Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Disaster and to enable members to
      give consideration to further action which is required. This report
      contains a summary of the action which has been taken so far and
      enumerates a number of issues which require views from members.

2.    Summary of Action Taken

2.1   Following the publication of Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report on the
       4th August, 1989, copies of the Report were made available in the Members
       Library.                ^

2.2   A copy of the Interim recommendations contained in the Report is attached
       at Appendix A. The items marked with an asterisk required implementation
       prior to commencement of the football season.

2.3   Immediately after publication of the Report, the Acting Head of the
       Administration & Legal Department wrote to Sheffield Wednesday Football
       Club, Sheffield United Football Club and Sheffield Sports Stadium asking
       for confirmation of the action they had taken to activate those
       recommendations.

2.4   The Acting Head of the Administration & Legal Department also wrote to the
      Police, the Fire Service, the Building Surveyor and the Director of Health
      & Consumer Services for their views upon the interim recommendations and
      the action which needed to be taken as a matter of urgency.

2.5   On the 9th August, it became known that a pre-season match was taking
       place at Sheffield United Club. To regulate the position, the Chief
       Executive, in the absence of the Acting Head of the Administration and
       Legal Department, issued an interim Safety Certificate to the Club. This
       contained basic safety provisions and also made specific reference to the
       interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor, which required
       implementation forthwith. •

2.6   The Chief Executive also issued a Notice of Amendment in respect of the
      certificate issued to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to reflect the
      items which needed immediate implementation pursuant to Lord Justice
      Taylor's interim recommendations.

2.7   The action of the Chief Executive was approved by the General Purposes
      Panel on the 17th August. The General Purposes Panel also approved
      further amendments relating to the use of the North Stand at Sheffield
      Wednesday Football Club and the use of the North West Terrace at Sheffield
      Wednesday Football Club. A copy of the resolution of the General Purposes
      Panel is attached at Appendix 2.

2.8   Most of the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor have been
      implemented. The following paragraph provides more detail about this.

3.    Implementation of Recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor

      Revised capacities have been calculated and the appropriate
      reduction made. Arrangements have been made to count the number of
      spectators entering each self-contained area. Written agreements have
been entered into with both the Football Clubs and the Police setting out
responsibilities for crowd safety and control and the filling of terraces.
Stewarding arrangements have been improved in accordance with Lord Justice
Taylor's interim recommendations. Gates in radial or perimeter fences
have been painted in a distinctive colour. The Football Clubs have
confirmed that gates to the pitch will be kept open during specified
activities. Police Officers have been allocated in respect of each
perimeter fence. Cutting equipment has been made available. Inspections
of crush barriers have taken place and arrangements are in hand for
replacement of those affected by corrosion. The question of layout of
barriers has also been addressed. The Clubs have also inspected
turnstiles. Signposting has been reviewed and also the information
printed on tickets. Police planning has also been revised and the
co-ordination of emergency facilities. The first aid and medical
facilities as required in recommendations 39 to 42 of Lord Justice Taylor
have also been effected. Members should, however, note that a
satisfactory response has not been received from Sheffield Sports Stadium
concerning these general safety issues.

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
(a).   Revised capacities for calculation have been made in accordance
       with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide and a deduction of 15$ made to
       improve the safety margin. The revised capacity is reflected in
       the notice of amendment of the Safety Certificate. Thus,
       recommendations 1 and 2 of Lord Justice Taylor have been
       implemented.

(b)   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club have indicated that they propose
       to limit the number of spectators entering each self contained pen
       or area using a computer system. The detail of this is provided in
       the agreement they have entered into with the Police in accordance
       with recommendation 4 of Lord Justice Taylor. It is not clear from
       this how they propose to achieve a closing of access to the pen or
       area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached. The Acting
       Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to the Club on
       the 16th August for clarification of this matter. Response has not
       yet been received.

(c)   A copy of the agreement between the Club and the Police   as required
       by recommenda'tion 4 is attached.

(d)   In accordance with recommendation 5, the Club have agreed to
      appoint stewards on the perimeter track for the purpose of checking
      crowd conditions for possible overcrowding or distress. There will
      be a need to revise the Safety Certificate to reflect the new
      levels of stewarding.

(e)   Discussions between the Football Club and Police are taking place
      and training sessions to ensure that officers and stewards are
      fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd
      densities, signs of distress and crowd dynamics. There   is a need
      for enquiry to be made as-to the full details of this.

(f)   In accordance with recommendation 7, the gates and perimeter fences
      have been painted in a different colour from the rest of the fence
      and marked "emergency exit".

(g)   In accordance with recommendation 8, the requirement for perimeter
      fence gates to remain open during specified activities has been
      made a condition of the Safety Certificate. Sheffield Wednesday
      Football Club have also confirmed that this will be done.
In accordance with recommendation 9, the   Club have confirmed that a
Police Officer will be stationed at each   gate in the fence and will
be easily identifiable by the stewards.    He will be able to make
contact with the Police Control Room and   will be in control of that
gate.

In accordance with recommendation 10, the provision of cutting
equipment has been made a condition of the Safety Certificate. The
Club have also indicated that they have provided four sets of bolt
cutters. Two sets will be dispersed at each fence area, stored in
boxes, clearly marked "emergency equipment". The stewards for each
area will be trained in the use of this equipment and it will be
the policy of the Club to ensure each steward is regularly deployed
in the same area with the same responsibilities.

In accordance with recommendation 11, the Club have confirmed that
crush barriers have been inspected and that those showing signs of
corrosion will be repaired or replaced. The Acting Head'of
Administration and Legal Department has written to the Club asking
for the details of inspections and details of which barriers have
been repaired or replaced. Site meetings have been arranged with1
the Building Surveyors, the Fire Service and Environmental Health
Officers in order that further progress can be made in this area.

In accordance with recommendation 12, site meetings have been
arranged with all interested parties to discuss this complex
matter.

In accordance with recommendation 18, the turnstiles have been
inspected. The Club has provided a report of the examination.
This is attached. The Club have also provided statistics assessed
by the Health and Safety Executive which assess the potential rate
of flow. It must be appreciated that this is purely speculative
and further steps will have to be taken to undertake further tests.
This will be essential to ensure compliance with recommendation 19.
The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to the
Club on the 17th August asking for this information for the third
time. It has not yet been supplied.

No action has* been taken, as far the Acting Head of Administration
and Legal Department is aware to install closed circuit
television.

In accordance with recommendation 22, the signposting has been
reviewed. An inspection has been undertaken by the Chief Licensing
Officer who confirmed that it complied with recommendation 22.

In accordance with recommendation 23, the Club have confirmed that
the printing of tickets has been reviewed and styled in accordance
with the recommendation. A copy has not yet been supplied.

In accordance with recommendation 24, the Club have confirmed that
tickets will be printed with the request that spectators should be
in position not later than 45 minutes before commencement of the
game.

Recommendation 25 has not yet been addressed from the point of view
of the Local Authority.

In accordance with recommendation 26, Mr. P. Hayes, Deputy Chief
Constable has been designated as the Senior Officer.
(s)   With reference to recommendation 35, the Police and Ambulance
      Services have nominated senior officers. Enquiries will need to be
      made to establish the proposed liaison. Essentially, the
      co-ordination of emergency services is a matter for those
      Authorities.

(t)   The requirements of recommendation 39 have been incorporated in the
      amended Safety Certificate. The requirement to employ a medical
      practitioner in accordance with recommendation 41 has also been
      made a condition of the Certificate. The Club have confirmed that
      both these recommendations will be implemented. Similarly, it has
       been made a condition of the revised Safety Certificate that one
       fully equipped ambulance where a crowd of 5,000 or more is
      anticipated shall be in attendance. Again, this has been confirmed
       by the Club. It will be necessary for the Local Authority to take
       the advice of the Ambulance and Emergency Services to ensure that
       compliance with recommendations 40 and 43 is achieved.

Sheffield United Football Club

(a)   A revised calculation of the capacity in accordance with
       recommendations 1 and 2Thave been made by the Building Surveyor and
       incorporated in the interim Safety Certificate issued to the Club.

(b)   The Club proposes to use the computerised counting system to limit
       the number of spectators entering each terraced area to comply with
       recommendation 3. When the number of spectators admitted to any of
       the terraced area reaches within 10? of the capacity figure, the
       computer monitor operator will inform Police Control who will take
       the appropriate action to.close down the necessary turnstiles. The
       Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department has written to
       the Club seeking exact details of the procedures to be followed.
       They responded on the 21st August indicating that the computer
       monitor operator will inform Police Control by telephone and Police
       Officers will then ,be given instructions to instruct the turnstile
       operator to close down the necessary turnstiles. Consideration
       will need to be given as to whether or not this is the best
       practical means of ensuring that the terrace is closed off before
       its maximum capacity is reached.

(c)   In accordance with recommendation 4, the-fflub has supplied a copy
       of the written agreement with the Police setting out
       responsibilities for crowd safety and control.

(d)   In accordance with recommendation 5, the Club have indicated that
       they propose to deploy six crowd safety stewards on the perimeter
       track to monitor specific areas for possible overcrowding and
       distress. It will be necessary to revise the stewarding figures in
       the Safety Certificate to reflect this fact.

(e)   With reference to recommendation 6 that Police Officers and
       stewards are briefed and trained with regard to recognition of
       crowd densities and signs of distress, I have not had any
       information to the effect that action has been taken to implement
       this recommendation.

(f)   With reference to recommendation 7, the perimeter fence gates have
       been removed at Sheffield United Football Club. The Club have
       painted the frame of the gate in a different colour and erected
       emergency exit signs above each gate. The Chief Licensing Officer
       has inspected this.
To comply with recommendation 9, the Club have confirmed that
Police Officers will be provided as required and their identity
known to stewards and other officers in the vicinity. The Police
Officers will have radios to make contact with the Control Room.
It should be noted that the agreement entered into with the Police
also deals with stewarding aspects.

To comply with recommendation 10, the Club have confirmed that they
will provide four bolt croppers. These will be used by stewards of
the Club. The Club have asked the Fire Service to provide
instructions for stewards in their use.

In accordance with recommendations 11 and 12, the Club have
supplied a letter from their Consultant Engineer, Messrs. Eastwood
and Partners who have confirmed that a visual inspection of the
barriers has been carried out. The letter confirms that some
rusting has occurred but that none of the barriers is sufficiently
infected by rust for it to be necessary to carry out emergency
strengthening'or replacement before commencement of the football
season. They also confirmed that a review of barriers has revealed
that in some places they do not comply fully with the criteria in
the Green Guide and that drawings are being prepared showing the
extra barriers which will be required so that tenders can be
invited. This matter will need to be given full consideration by
the Building Surveyor and Fire Service and a further report
supplied to members in due course.

With reference to recommendation 18, the Club have instructed an
independent turnstile servicing company to carry out an inspection.
A copy of their report has not been supplied.

In considering recommendation 19, the Club have responded as
follows: "I can confirm that the correlation between the viewing
areas of the Spion Kop (southern end), New South Stand, John Street
Stand and Terraces and the turnstiles serving those areas is such
that all spectators intended to be admitted to those areas can pass
through within one hour. In the Bramall Lane End Stand and Terrace
areas on the Spion Kop (main area) servicing is necessary to some
.turnstiles before this criteria can be met. We hope to complete
the work prior to the start of the season on the 22nd August but if
this is not possible, will reduce the capacity in those areas
accordingly and inform you prior to the game taking place". This
matter has been referred to the Building Surveyor and the Fire
Service for their comment for independent checks to be made.

I have no information that closed circuit television has been
installed.

The Club have confirmed that the signposting has been reviewed in
accordance with recommendation 22. The Chief Licensing Officer has
also inspected the ground and confirmed that this is the case.

The Club has supplied a copy of their current tickets which seem to
conform with recommendation 23.

The Club~do not request supporters to be in their places by a
specified time.

The comments made in relation to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
are equally pertinent to Sheffield United. This is also the case
concerning the recommendations pertinent to co-ordination of
               emergency services.

      (q)      To comply with recommendation 39, the Club have confirmed that they
               have made arrangements with the St. John Ambulance Brigade to
               ensure at least one trained First Aider for 1,000 spectators is in
               attendance. This has been made a condition of the interim safety
               certificate.

      (r)      With reference to recommendation 40, consultation with need to take
               place with the Ambulance Service and other appropriate
               professionals to discuss this recommendation.

      (s)      The Club have confirmed that they will employ a medical
               practitioner in accordance with the provisions of recommendation
                41. This is also a condition of the Safety Certificate. The Club
               have not confirmed that he is trained and competent in advanced
               First Aid. Again, this is a matter which needs to be taken up with
               the appropriate professionals.

      (t)      With reference to recommendation 42, the Club have confirmed that
               they have made arrangements with the Ambulance Authority for the
               necessary ambulance cover. Again, this is a provision in the
               interim Safety Certificate.

      (u)      With reference to recommendation 43, this is a matter which will
               require consultation by the Local Authority with the appropriate
               professional bodies.

3.3   Sheffield Sports Stadium

      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to Sheffield
      Sports Stadium asking for the proposals on the implementation of the
      interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor. The Club have not
      provided the necessary details. The Building Surveyor, the Fire Service
      and Environmental Health Officers are to visit the Sports Stadium to
      undertake a detailed inspection of the Ground with a view to establishing
      whether or not it is safe for the admission of spectators. The Acting
      Head of Administration and Legal Department has written to the Sports
      Stadium indicating that unless a satisfactory response is received to our
      letter seeking their-proposals for implementation of the interim
      recommendations, then the Council have no choice but to consider issuing a
      prohibition notice relating to the premises. It is anticipated that a
      full report will be made to the General Purposes Panel at the end of
      September once the members of the Advisory Group have reported back
      following their inspections.

4.    Matters for Consideration

4.1   Visits

      At its meetings on the 17th August, the General Purposes Panel stated an
      intention to visit all sports grounds with the City. All three Clubs have
      been notified of this request and a suitable date for a visit will be
      arranged.

4.2   The function of members in the future.

      It is clearly essential that there is a tightening up of existing
      procedures and a clarification of the terms of reference for dealing with
      the issue of Safety of Sports Grounds. At present, the General Purposes
      Panel has delegated authority to deal with Safety of Sports Grounds
issues. In the past, matters have been referred to the General Purposes
Panel for decisions as and when they were necessary. Members have
indicated an intention to participate more fully in this area; indeed,
this is required by the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor.
The function of the Advisory Group must be to advise members and assist
them in providing enough information for members to make an informed and
rational decision as and when required. The Advisory Group is made up of
the Police, the Fire Service, the Building Surveyor, a representative from
the Department of Health and Consumer Services and the Ambulance Service
since the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor were published.
Prior to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, the meetings of the Advisory Group
were not as tightly controlled as they should have been. This has now
been improved. Arrangements have already been made for the Acting Head of
Administration and Legal Department to nominate a senior officer to Chair
the meetings of the Advisory Group and for full detailed minutes to be
taken. When the approved departmental structure has been completed, one
of the new Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department (Legal) will
undertake the function. It is suggested that one way of members becoming
more involved in this issue would be for them to be supplied with agendas
of the meetings prior to the meeting taking place and minutes of meetings
which have taken place. It is recommended that this is implemented.

Inspections

There is a statutory duty upon the local authority to inspect designated
sports grounds at least on an annual basis. In his interim
recommendations, Lord Justice Taylor has said that he feels more frequent
inspections would be of benefit. It is suggested that it may be
appropriate to undertake quarterly inspections, once during the close
season, once at the commencement of the season, once in the middle of the
season and once at the end. This would obviously require a substantial
devotion of resources. It is recommended that this is implemented.

Emergency Procedures

In the normal course of events, matters will obviously be referred to a
Sub-Committee of the Council for consideration. The delegated authority
in respect of these functions is vested the General Purposes Panel.
Recent events have highlighted the need for a proper emergency system to
be set up. In vie* of the fact that the Licensing Department is part of
the Administration & Legal Department, it would seem logical for this
emergency delegation to be granted to the Acting Head of Administration &
Legal Department in consultation with the chair of the General Purposes
Panel. Members are asked to comment upon this.

Resources

The existing structure of the Licensing Section is shown in the attached
diagram. It consists of a Chief Licensing Officer, a Principal Licensing
Officer, three Licensing Officers and an Administrative Assistant. The
Section was originally comprised of five staff which were increased to six
by the addition of the Administrative Assistant's post in 1986 upon the
abolition of South Yorkshire County Council. The increase was to take
.account of the additional responsibilities taken on by the Section upon
abolition of South Yorkshire County Council.

The Section is responsible for the processing, issuing, monitoring and
enforcing of numerous licences and consents; for example hackney carriage
licences and private hire licences, public entertainment licences, cinema
licences, theatre licences, street collection permits, sex shop permits,
mini-bus licences and the licensing of sports grounds. The work requires
a comprehensive knowledge of the relevant legislation and much of the work
is carried out under delegated powers.

The Effect of the Hillsborough Disaster

This has had repercussions throughout the Section since the Chief
Licensing Officer has been engaged full time since April in dealing with
the Inquiry and subsequently the interim recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor.

One of the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor is that "each Local ‘
Authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring,
enforcing, reviewing, ameiiding and renewing safety certificates." It is
clear that at present, this requires a substantial devotion of officer
time and that this is likely to continue indefinitely. Whilst the Chief
Licensing Officer is engaged full time on this task, other important
duties are neglected.

It is clear that further resources need to be devoted to the issue of
safety of sports grounds. It is anticipated that it will require between
75% and 10055 of one persons time to deal with safety of sports grounds
issues in the short term. This will entail dealing with the existing
designated sports grounds in the City, namely Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club, Sheffield United Football Club and Sheffield Sports Stadium. It is
hoped that by next Spring, a workable and well understood administrative
system will be in effect which should mean that there will be no need to
repeat much of the work which has been done to improve the administrative
systems. However, the World Student Games Facilities are currently under
construction and will have a significant impact in respect of the work on
safety of sports grounds.

It is anticipated that additional staff will be required to fulfill these
functions. A proposed new structure is shown in diagram form and attached
to this report. The proposal is that an additional post of Chief
Licensing Officer with specific responsibility for sports grounds is
created. There is also a need for an additional Licensing Officer who
will have direct responsibility to the Chief Licensing Officer for sports
grounds. Also attached to this report are draft job descriptions. In
addition to their specific duties relating to sports grounds, it is
anticipated that the’se two officers will as and when necessary provide
support to the existing structure which will continue to deal with the
general licensing functions.

The benefits of the changes

The increase in staff should ensure that the Licensing Section can
continue to function efficiently and provide a reasonable level of
service. It should enable the Licensing Section to improve its service
delivery and enable a review of licensing systems to be undertaken, and
proper enforcement of legislation to take place. During the last two
years, it has become clear that the quantity of work carried out within
the Licensing Section has increased. There has been an increase in the
number of private hire vehicle licences issued in particular as well as a
general increase in most areas. The World Student Games Facilities will
also in all probability require public entertainments licences requiring
additional devotion of time from the Licensing Section. In the light of
the Hillsborough Disaster, it is important that a proper allocation of
resources is made and consideration needs to be given to the allocation of
resources and priorities in other areas.
The coat of the proposals

Taking account of the recent pay offer, the cost of implementing the
proposals in a full year will'total £26,460, taking account of salaries
and additional costs. Clearly, some of this will be recoverable by way of
licensing fees which can be charged for the issue and amendment of safety
certificates for sports grounds. There is statutory authority to enable
the Council to charge fees for the issue, amendment and transfer of Safety
Certificates. The fee charged must be commensurate with the work actually
and reasonably done. No charge has yet been made for the issue and
amendment of certificate since the first amendment and certificate which,
were issued with those issued recently. The original certificate issued
to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club was that which had been issued by the
former County Council. The Acting Head of Administration and Legal
Department has sought the views of the various bodies which have an imput
into Safety of Sports Grounds issues to enable a full discussion to take
place about the levels of charges which should be levied. A full report
will be made to members once further information is available in this
respect. For the future, however, it is anticipated that in accordance
with Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations, certificates will be issued on
an annual basis and thus a charge will be made annually. This charge will
reflect the inspections which take place and the administrative
procedures. There may be a need for additional devotion of resources to
cover the necessary expenditure.

Recommendations

Members are asked:-

      Tib note the contents of this report and to authorise the creation
       of two additional posts of Chief Licensing Officer and Licensing
       Officer to deal with Safety of Sports Grounds issues subject to the
       proposals being discussed and agreed with the appropriate Trade
       Onions in line with the Council's (Responding to Change) agreement.




1RPADW/JS
                                                                                                                         I




                                     CHAPTER 24-THE RECOMMENDATIONS
  315. The recommendations which follow are the minimum necessary to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and other
information I have received. They complement the recommendations which Mr Justice Popplewell set out •
after his inquiry at Bradford.

  3 16. Those which are asterisked should be'carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
started forthwith and completed as soion as possible.
       *> *
              •» *
M axim u m C apacities for Terraces
*       1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-containetL'the Safety Certificate-
      shouid specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

      A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained*’ notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
      another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

*       2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green
       Guide (“the Green Guide-figure”) subject to the following qualifications:-

       (a) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure**, proper and realistic allowance must be made for ail factors
           which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
           in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide:

       (b) after assessing "The Green Guide figure’*, a deduction of 15% should be made to improve the safety
           margin.

*          3. Arrangements should be made:-

       (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
           figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
           dcketing arrangement, by coundng or otherwise. and

       (b) to dose off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


 F illin g and M onitoring Terraces
 *       4. There should be a written agreement between the dub and the police setting out their respective
     • responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
       ether terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. .Any
       variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.
                                     »                                                 •           .
 *    '     5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
          area, a steward (if the dub is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
          sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
          period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addidon to any other steward
          or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendadon 9
          below, and by radio to the control room.


, Fences and Gates
             6. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
          duties under Recommendation5 above, shouid be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
          crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
          demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
          different crowd densities.

 *           7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
          different colour from the rest of the fence and marked "Emergency Exit”.
*  8. Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
* whenspectators a n o n the tenses.

*         9. T iere should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
        apolice officer authorised to         whether or not to a llo w spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowding.
        The officer so authorised in respect of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so by ail
        stewards and police officers in that vicinity. He should be able to make radio contact with the control room
        either himself or via an officer close at hand.

*       * 10. Suitable and sufficient ratting equipment should be provided by the dub at each ground where there
        are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fendng to release numbers of spectators if
        necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether th r equipment should be used by poiice. the fire
        brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a dedsion of a
        nominated senior poiice officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
*          11. Ail crush barriers shouid be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
        to be ailected by a significant degree of corrosion shouid be repaired or replaced.

*         12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area shouid be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
        complies with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not. the assessment of the
        maximum capatity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, shouid
        reflect the fact.


Safety C ertificates
          13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible local authorin',
        which should consult the dub in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the poiice. the fire service, the
        ambulance service and the building authorin’. Such a reviewshould inciude an inspection of the stadium. Its
        object should be to ensure that the operative'condirions of the Certificate-are complied with and to add or
        substitute any condition shown to be n ecessa ry as a matter of urgency following the findings and
        recommendations in this report.

         14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 .Act for
        which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued shouid proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

          15. Every Safety Certificate shouid be reviewed by the locai authorin' at least once annually and each
        Certificate shouid require to be renewed annually.


            16. Each local authority shouid review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
         amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
         accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authorin' are regulari> and
         effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properiy taken in accordance
         with the local authority's rules.

            17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it shouid set up an Advisory Group consisting
         of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives-of the police, of-the fire and ambulance services, of
         the building authorin', of the dub and of a recognised supporters' ciub. The Advisory Group's terms of
         reference shouid encompass ail matters concerned with crowd safery and shouid require regular visits to the
         ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group shouid have a chairman from tne iocal autiiorin.
         and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it shouid be required to produce rcguiar
         written reports for consideration by the local authority.


    D uties o f each Football G ub
    *      18. Each turnstile shouid be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
         inspections shouid be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
         anticipated.
*       .19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
      as to. ensure that ail the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
      turnstiles within one hour. If that cannot be done, the capacity of that viewing area shouid be reduced
      accordingly.

*       20. Turnstiles should be dosed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be
      reached and arrangements should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
      operators for this purpose.

        - 2 jU Qosed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, wi thin
       concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

*        22. Ail signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
       reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
       and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
       area.

*        23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and dear and should correlate absolutely with
       the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
       should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

▼        24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time shouid be reviewed
       by dubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for
       admitting spectators to the ground.

         25. Each dub shouid consult with a recognised supporters’ ciub as to the provision of pre-match
       entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


Police P lan nin g
*        26. The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
       should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football ciub and local authority
       concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

*        27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of ill
       officers on duty there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowdingand. if any
       is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

*       28. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium shouid enable the police to cope with
       any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It shouid provide for
       sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

*       29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
       Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

          30.    There shouid be available in the police control room the results of all dosed circuit television
       monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of nomoers
       at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room shouid be skiiied
       in the interpretation and use of these data.


    Comm unications
          31.      There shouid be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
      . received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
        priority over, and the capacity' to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be
        used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration shouid be given to
        sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.
       32. To complement radio communications, there shouid be a completely separate system of land lines
     with telephone Knfcs between the control room and key points at the ground.

       33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
     areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
     an n ou n cem en ts shouid be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
     noise in the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every
     match.

       34. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
     Consideration shouid also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
     the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


C oordination o f Em ergency Services
*       35. The police, fire and ambulance services shouid maintain through senior nominated officers regular
     liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

*      36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the poiice should ensure that the fire service and
     ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
     spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
     concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readiiy available in the control
     rooms of each of the emergency services.

*      37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
     services shouid be reviewed. They shouid include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
     within the ground itseiL

       38. Poiice officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
     the arrival of emergency services and shouid be informed when such services are called as to where and why
     they are required.


First A id, M edical F acilities and A m bulances
•*      39. There shouid be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1.000 spectators .The
     ciub shouid have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

       40. There shouid be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
     equipment to be maintained-within them shouid be specified by the local authorin' after taking professional
     medical advice and shouid be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

*      41. The ciub should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
     any medicai exigency at the ground. He shouid be m in ed and competent in advanced first aid. He should be
     present at th,e ground at least an hour before kick-off and shouid remain until half an hour after the end of the
     match. His whereabouts shouid be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
     contactable.

*      42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambuiance authority should be in
     attendance at ail matches with an expected crowd of 5.000 or more.

       43. The number of ambulances' to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected s hould
     be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambuiance service and shouid be made a
     requirement of the Safety Certificate.
     AGREEMENT BETWEEN

SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

          AND THE

    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen ox

terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding
   ♦
       lb


or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.



The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.



All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact wita police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.



The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.



Cutting Equipment

The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

vi 11 be the officer in charge of policing the ever.:.
This document is a written agreement betveen South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

referred to as ’The Police') and Sheffield United   Football Club (hereafter

referred to as ’The Club').



This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

recommendation four of the Interim Report of theInquiry held    by The Rt Hon

Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium   Disaster of 15   April 1989.



The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows:-



Maximum Capacities for Terraces

The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.



The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

number of persons passing through each turnstile.     The Spion Kbp is divided

into two pens.   One pen is entered via turnstiles in John Street-, the ocher by
          *

turnstiles in Shoreham Street.    The Club will provide stewards to prevent a

cross flow of spectators from one pen to the other.



The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

approaching capacity.   The Club, will be responsible for closing off further

access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.        The

Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.



The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

prepare contingency plans to deal vith such situations.
Liaison

Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following matters:-

     i)       the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

              to the separate supporter groups;
          %



    ii)       the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;



   iii)       any information in relation to crowd problems;



    iv)       the number and location of turnstiles to be made available    _ ;

              to each group;



     v)       an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

              through the turnstiles;



    vi)       where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

              corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

              spectators to the ground.



Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

at the ground.      It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

between the referee's room and the police control room.



The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

being called to the ground.      These include routes of access, rendezvous

 points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.      The Police will

 liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

 amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

dr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.



Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED .................         on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club



SIGNED ........................ on behalf of South Yorkshire Police



DATE
                            ACTING     HEAD    OF   ADMINISTRATION   AND   LEGAL    DEPARTMENT

PRESENT

P02i                                         PRINCIPAL SOLICITOR


POlf                                        ASSISTANT SOLICITOR


POld                                     CHIEF LICENSING OFFICER




S c .6.            PRINCIPAL LICENSING
                   OFFICER.


Sc.4/5      LICENSING                 LICENSING               LICENSING
            OFFICER                   OFFICER                 OFFICER


Sc.1/3                                                                               ADMIN.
                                                                                     ASST.

                        ASSISTANT HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT


PROPOSED


P02i                                          PRINCIPAL SOLICITOR
                                                         I
POlf .                                        ASSISTANT SOLICITOR



POld                    CHIEF LICENSING                                      CHIEF LICENSING
                        OFFICER (GENERAL)                                   OFFICERfSPORTS GROUNDS)



S c .6 .                PRINCIPAL LICENSING
                        O f f i c e r (g e n e r a l )



Sc.4/5     LICENSING                  LICENSING              LICENSING             LICENSING
           OFFICER                    OFFICER                OFFICER               OFFICER



Sc. 1.2/3                                                             CLERICAL
                                                                      OFFICER
                          City of Sheffield
                          J 0 3 DESCRIPTION
    DEPARTMENT
                   Administration and Legal



DIVISION/SECTION
                   Licensing


      POST TITLE
                   Chief Licensing Officer (General)



          GRADE
                   POld



 RESPONSIBLE TO
                   Assistant Solicitor



RESPONSIBLE FOR
                   Principal Licensing Officers
                   Licensing Officers
                   Admin. Assistant
                                                           ..   ---



   • HOLIDAY AND
 SICKNESS RELIEF

                   To be covered by Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds)
                   and Assistant Solicitor
                   To provide cover for Chief Licensing Officer (Sports
                   Grounds) and Principal Licensing Officer




 PURPOSE OF JOB



                   To ensure that the statutory licensing functions of the
                   Council are maintained and enforced.




                          Workina                  fo r
 SPECIFIC DUTIES
            AND
RESPONSIBILITIES

        These duties must at all times be carried out in compliance with the
        Council's Equal Opportunities Policy.
        1.     To ensure that the licensing functions of the City Council from time
               to time allocated to the Administration and Legal Department are
               properly carried out in accordance with statutory requirements and
             fcthe Council's policies.

        2.   To assist the Assistant Solicitor in ensuring the proper supervision,'
              training and discipline of all employees in the Licensing Section.

        3.   To prepare reports on -licensing matters for the Assistant Solicitor
             and appropriate Committees, and to institute, maintain and operate
             proper procedures to ensure that all relevant matters are brought
             to the attention of any Committee or Officer of the Council required
             to make a decision on any of the licensing matters referred to in (1)
             above.

        4.   To liaise with Members^_.other departments of the Council and outside
              bodies on all matters affecting the licensing Section.

        5.   To maintain a service to the general public on licensing matters,
              including dealing with enquiries and correspondence.

        6.   So far as resources permit, to ensure that the requirements imposed
             upon licensees by law and by licence conditions are complied with
             and in this connection to copordinate the acti.vities of the Council's
             Off icers and the police, fire and other relevant authorities.

        7.   To be responsible for all monies received by the Licensing Section
             and to maintain proper records to the satisfaction of the City
             T reasurer.

        8.   To take statements and to prepare reports on any matters where legal
             proceedings may be contemplated and to appear in any Court proceedings
             which involve the Council's licensing function.

        9.    To assimilate and implement the increasing items of new legislation
              relevant to the Council's licensing functions, which is both varied
              and complex.

       10.   Assistance in research of new legislation and the relevant case
             law affecting the licensing function.




        Any other duties and responsibilities as may be determined after negotiation
        between management, the post holder, and the appropriate Trade Unions.




      ISSUE DATE
                                   JOB DESCRIPTION

   DsPARTMsNT            Administration and Legal




DIVISION/SECTION
                         Licensing



      POST TITLE
                         Principal Licensing Officer




          GRADE
                         Scale 6



 RESPONS1BLETO
                         Chief Licensing Officer



RESPONSIBLE "OR
                          Licensing Officers
                          Admin. Assistant




     HOLIDAY AND
 SICKNESS RELiEr     .   To be covered by Chief Licensing Officer

                          To provide cover for Chief Licensing Oi*icer




  = |JRPOSE OF JOS
                           To ensure that the statutory licensing runctions
                            cf the Council are maintained and sn:arced.




                                     Working for Sheffield
            ■Public Entertainments
             1.    Ensure efficient operation of the public entertainments licensing system.
             2.    To provide information, advice and liaison to and between other officer?
                   and authorities.
             3.    Presentation of cases and providing information relatina to public
                  - entertainments licensing to the General Purposes Panel.
                   Monitoring and suggesting improvements to the public entertainments system.

             Other Duties
             5.    To provide, maintain and enforce the relevant statutory licensing functions
                   of the Council, including:-
                   (a)   specific delegated powers in relation to licensing and preparation
                         of prosecution;files and giving evidence in Court on behalf of the
                         Council.

                   (b)   Preparation and presentation of reports So"'G.P. Panel.

                   (c)   An organisational role particularly in complex licensing cases
                         and prosecution files.

                   (d)   Management responsibilities in particular'in relation to allocation
                         of work and guidance and supervision of staff.

                   (e)   General duties e.g. setting licence fees, preparation of estimates
                         etc. inrrelation to the Council’s licensing functions.




                                                                   zs.r.s;*~z
       .zer, and tr.e a?prrsria“e “rasa ‘
                                        ."nis.-s.

   ■.as* zuties sr-st at s.ii tises is ^rrtec 3ut Lt. csrpliansa wit." the Zz'^r.zLl's
   :u3i CppartURities Pclicv.




           iSSUE DATE




»a3r                                   Working for Sheffield
                                               City QT bnetTieia
                                               JOB d e s c r i p t i o n

.v         DEPARTMENT                                  ‘
                                   Administration and Legal



     d iv is io n / s e c t io n
                                   Licensing




                =>OST TITLE
                                   Licensing Officer



                       GRADE
                                   Sc.4/5



        RESPONSIBLE TO
                                    Chief Licensing Officer



      RESPONSIBLE FOR




             HOLIDAY AND
         SICKNESS RELiEr             To be covered by other Licensing O^icers.

                                     To Drovide cover :0 r other Licensing Cificers.




           p'JRPCSE OF J 0 3
                                                     tv,*               licensing functions of tns
                                      To ensure tnat t-r.e s.a^ u . . y   ------ »
                                      Council are maintained and enforces.




                                                 Working for Sheffield
                    AND
K £ 3 P 0 N S IB IU T i2 S
T,
       C                                     “ “ Snf°rCS                                 statutory Ucansins functions of f,

       < )                                        *n d p r o c a s a in g a p p l i c a t i o n * ,     ra fa ra n c a a   a te .   w h ic h   in c lu d a , ',
             <i       d a a lin t w it h     t h a g a n a r a l sue l i e ;

           (iii) uSij ss                                                               andwln*lntocity
                  .   X T Z £ 2 £,?f                                                              v * le l«        and     d r iv e r s


                      “   th Pt h   r ; us“ :L Cio n e   Vt                                           " ■ P ~ « * U t Jr i n - c o n n a c t i o n
                           Pp°P«rly exercise their statutory Dowers                                    under th*
       'v^i' maintlin^reaent t0 produca documentation;                                                                   PS *Vant leSlslatior’
       - —            maintaining accurate records.
     is) enforcement duties which inciudes:-
            ' - ) ensuring licensees comDiy wi*-n
           (ii) enforcement duties        y • 1 -n .s-acucory standards;

        cm ,    5 - v m g statements ve.g. to the polic®)                                                                  "        " Cludins
           C-v) preparing prosecution files;
            (v) giving evidence in court.

           da“ i r 2 a n t “                     ■ " * * —        *   < « P U in t.       fro a       th a   p u tiio    and o th a r



     <d) t h ^ K ^ t ' o n                            U c ” “ I"« = " t = T and Chiaf Li---,.,, Ofr.c- <
                  ® cecutl°n of the overall functions of the section.                                                       ^es**         in




                                                 Working for Sheffield
                                J 0 3 DESCRIPTION
    DEPARTMENT                                           ,
                   Admi n i s t r a t i o n and Legal




DIVISION/SECTION
                   Licensing



      POST TITLE
                   Chief Licensing Officer {Sports Grounds)



          GRADE
                    POld




 RESPONSIBLE TO
                    Assistant Solicitor



RESPONSIBLE FOR
                    Licensing Officer




   • HOLIDAY AND
 SICKNESS RELIEF     To be covered by Chief Licensing Officer (General,1
                                       Assistant Solicitor
                     To* provide cover for Chief Licensing Officer iGeneral)                                        .
                                           Principal Licensing Qfticer




                      To e n s u r e t h a t t h e s t a t u t o r y l i c e n s i n g f u n c t i o n s r e l a t i n g t o
                      S a f e t y of S o o r t s Grounds of t h e Counc i l a r e m a i n t a i n e d and
                      enforced:




                                   Workina
JN SIBIU TIES


      Cou^-                           tia a s b e Carried out in compliance with the
          —         s -j-aj. wwportunitiss Policy.

      I.

             of the Citv C n t m r ~ i l           ..•            .       5ports wrounds Licensing System
           • t.Sol.Department or. p ^ p - r i * earrj“ o ^ i n ' " *                   to th* *<*»l"i*tPOtlon ond
             repulrement, and th. L u n c i r , p ^ l ' c L                       °"°rd° ™     "*'h statutory
      2i

  3.

            =°do”=“Pan
                     %irLinLpu;“r^ih:T“«"L^%,pc
                                              r:':nr.!,“p*rvision-                                                       c roi" i"s


            a pp ro priate C o m m i t t e e s ! ^ n l T t o M ^ t i t u t e ^ m a i n t ASSiS* ant S o i i c i t o r and
            procedures to ensure thn+ n                     1 s t l t u t ®« ma i f t a i n and operate proper
            of ony Committee of Officer c / t i r e " ' ™ f t* rS ° re bro“9hl to the attention
            of the licensing                                 ™         <° - * °           - ->
  5.
                           oif                  ?th'r                            th. Council ond outside
            u=i" ™         s i i t ™ " * rs r*iot1"9 to ^                  °f w t = « ™ « *                            th.

            »   sT/.Tif                       'V h* sr r al ~ bUc °n
                - r . t y of Sport, Ground, including deol.ns »ith enouirie, ond cor r.sp p^,
                                                                                                     -otter, r,1=,ta
 7.
           licensees o y " l o w ' a n d ^ ^ L ' c . n !              th0t th* r«auir,m ,nts imposed upon


                                             T^ ^
                             rir® ond other relevant authorities.

                                                             ^  -h* Ll” "s ‘"S Se: 1 1 on end to
                             pe    recrods to th. satisfaction of the City 7 r , o s u ~ r
 9.



           th, c c u „ c n •sp ilc,n,         w?r»"%:^idc:r^r:":.di"35                               "hi~      i" ~ K *

           l:                * A 3 lice n sin g3 Tunctions
                                                 'wi n, t . i g n 5 r«
                                                                    r s r*rr»w           m °in
                                                                                             >~f ~(1)   ^ —
                                                                                                  ml li coovs        ion relevant
           varied
           v a r i e d onr)   -----1__
                       a n d complex.                               ^ . rr ei rr rr -*an to
                                                                                         frt      i     ...
                                                                                                                  vsnish is
                                                                                                        c o o v e A.-ucn is hnCh
                                                                                                                            both
                                 JOB DESCRIPTION
    DEPARTMENT
                     Administration and Legal



DIVSSION/SECTION
                     Licensing


      POST TITLE
                     Licensing Officer



          GRADE
                     Sc.4/5       "



 RESPONSIBLE TO
                     Chief Licensing Officer    (Sports Grounds)        -




RESPONSIBLE FOR


                     -




     HOLiDAY AND
 SICKNESS RELIEF
                     To b§, covered by other Licensing Officers

                     To provide cover for other Licensing Officers




 P JRPGSE.OF J 0 3
                                                               «

                     To ensure that the statutory licensing functions of the
                     Council are maintained and enforced.




                                 Workina                  f o r o f *w **? ?o
 SPECIFIC DUTIES
                 AND
RES '--ON 3! E!L1TIE3




                 To provide, maintain and enforce the ^eisvcnt statutory licensing
                 ^unctions relating to Safety of Spc-rts C-ouncs Of the Council,
               „ including;-

                 (c)     receiving, checking ana processing cop 1 1 cat i:ns , references sire,
                         wh ich inc ludes:

                         ( i}dealing with the general public.-
                        ■ii) handling cash - including receipting pna paying in to City Tree
                       !li i )
                             liaising with other officers, ceoartments ar.a authorities,-
                        (iv) issuing licences, permits, etc. «here ccpropriate,-
                         (v) to properly exercise their statutory powers jnder the relevant
                             legislation e.g. reauirement to oroduce documentation,-
                        (vi) maintaining accurcts records.         ~ ’

                 (bi     enforcement duties which incluaes:'-

                         {i ) ensuring licensees comply with statutory standards,-
                        (ii) enforcement duties from interviewing inaiviaual involved and
                              including all steps up to presentation o f evidence in court;
                       (iii) giving statements (e.g. to the police)
                        (iv) preparing prosecution files;
                         (v) giving evidence in court.

                 (c)     dealing with general queries and complaints from the public and
                         other departments.

                 (d)     assisting the Chief Licensing Officers in tne execution of the
       9                 overall functions of the section.




             Any other duties and responsibilities as cay be determined after.negotiation
             between car.a2er.ent, the post noisier, and the appropriate Trade Unions.




           ISSUE DATE
       S H E F F I E L D     C I T Y   C O U N C I L

          MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
  (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                    held 17th August, 1989


PRESENT:.   Councillors Butler (Chair), Hussain, Lamb, Moscrop, Mrs.
            Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and
            White.



SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
           The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
submitted a report on the issue and amendment of General Safety
Certificates under the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act 1975.
           Chief Inspector Beal of the South Yorkshire Police
attended the meeting to give the Police observations on the
proposals contained in the report and Mr. K. T. Addy, a Director
of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Dr. Eastwood,
Consultant Engineer, attended the meeting to give the observations
of the Football Club.
           The Chair asked for a letter dated 16th August, 1989, fian
the- Sheffield Wednesday Football Club requesting a written ruling
prior to the caning Saturday's match on the question of access to
and capacity in the North Stand at the Hillsborough Football Ground,
which letter had not been circulated to members of the Panel before
the day of the meeting, to be considered as an urgent item.
RESOLVED: That (a) in accordance with the provisions of Section
100B(4) (b) of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local
Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, the request in the
letter now submitted from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be
considered as a matter of urgency in view of the impending
ccnmencanent of the Football Season;
            (b) *confirmation be given to the action taken by the Chief
Executive in (i) issuing to the Sheffield United Football Club an
interim Safety Certificate under the provisions of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 and (ii) amending the current Safety
Certificate issued to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, all in
accordance with the details contained in the report and copy
documents now submitted;
            (c) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
be authorised to issue a further Notice of Amendment in respect of
the Certificate issued to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (as
amended) as follows:-
            (i) Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further
amended to state that (A) the maximum capacity for the upper area of
the North West Terrace at the Hillsborough Football Ground shall be
2,300 and (B) the maximum total capacity permitted in the North
Stand shall be reduced to 9,700 and the maximum total capacity
permitted in the Hillsborough Football Ground shall be 43,542; and
           (ii) for the sake of clarity, additional Condition 10 of
the amended Certificate shall be amended to reflect the fact that
only the upper part of the terracing of the North West Terrace shall
be used;
Meeting of the General Purposes Panel.                       Page 2
(Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme) 17.8.89



          (d) approval be given to the proposed arrangements now
reported for the upper part of the North West Terrace at the
Hillsborough Football Ground to be used on a contingency basis as
and when requested by the Police.
          (e) having heard the representations of Chief Inspector
Beale on behalf of South Yorkshire Police and the representations of
Mr. Addy and Dr. Eastwood on behalf of the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club concerning the use of the North Stand (i) in view of
the need for segregation of football supporters and taking account
of the operational plans of the Police, the North Stand shall be
filled only through turnstiles located in Penistone Road; and (ii)
taking account of the undertaking by the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club to provide two additional turnstiles (currently
serving the Spion Kop Terrace) to serve the North Stand, the
capacity for the North Terrace shall be reduced to 9,700;
          (f> the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
and representatives of the South Yorkshire Police and the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club be requested to monitor the operation of the
Hillsborough Football Ground particularly with regard to the
functioning of the North Terrace until the end of September, 1989,
and report back to this Panel on the.outcome of such monitoring;
and
          (g) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
be requested to make arrangments for this Panel to visit and inspect
the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Football Grounds and the Owlerton
Sports Stadium in the near future.
          UPDATING REPORT TO MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES COMMITTEE

                             SUBJECT: SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS


     PURPOSE OF REPORT:

     This report is an appendage to the general report upon this issue. That
     report gives details of the responses which have been received from the
     respective football clubs within the City to the proposals of Lord Justice
     Taylor in his interim recommendations pursuant to the enquiries into the
     Hillsborough Disaster. There were a number of oustanding issues referred
     to in the    general report. The Acting Head of Administration and Legal
     Department has taken these matters up with the various clubs and this
     report updates that position.

1.   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

     The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to Sheffield
     Wednesday   Football Club on 5th September, 1989 in respect ofthe matter
     which did   not seem to have been dealt within accordance with the interim
     recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor. Copies of the letter of 5th
     September and the response of the Club are attached. The matter was
     referred to the General Purposes Panel on 8th September who confirmed that
     they were satisfied that the Club had responded appropriately and that it
     was not therefore appropriate to consider the issue of a prohibition
     notice. There is now a need to consider in detail via the Advisory Group
     the responses of the Club.

2.   SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to Sheffield
      United Football Club on 6th September. A copy of that letter and the
     .Club's responses are attached. The matter was referred to the General
     Purposes Panel on 8th September who confirmed that since the Club had
      responded in accordance with the interim recommendations of Lord Justice
      Taylor, it was not appropriate to consider the issue of a prohibition
      notice at this stage.. Again, the matter will need tobe considered in
      detail through the Advisory   Group and matters referred to members in due
      course.

3.   SHEFFIELD SPORTS STADIUM

         Owlerton Stadium have now responded in accordance with the interim
         recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor. The Advisory Group is meeting on
         14th September to consider whether or not the ground is safe. The General
         Purposes Panel will meet on15th September to consider whether or not to
         issue a prohibition notice.    Thiswill depend upon the content of the
         report it receives from the Advisory Group. Copies of the relevant
         correspondence are attached for members information.

4.   RECOMMENDATION

         Members are asked to note the contents of this report.

HB7AAR
                                                                       U3E*vC         T t )* .




                          JHH/JB/D34
                          5tn Septeuioer, 1985#


..r. :-ac*.raxi,
itieii'iexa ««dntis<5ay rootoall Club ?LC,
•■lillsbojrougn,
i-'C? r   w«
So ijW


J e a r *ir. l i a c i i r e i i , •                          —

-.a: Safety          qz   j i 'h t t s   0 rounds

I refer to previous correspondence la connection with this natter and your
letter of 24th August. The General Purposes Panel of the City Council aet on
the 4th September 1939 to discuss the outstanding items of the interia
reconisjendations ox Lord Justice Taylor.

As far as the isatters which required 'iapiesentacioa before the caranencetaent of
Ctie football season are concerned, there arc three outstanding Batters

C A l e Rough you have confirseu that the Police are satisfied that the
    inf oration on. tici-ets is unaaoi^uous and correlates with information
     provicV^        «nu outsiue ttse ground, you have nutyet supplied a copy of
     cue revtseu tickets to enable the Local Authority to satisfy itself      that
     this is ia fact no.

(a) You have not confirmed that tne necical practitioneryou        propose to eaploy
    is trained ass cocpetent in advanced first aid*                        —

r'lease al3o supply, as requested, a copy of the "scewarding plan" showing the
locution cf tiie scavarcs.

I look, forward to ’
                   nearing from you with a response to these particular natters
and also a suostsstive response to ay letter of 17th August. The members of the
General Purposes canel indicated that unless a satisfactory response is received
by the close of Business on the 7th Septenber, 1939, they feel they have no
sption but to coosxuer the issue of a Prohibition Notice in respect of the
iports Grouna.




                                                             Li.   fitted    err* &
Acting Hea3"~ of Department



Pa/61                                               734004 — Mrs. Woodhead
                                                                                    7^/f/  to




 our Ref:         GHM/JB/D34

 7th September 1989


 Mr. M. Webster,
 Acting Head of Department,
 City of Sheffield,
 Administration and Legal Department,
 Town Hall,
 Sheffield.
 SI 2HH


 Dear Sir,

 Re:       Safety of Sports Grounds Act

 I am in receipt of your letter dated 5th September 1989.

 In respect of the points raised please find enclosed a copy of our matchday
 tickets for the current season. The wording on the tickets for visiting
 supporters was printed at the request of the Police.

 In addition I am able to confirm that the additional medical practitioner is
 trained and competent in advanced First Aid.

 The stewarding plan has been completed but at present it is still in draft form
 as the Police and ourselves have been making     minor amendments at each ofour two
 hone matches. Once the plan has been finalised I will have it typed and forward
 a copy.

 Witinregard to your letter dated 17th August     1989, containing        Officers comments,
 I will deal with the points that were raisedin order:

 pg 1 1(a)(1)          Work completed.
.pg 1 l(a))ii)         In hand, we are awaiting however for the relevant Fire Officer,
                       who is at present on holiday, to return to duty for
                       clarification.
 pg    1   1(b)        Work completed by service engineer.
 pg    1   1(c)        Completed.
 pg    1   1(d)        Noted. Relevant staff informed.
 pg    1   1(e)        The subject of negotiations between Fire Service and Eastwood
                       and partners re re-siting.
 pg 1 1(f)             In hand. Awaiting exact specifications from Fire Service and
                       Building Surveyors Dept.
 pg 1 1(g)             As 1(f) above.
 pg 1 1(h)             Work in progress, not yet completed.

                                                  continued
■**» JMLW' 5TON0 *<LW                     "BARCLAYS .i^ABLJE iDIVISICN ONE
SOW           HOW        ■"3 9            -OWLS -V- -f«3RWICH CITY
S eat         se a t     '     ^3        . 19TH AUtSUST 4989 >
                                           Kick Of* -3.00pm
ENTRANCE     ft ENTRANCE £               NTH LEPPINSS WINS r
GANGWAY      p, GANGWAY A                GANGWAY^                                ROW:          19
. AOULT            JUV fr-OAf*           JUV fr OAf                              SEAT:             J3
* ^ 0 0        £     A. n o
            Po'TOBBG                                                  HE RET,




                                                                           e s t f a g F

                                     YOU ARE REQUESTED TO TAKE UP YOUR
                                     POSITION 43 MINS. BEFORE KICK-OFF

STAND     WS2 STANO WS2                   BARCLAYS LEAGUE DIVISION ONE
ROW           ROW   27                    OWLS -V- EVERTON
SEAT          SEAT   58                   30TH AUGUST 1989
                                          Kick O-f-f 7-30pm
ENTRANCE     c ENTRANCE C                WEST STAND VISITOR

GANGWAY      W GANGWAY W                 GANGWAYW                                ROW:          27

 AOULT             JUV.ft O A P          JUV &OAP           aouct                SEAT:          58
* 7.00         €       4.00          C 4.00               * 7.00
ra HE GIVE?*UP- TO HE GIVEN UP-                       THIS POHTiaN-TO BEHETAINEIS-




        Sheffield Wednesday F.C. pie
          Hillsborough Sheffield
  /•l                                                               •2 3   2
 M
                             LEPnMSSu«
                                                                    il I
                                                                    iM
                                                                                         : <0
                                                                                         Ui oc
                                                                                         11
                             isr
                                                                    I- ii1
                                                                    I?
                                                                                         F «
                                                                                         o 2
                                                                                         uli   2
                                                                    3?so * i1
                                                                           s 7
City of Sheffield              Metropolitan District

Roger Pensam , FCIS. MB1M, Solicitor                                                           A dm inistration and Legal D ep artm en t
Head of Department
                                                                                               Town Hall,
                                                                                               Sheffield S1 2HH

Our rafaranca         FW
       It

Your reference        __
                      DC/DM F
Oats                   6th September, 1989


Sheffield United Football Club,
Bramall Lane,
SHEFFIELD.
S2 4SU


Dear Sirs,

Re: Safety of Sports Grounds

I refer to previous correspondence in connection with this matter. I refer
particularly to the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor which
required implementation prior to commencement of the football season. The
General Purposes Panel of the City Council recently gave consideration to those
matters which required implementation prior to commencement of the football
season and remained outstanding. These -appear to be as follows:-

(a)    With reference to recommendation 41, I have not received confirmation from
       you that the medical practitioner you propose to employ is qualified in
       advanced first aid..

(b)     I refer to your letter of 16t'n August in which you indicated servicing was
        necessary to some turnstiles in the Bramall Lane stand and terrace areas
        and the Spion Kop area. I look forward to hearing from you with some
        indication as to whether or not this servicing has been completed.and the
        effect upon capacity in those areas.

(c)     The final point is a minor one, but please would you confirm that seawards
        have now been trained in the use of butt croppers. You indicated that
        there was a proposal for the Fire Service to undertake such training.

The members of the General Purposes Panel indicated that unless a satisfactory
response is received to these items by the close of business on 7th September
1989, they felt they had no option but to consider the issue of a Prohibition
'otice in respect of the Sports Ground. I therefore look forward to hearing
from you.

Yours faithfully, ^ ___________




                                                                                                              c :




                                                                                     73*00^ -               oochead
                           Fof-teteehone enquiries on this matter oieasa ring...........................    . (STD Code 0742)
                                                          Telex 5 4 2 4 3 (A d m in istratio n & Legal)
                                       "TheFmiiy CM”
            Bramall Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 738988 Fax: 0742 723030

           UC/EMF


           7 September 1989


           Mr. M. WebetBr,
           Acting Head o f Department,
           Administration and Legal Department,
           Town H a ll,
           S h e ffie ld ,
            SI 2HH


            Dear Sir,

            Re: S afety o f Sports Ground

            Further to your l e t t e r dato 6 September, I s e t out below our r e p lie s
            to the p oin ts th e r e in :-

            a)   I confirm that our medical p r a c titio n e r i s competent in advanced
                 f i r s t aid.

            bj   I confirm that th B necessary t u r n s t ile ser v ic in g has been completed,

            c)   The stewards who w ill be operating the b olt croppers have been
                 trained in th e ir use. In add ition the f ir e se r v ic e i s organising
                 a h a lf day course to incorporate f ir e extin gu ish er and c u ttin g
                 equipment use which w ill serve as a u sefu l refresh er course.

            Yours f a it h f u lly .



            DAVID CAPPER,
            Company Secretary




Directors; R.J. Brealey (Chairman), D. Dooley (Managing Director), A.H. Layer, M.A. Wragg, 3LWragg, P.O. WoolhoUM
            Company Secretary: D. Capper.         Team Manager: D.T. Bassett,     ' England Reg. No. 81564
..:iefriela oports 3ta<iiun,
      jtaCiius,
   tcrton,
      ;i— •




^aar 3ira

^e; Safety at Sporta Grounds - Owlerton Stadluta

I refer to previous correspondence in connection with this natter. The General
Purposes Panel of the City Council net on 4th September l>i‘ > to disc?**® ch*
ijuttera vaich resaineu outstanding wnich required luplesectation prior to
coar*encement or tne roocball season pursuant to the rsccffaendatians of Lord
Justice Taylor. As far as Sheffield Sports Stadiu-s arc concurred, the u>llowins
r.-atcers appear to oc outscanning

        I nave not received your calculations cr
                                               ~r capacity -■■■'. V:.«        .u.'..-

Cs)   i«u i«sve uot 3Uf j.-lieii a cup/ of cnc -l ;rcc-.t:nt you Uase •sntAr^j into with
      cue Police.

(c>   You have not supplied details of the checks you             -..atu<e concur*-.:*.tr rh«
      layout of barriers.

(a)   You have not supplied details of the checks you have aace upon. tr.e ilow
      rate of turnstiles in accordance with cnc interin t’ecouf.ieui-3 ti>■-.

(e)   You have not supplied details of the nunber of first aiders in relation to
      tne numbers of spectators you propose to capioy,.

(f)   ton have not contirned that the saedical practitioner you jropos* to eaploy
      is trainee, in acvanced first aid. Wot* have you supplied i n f o r - n a a s to
      his proposes location at the ground or confirmed chat aeaus hare bsdn
      establianeJ to ensure that he is ic«aediauely contact^ole.




                                                                 Cl.     tofu*        iff**

                                                                    't    Cctxrv,
                                                                                 'f       >4*^,

FB/61                                                734004 - Mr3. Woodhead
Tiieae iteas all required iaplaaentatioa prior Co coaisencerwmt of the football
season on 22nd August 1989.    Hie General Purposes Panel stated that unless a
full aaciszactory response 13 received by the close of business on 7th September
       easy wilx consider cue isiue of a Prohibition H o d c e in respect of the
Spurts ■'■rour.u. L ajok :cr*ara to hearing froa you.

Yours faithiuii.,




       :tidu 'JL - r.aCwia«ttt
 (Sheffield Spo q ts Stadium
    __________________ (OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM LTD.)—----------------------------

                      THE STADIUM                .    OWLERTON               .   SHEFFIELD S6 2DE                                                          Tel. Sheffield
                                                                                                                                                          (0742) - 343074

G'.'fsral Manager:   J. S. CARTER


                                                                                                                                         7th September, 1989 •
Hrs:. Vioodhead,
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
Administration &. Legal Department,
Town Hall,
Sheffield,
SI 2J1H.


Po«r Si r s ,

                                   ~Re: Safety at Sports Grounds - Owlerton Stadium

     We hereby acknowledge your letter of 5th September that arrived this morning.
We would like to make the point that if Mr. Bownes had not kindly faxed a copy of
the letter* through to us yesterday that it would have been impossible to give you a
reply by the deadline set (7th September, 1989, i.e. tonight).


         a)          Ground Capacities as advised by Eastwood & Partners

                     1)      The Sportsmans' Tavern..                                                                                                600
                     2)      The Sportsmans' Tavern Terrace - 3,078 Less 15%                                                                     2,616
                     3)      Panorama Room.                                                                 4                                        601
                             Main Stand Seating.                                                                                                     667
                     5)       Greyhound Terrace - 1,615 Less 15%                                                                                 1,372
                     6)      Greyhound Bar.                                                                                                          220
                     7)       East Terrace - 2,592 Less 15/5                                                                                     2,203
                                                                                                                                        -   .




                                                                                                    TOTAL.                                       8,279


                     N.B.       Imposed Limit 4,000.

         b)          We have been in touch with Chief Inspector Beal who advises us that policing
                     is not required for greyhound racing, stock car racing and speedway.
                     Policing however is required for Rugby matches and they will only provide
                     such policing if the Stadium is issued with a Safety Certificate.




                           Chaitman and Managing Director K S H-JNT Directors P 1 5RAOFOHD. 1-C.A. 1 CijRliEN. J S I'AHltR. A G yARHIOT
              R e g is te re d in E n g la n d N o. 7 0 7 4 0 6   R e g . O H ic e . T H E S T A D IU M .   P E N IS T O N E R O A D , S H E F F IE L D S 6 2 D E .
                 ■39   39/37        13:49                                    S 3742 333531          OULSRTON STOP1.                    • 02




S heffield (Spo q ts S tadium
             ________ (OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM LTD.)------------

                                                                                                                            Te). Sheffield
             THE STADIUM              . OWLERTON                      SHEFFIELD "55 2DE
                                                                                                                           (0742) • 343074

   \>iM anager- J- S. CARTER


                                                                         -   2
Mrs?. Woodhead.                                                                                            7th September, 1989-


      c)    A random sample of the barriers and perimeter walls on the back straight
            terrace have been load tested. Stress tests indicate that the barriers
            and walls will safely withstand Category 'B* loading. The general condition
            of the barrier is good.          _ ,

            The opening between the perimeter wall and rows of barriers satisfies _
            the requirement of the Green Guide in respect of the slope of the terrace.
            However, the spacing of the individual barriers, along the rows does
            not strictly comply with the suggested arrangement shown in Figure 3 of the
            Green Guide. We would therefore expect the capacity of that particular
            area of terrace to be reduced accordingly.

      d)    We have checked the turnstiles which are in use three nights a week ard we'
             can average ten people per minute per turnstile. On this calculation with
             ten turnstiles operating at the main entrance we would easily accommodate
             the imposed limit within the Statutory Hour. For sports other than Rugby
             League we can accommodate expected crowds within thirty minutes.

             The turnstiles themselves are awaiting mechanical checks by Mayer Turnstiles.

      e)    The Interim Report requires us to have 1 first aidmember per 1,000                                                    of crowd
             and we usually have at least double this for stock car racing.

      r)    Ourmedical practitioner for motor sports is:-
             Dr. Colin Shawcross.

             Sheffield, 5.
             (Tel.No.                      )

             He is retained and approved by the R.A.C. and is qualified to the highest
             degree in advanced first aid.

             He is located in the Private Box with the Duty Safety Officer throughout
             the evening where he can observe the racing and where he can reach the
             First Aid Room. He is contactable by telephone and the Duty Officer's radio.

             As far as the 156 greyhound racing days are concerned we have been unable
             to obtain the services of a Doctor as yet as racing clashes with surgery
             hours. We are arranging with Para Medical Organisations that a member of
             their staff is present at the First Aid Room at every meeting and would
             ask the General Purposes Panel to consider our request that this measure
             would suffice for the time being.




                   "hain>an and Mai’ ac:'i<l Oirecror < S -UN’   Oiref"'S’ 9 3 iHAOf’JHy. • C j\.   - 3    » fc MARHiCl>
           R egistered in England No. 7Q7406 Reg. Offics : THE STADIUM, PENiSTONE ROAD. SHEFFIELD S6 2DE.
               ________(OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM LTD.)                                                    ...

               THE STADIUM             .    OWLERTON                .    SHEFFIELD S6 2DE                                                        Tel. Sheffield
                                                                                                                                                (0742) • 343074

 !ii-.iiMAiiac)(»r J. S. CARTER




Mj'i-’. Woodhead.                                                                                                               7 t il S e p te m b e r , 1 9 8 9 -




      In view ol‘ the pressures caused by the !tf 11ssborouKh Tragedy and Lord Chief
Justice TnyJor’n Interim Report on the Officer Working Party the General Purposes Pnncl
together with the support {services required for the staging of Uugby League and
root,ball, wc feel that we have no alternative to abandon p.lnns for the opening of the
Si-adJum to the paying public for both Football and Rugby I.eague for the coining
reason. This would not prcc.lude the Stadium being utied for trainingschooling and
practicc. We hove asked our legal advisors to write to you separately on this point
:n; ihey are In the process of applying to the Home Office for the de-dcsignation
of the Stadium under The Safety and Sports Grounds Act 1975-



                                                                             Yourn fuithfully




                    I'JiwiiHii ii-’U       ‘n w rif < S 'ilJNi   OifCPt'VV f* 1) HHAtJI UHU. • C-A   ' CJfUilN, i S ’JAHlLff A I M A H R KH ?
           Registered, m England No. 707406 Meg. Office THE STADIUM. PtNISTONP ROAD, SHEH IU.D S6 2DE.
Lord Mayor's Secretariat
           The Committee received a report of the Chief Publicity
Officer  on a review of the staffing arrangements for the Lord
Mayor's   Secretariat carried out by the Personnel Department and
noted that, because of the varying nature of the workload of the
Lord Mayor's Attendants, it was proposed to bring the relevant posts
into line with the NJC Conditions of Service for APTSC staff without
delay and as recommended by the review.

CAPITAL PROGRAMME OUT-TURN 1988/89                 ,;\
          The Committee received and noted a Joint report of the
Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department, the City
Treasurer and the Director of Land and Planning on the out-turn of
the Committee's Capital Programme for 1988/89.         *

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS                           -      t
          The Acting Head of Administration and Legal'Depar'tmetrt
submitted a report informing members of action takenin retrpcLt <of
sports grounds in the City as a result of the Tnquiiy lnto^%ire
Hillsborough Disaster, giving details of staffingchanges which
would be necessary to deal with the additional/ jieatands on t^e
Licensing Section of his Department arising from the recommendations
contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and outlining
other future necessary action in the mattec.           ~'
RESOLVED: That (a) the contents of the report sow submitted
noted;
          (b) approval be given to the proposal contained in the
report for the creation of two additional posts of Chief Licensing
Officer and Licensing Officer to deal with safety of sports grounds
and other issues, subject to such proposals Itesbag discussed with the
appropriate trade unions under the CounciT’s "Responding to "Change
agreement; and
          (c) the attention of the PolicyXora^ttee T>e drawn to the
fact that this Committee has insufficient resources in Its '’Revenue
Budget to cover the cost of providing the two additional posts.

MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISES
Action taken under Delegated Powers
          The Committee received and noted a TTBpert of the 'General
Manager, Markets, on action taken by him under delegated powers to
let stalls at Exchange Street and The Market TXace, Crystal Peaks
Shopping Centre, Waterthorpe.

Four-Monthly Report on Staff1-*»g
          The Committee received and noted the xour-monthly report
on staffing of the Municipal Enterprises Management'"Board-

Revenue Budget          _                     ; .5.
          The Committee received and noted reports on the monitoring
of the Revenue Budget relating to the Markets undertaking, the
Central Transport Service, the Central Supplies Organisation,,
Printing Services and the Catering Service.

Printing Services
RESOLVED: That (a) authority be given for the provision of a
suitable car within the Central TransportTleet to be made available
for use by the Marketing and Sales Section of Printing Services; and
          (b)           the City Treasurer be requested to advise on the most
appropriate method of financing such provision-
                              S H E F F I E L D       C ITY    C O U N C I L


                                          GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
                          (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                       Meeting to be held on Monday, 2nd October, 1989 at 2,30 P-.nu
                                             In the Town Hall

                           PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MESTIMG
                                                                               V;   .



          (a)   The documentation and items to be discussed in public at the
                 meeting may, in the first instance, be inspected at the'Local
                 Government Information Service, 67 Surrey Street, S h e f f i e l d ;
                 The Service is'open between 11.30 a.m. to 1.00 pim. and 2«00 p.a.    :
                 to 4.00 p.m. -Monday to Friday. For further details telephone
                 734750.                                                       ~    ‘
                                                                   .   * 1~             •...   -ti
                Certain information may not be available for public    inspection.
          (b)   For items (if any) marked * it is anticipated that the jpreaajT' '
                 and public may be excluded from the meeting.                     v

          (c)   If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not available Iso
                 the press and public or not available until the start of £be
                 meeting for the reasons shown.


                                        A G E N D A


          1.    EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
                To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude
                 press and public.

»         2.    HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATEHIRE LICENSING
    ^           Reports of the Acting Head ofAdministration and Legal
    Jpl         Department on individual cases.                  (Copy herewith - '*1*1

*         3.    CINEMA LICENSING
                The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to
                report verbally on an application for the grant of a
                 cinema licence in respect of the Woodthorpe Public House,
                Mansfield Road, Sheffield.

          4.    THEATRE LICENSING
                 Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
                 Department on an application for the grant of a
                 provisional theatre licence in respect of the Lyceum
                 Development, Tudor Way, Sheffield.               (Copy herewith - "B”!

          5.    TRACK BETTING LICENCE
                 Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
                 Department on an application for a track betting licence
                 submitted by Mr. Graham Mackrell on behalf of Sheffield
                 Wednesday Football Club pic, in respect of the
                 Hillsborough Stadium.                            (Copy herewith - "C")
HACKNEY CARRIAGE LICENSING
Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
Department on an application for permission to install a
television set in a licensed hackney carriage.  (Copy herewith - "D")          T.-r-.r


AMUSEMENTS WITH PRIZES
The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to ' '                      ^
report verbally on an application for the grant of permits
for amusements with prizes under the Lotteries and
Amusements Act 1976 and the Gaming Act 1968, in respect of
the Old Palace Cinema, Stocksbridge.

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal.                             ;
Department.                                     (Copy herewith - "E")

FILM CERTIFICATION
Bequests of the Senior Film Officer for permission to
exhibit the following films under the conditions relating
to Category "12":-                                                      ' *
     "Rebel Without a Cause" ("PG")
     "Stand and Deliver" ("15")
     "Young Frankenstein" ("15")


 (NOTE: It is expected that the public and press will be
excluded from the meeting during the consideration of
items 2 and 3 as the relevant reports will contain exempt
information as described in paragraphs 7 and 12. of
Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended
bjr the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985,
relating to the financial and business affairs of other
persons and legal matters and advice).




                                                                              •>
REPORT OF THE ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
PURPOSES PANEL


Subject::- Safety of Sports Grounds

1.   Introduction

     This report raises a number of miscellaneous issues which require members
     aattention.
       ffu n fin n -

2-   Visits to Sports Grounds

     Members have expressed an intention to visit the Sports Grounds within the
     City. Sheffield United Football Club and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
     have indicated that they would .welcome such a visit at Members' convenience.
     It is therefore recommended that such visits are arranged as soon as
     possible*

3.   Minutes of Advisory Group Meetings                       ^

     .The Advisory Group met on 24th August, 1989 and 14th September, 1989.
      Copies of the minutes of thosemeetings are attached for Members'
     information* ■■         ''                                ’"

4.   Don Valley Athletic Stadiua

4,1 The Advisory Group visited the Stadium on 20th September, 1989, to make an
    inspection of the site and discuss with the architects their proposals for
    implementation of the requirements of Lord Justice Taylor.

•4»2 It is clear that substantial resources will need to be devoted to the
     numerous issues raised. Members will receive a full report in due course.

4-3 Ihe Stadium "has not yet been designated by the Secretary of State as
    requiring a Safety Certificate. However, since the premises are in the
    course of construction it is felt that every effort should be made to ensure
    that they wilT comply with the Green Guide and Lord Justice Taylor’s
    recommendations »

4*4 There is one matter which requires consideration at this stage. The
    Advisory Group are meeting to discuss this matter on 28th September, L989,
    and at the meetiqg of the General Purposes Panel on 2nd October, Members
    will receive a full report upon the matter. The issue which requires views
    from. Members is the effect upon safety of spectators of a hill located at
    one end of the Stadium.



5.1 At its meeting on the 15th September, the Panel considered whether or not
    spectators should be admitted to the Kop in view of the fact that the
    barriers had not been tested pursuant to the removal of the radial fences.
    I have now received confirmation from the Club that the barriers have been
    tested. A copy is attached for members' information.

5.2 Oh the 21st September, L989, I was notifed by the Building Surveyor that a
    number of items of maintenance work had not been carried out at the Club.
    Additionally, the Building Surveyor was concerned that the perimeter wall at
    Shoreham Street and Cherry Street was in a dangerous condition. I advised
    the Club T?yletter on the 21st September that my representative and" the
   Building Surveyor would attend at the Club at 11 o'clock on Friday the 22rv.
   September to discuss the matter. Unless the Building Surveyor was satisfi* ...
   that the premises were safe, then a prohibition notice would be issued with-.'-
   immediate effect. Upon attending the Club, an inspection revealed that most::;
   of the maintenance works had been carried out. Those which remained were
   not of immediate danger to spectators in the opinion of the Building
   Surveyor. Arrangements were made for the wall to be supported by shorings
   and scaffolding. The work, was carried out on Fridaiy-rthe 22nd September by
 — the Works Department. The Club ga-ve an undertaking to replace the wall
   within the nextTthree weeks. There are no matches scheduled to take place
   at the Club in that period. This item is referred ta'^aembers for
   information purposes- l am concerned that this matter^was picked up at a
   late stage and discussions are taking place with meaibers .of’ the Advisory
   Group to establish how we can ensure this does Vnot'<rcciax 1again. A further
   report will be submitted to members in due course Iwt'any comments members
   have would be welcome.                               ;X v "

Recommenda cion

1.   Members are asked to suggest suitable dates for visiting Sheffield   United
     Football Club and Sheffield SJedaesday Football Club. -

2. Members are asked to note the concents of the attached minutes of the
   Advisory Group Meeting..

3. Members’ views upon the safety of spectators at Don Valley Stadium are
   sought.




BH/PB66/FW229
      Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group Meeting in the Town Hall Sheffield
      - Committee Room 3 - Thursday 24th August, 1989 at 10.00 a.m.
i i
                                                                                                  ACTION

      Attendance:-   Messrs.     Ward and Bownes (HALD);
                     Messrs.     Broomhead, Ma r s h .           and Baal (SYP) ;
                     Messrs.     Grimshaw a n d F             (CFS);
                     Mes srs .        and            (SYMAS);
                     Messrs.     Purchon and          (HCS) ;
                     Mr.   A.    Butler (Building Surveyors).

      PRELIMINARY COMMENTS                                                             ]

      The meeting started shortly after 10.00 a.m. with each individual person   1
      present introducing themselves. Mr; Ward then explained"biMtS&sixaanshi? “"1 •
      of the Group and explained that the future of the group was under review i
      and that there would be a report to the Policy Committee in September.     }
      Mr.  Ward also explained that the reason for the length of the agenda was ]
      so that all current outstanding items could be at least noted for dealing }
      with in future if possible.  He also indicated that he    Id prefer if ' f
      possible that the meeting finish at or before 12-30.   ■’ '     •        V'}

      ITEM 1 - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY SAFETY CERTIFICATE                                 -      J
                                                                                             1
      Mr. Ward asked if there were any comments on item 1 on t h e agenda —                  J
      relates to the amendments of the Sheffield Wednesday Sscejy Certificate-               i
      It was confirmed by Mr.   Bownes that the capacity of the North Stand at               ;
      Sheffield Wednesday had now been cut to 9 ,700. The Ti r e Service cosnaen£s           ?
      were being sought on the capacity of the Stand bearing In mind the "as®*               I
      wheel chair provision at the front of it. Mr. . Grimshaw iadicat-ed that               ‘
      the Fire Service comments on capacity would be forwarded in full deSari!               s
      shortly and he went on to mention that the Stand capacity of 'the T o p couia          \
      not be evacuated in 8 minutes in accordance with the Green Guide as rt seS             1
      been discovered that a number of the exits were^ in fact smaller thme
      originally thought.   In fact, the 18,200 number could only be evacuated
      from the Kop in 8.6 minutes using the existing exits and-not the oicrs
      perimeter fence gates.   It also transpired that approximately 16,83S
      people could get out in 8 minutes (again not counting the pitch perimeter              ! “ ire
      gates).   This whole question was being fully reviewed by the Tire ‘S ervirs-          i Servi ce
                                                                                             i
                                                                                             i
      Mr. Butler indicated chat the capacity figures he had arrived at wessa           ?
      based on the Green Guide and not necessarily on the meanis of e-scape- *jle -
      went on to explain that the previous 21,000 capacity figure had no             -1
      relevance in this respect and he had simply started from a clean sheeccttr *
      paper.  He also indicated that 152 had been taken off the figure i a
      arrived at in order to give Che capacity as recomnended by the T a y l i m v ;;-T 5
      Report.  Chief Inspector Beal mentioned chat at this point recommendation'
      19 of the Interim Report, which refers to che availability of a n u m b e r 1of •!
      turnstiles for each area.                               - ,                   ■ \
                                                                                    ■■■■■*   ;i
      Mr. Purchon questioned Che widening of the pitch perimeter gates and Mr.   i
      Grimshaw indicated that the Fire Service will recommend this, but the Cicb I
      had not been asked for it. Mr. Bownes explained chat 'this' was -new '•    !
      information which had not yet been formally passed to the Council-

      It transpired sc Chis t-oinc, cnac HeaLch & Consumer Services, SYMAS and
      t n e Building Surveyor apparently had no: recsived- copies of che latest
      amendment co che Sheffield Wednesday Certificate and Mr.     3ownes agreed zz
      send chfem furcher copies.                                                                  HALD
Mr. Purchon indicated chat ha was not clear as to what parameters were
used to arrive, ac che capacity figures and h e noted chac Fire Service
comments had been sade on pitch perimeter ga :as and thac gangways had been
aencioned.   Mr.            |once again raise d the question of the 21 , 0 0 0
capacity which, if ic was subject to a 15” reduction, would gee co
approximateLy 17,350 people.   Therefore, a h igher than 21,000 figure must
have been used by Mr.   3ucier to scart vith.    Mr.  3ucler iadicaced chat
chac was che case and he wenc on C3 reicerac a that his figures were based                                Fir e
on the. Green Guide.  Ac this poinc, Mr.   War d indicated chac che Fire                                  Ser vi chj
Service'"and 3uilding Surveyor could perhaps usefully discuss chese macters                               3ui lair..
which each other , wirh a view to coining out virh a concensus view.                                      Sur vevo '

Mr. Pur chon said chac he Thought, che Council should adopc the .'lowest        [
possible figure, for example, the 16,SQO as mentioned by the Fire Service [
earlier. 13r- "Butler mentioned that such a decision presupposes che
  —___ of
non-use  _x' "Che emergency
                   :_______ -exits
                              :___ onco a e pitch-
                                              •      ._ ^
                                                     Ac  1 .• _pointV
                                                        chis       -‘. 1Mr
                                                                         . --- 2I
Che Aobula-nce 'Service indicated that he thattjjht ic would be’ap'propriacs
for the Tire Service and Building Surveyor to discuss chis further.             [
Mr. Ward further comneaced that there should be a meeting between che two !
parties, with a view Co escablishing a basis of calculation and .producing |                              F ir^
recommendations on capacity.       Tf there was no agreement on either of these I                         Seri^ce
two areas, Then the Council -would probably have to take the lowest figure S                              Building
available-                                                          I                                     Surveyo r

Mr. "Butler questioned again whether or not the pitch perimeter gaca should!
be accepted ,s t a tneaas oi egresa.   Mr. Bownes then suggested chac the      j
appropriate procedure if there were any differences of opinion was for a       •
full report to be prepared tor the General Purposes Panel wich opcions so ;
chat members could decide «ith the benefit of all che advice .Co adopc one I
particular course or another.     ?lr. ward said, chac in £uCure all decisions •
would be made by the "Panel as would ail !codificacions co any cercificaca     1
issued- Ho USrlcer af •the "Council has auchority to modify or exclude any }
part of the certificate-. /This information would be communicated to the       j
Clubs and tro all Authorities and deoartaencs involved.                        ! HALD

Mr. Purchon mentioned paragraph 215 or che Green Guide which- dealc wich
pitch perimeter..gates and the stricc interprecacion of chac paragraph
would result in che 15,800 figure being che only one chac che Council
could adopt- ."Sr. "Sard once azain said chac ic mignc be appropriaCe for '
Officers to meet and discuss this and-chen for a Raporc co subsequencly be
prepared cor the ?anel.                                                                                   Officer

Chief Inspector Beal ^pointed out chac now all pi cch perimecer gaces were
signed as emergency exits la accordance wich che Taylor Reporc and chac as
che Fire "Service say, each.jjate should be ac lease 1.1 mecre wide, wich
level access to them.. Mr. 'Purchon agreed wich this view.

Ic was agreed Chac the Fire "service and che 3uilding Surveyor should
discuss che outstanding issues concerning capacity with a view to
reporting back to the ne)£t Advisory Group and-subsequently to the Council.

ITEM 2 - THE SHEFFIELD UNITE]             JENERAI

Mr. “Purchon said-he would like Co hear the Fire Service view on the John
Screec Scand as having read he ' De p a r t m e n t 1s Reporc there was a quantity of
combustible rubbish, etc.   and breaks             the floor giving access to the
void beneath in sevaral areas.    Mr. Grim snaw o r cne : ire service m a ic a t e c
that as far as che Fire Service was concerned, the work carried o u t t o t h e
Jonn Street S'ind rais-sc safety t r 2         i              Level.      He —e r . t ' . o n e c c h e
reduction in caoac.tv, the rscova : c-         ■Sa wI T Z .      CO rW" 3 Z i ~ 5 S", i O* S 5 C2 D6
onto the pitch, automatic fir? decoction, the insca.l       •     : -s- ; .
                                                                  lacior.     of two fire
                                             -3-


resisting screens, the securing and emptying of rooms noc in use, "Che                        ACTION
provision of two Seawards during specified activities on patrol in the
area checking locked doors ensuring that there were no accumulations of
rubbish and looking out for fires, and the provision of signs.

Mr. Bownes mentioned that the Stewarding schedule would of course have to
be amended, when the United Sxewarding schedule had been absorbed by
Officers.  This had been sent to Officers recently.   Mr. Grioshaw went
onto say that the refreshment area was apparently now defused and should
be cleaned out and locked.  In addition, any redundant timber should be
moved. Mr. Purchon once again commented that his Department's Report
referred to combustible storage etc.  Mr.   Grimshaw mentioned this was
covered in the Fire Service comments.  Mr.   Purchon said that United do
not appear to be toeing the line and Mr.   Grimshaw agreed. Mr.   Purchon
indicated that the situation needed to be watched closely and that there
seemed to be sloppy management and poor maintenance at the gfound. Mr.
Grimshaw agreed that there must be a toeing of the line by United.

Again, it was agreed that the Fire Service and the Building Surveyor
should discuss capacities and also sort out the question of the disabled
section at United.  Mr. Purchon mentioned United's request for radial
fences to be removed and he indicated that he saw no useful purpose for                       Fire
them. Mr. Donnolly outlined the Police request which had been submitted                       Service &
by letter. Mr. Grimshaw of the Fire Service saw no problems in removing                       B u ild itr g
the radial fences.                                                                            Surveyor

Mr. Bownes read out Mr. Butler's memorandum of 23rd August which had been
handed to him at the beginning of the meeting in connection with the
fences and the radial barriers.   There then followed a discussion between
Mr. Butler and Mr. Purchon.   Chief Inspector Donnelly asked (in relation to
radial barriers not fences)if there was any risk of crowd side sway
perceived by the Building Surveyor and Mr.   Butler indicated that people
could duck under the barrier but there must have been a reason for the
installation of the barriers in the first place and it seemed likely that
it was to deter crowd sway.   Mr.  Purchon indicated that the Council
should make clear whether it wanted radial barriers or not. Mr.     3utler
indicated that there was some efdvice available to the Council from
himself, the Police and Dr.   Eastwood in this connection.   Mr.  Purchon
questioned why there was, for example, no radial barrier in the middle of
the terrace and that there should be a logical approach to radial
barriers.   Chief Inspector Beal indicated that capacities cannot be
achieved by the Club as it was not possible to prevent a cross-flow of
persons from one capacity-determined area to another. Mr.     Purchon-
 reiterated his view about the need for a logical approach to radial
 barriers.

Mr. Ward then indicated that the options before the Group were that the
fence could either be removed or extended, and there was also a question
about the radial barriers.    It was agreed to recommend that the radial
fences should be removed -sub ject .to the conditions mentioned in Mr.
Butler's memorandum and that che Club be put on notice that che Council
was considering the quescion of radial barriers and that it ought to
consider them too.  Both clubs should be involved in this.

 ITSM 3 - OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM

 Mr. Purchon indicated that he was          very disturbed by the condition of the
 Stadium in that it a p p e a r e d to be   badly maintained and that it was beir.i;
 used ror a multi tud-        uses                  *23 n o t i d e a l .   Mr. Vard aske::
 if it was appropriate z s consider         u s u i r ; a Prohibition Motica. Mr.
 Purchon agreed.   Tne Fire Service         representatives indicated that tne
        future of rthe S-ports Ground was uncertain.   Mr.  Ward ascertained Chat
        everyone agreed the scadi.ua was Ln a poor condi cion and Hr.   3ovnes
        mentioned at this poinC chac no comments had been received from either the
        Building Surveyor or che Fire Service pursuant co the annual inspection i.i
        May chis year.   Mr.              [
                                          of che “ ire Service indicated chat they
        were under the impression chac che whole fucure of the Scadiun was being,
        reviewed, and chat also officers attended the ground but did not do a
        survey of it.                                                                            W,S:

        Mr. Ward explained chac the Council had co determine che applicacion
        before it seaa. indi raced that a full ra-survey of che Sports Ground was
        required cm the be-is of tfs presenc use and full capacity.       Mr.  Purchon
        said chera was a     roblem about chis, for example che south.terracing.
        Chief Inspector 5*31 indicated chac Sc.      Helens would be bringing 5,000
        sup porters {probably) to Hillsborough for che firsc rugby march and chac che
        Police definitely''will not police Owlercon unless all che -Taylor
        recommendations are fully mat.     Mr. Ward asked when che :surveys could be
        done and the Tire Service indicaced chat they would like, for consiscency,
        to have the same officer do che survey, buc if chac was not possible Chen
        someone else »ould do it.     Mr.  Ward, suggesced 14 days , .which was agreed.
                                                                                              i
        Mr. Sutler questioned what was co be done and referred co ,tne various
        -reports that had been prepared in 19S7.  Mr. Ward reiterated., chac a full
        survey was required and the Council had tc decide whether.to issue a
        Certificate or to prohibit the use of the Stadium.   He indicaced thac he         Fire
        was chinking"lit terms of a report co a committee at the end of Sepcember.        Servi ce
        Mr.   Ford indicated chat as far as re-signing the Scadiua was concerned




                                                                                                        M <10
                                                                                          Bui lair.
        everyone should use Eastwood's olan 3863/1.                                       Survevo

        I t was agreed that a full survey of che Sports Ground should be carried
        out within the next 14 days by che Fire Service and the 3uilding Surveyor
        with a view to a report to che next aeecing of che Advisory Group and then
        the Council by the end of Sepcember.


ire**   Sheffield Wednesday Aooiicacion - The Youns Owls Club Office Accommodation i

        "Everyone noced che Building Surveyor's comment ac 2.1 Co 2.5 in che
        memorandum.   There were no further conmencs on ic.                               HALD

        ITSM 3       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY NORTH STAND HOSPITALITY SUITE

        The commencs of the various officers were noted and approved and ic was
        suggested by Mr. Purchon and agreed chac all consenCsshouId include
        appropriaCa conditions co nocify complacion of che works and to ensure
        thee they will be compleced in accordance with che comments.

        ITEM h - SHEFFIELD' WEDNESDAY - CAR PARK AT REAR OF NORTH STAND

        It appeared chac a number of chese applications had gone astray and
        therefore, they were co be recirculated to che Building Surveyor
        and copied to SYV.aS . Tha application was, tr.ereiore, deferred pending a
        rsci rcu : i on o z «r\s c o c u n c s «                                          HALD

        ITEMS 7 AND 3 - -SHEFFIELD UNITED DISA3LED FACILITES & FAMILY ENCLOSURE

        ine Fire Service passed across the table a copy of chair comments on che
        Family Enclosure and both items were deferred for further consideration.
        Tne cotjv of t he c i s a o L e c i r o o c s a .   f a rw       C7**Mi~
                                         -5-




ITEM 9 - URGENT BUSINESS
                ,                                                                    I , ACTION
                                                                                      I
Mr. Ford mentioned ChaC a builder had made approaches Co Health and                   !
Consumer Services in connection wich Sheffield Wednesday and chac a visit             [
was abouc Co cake place Co assise the builder in following his
D e p a r t m e n t s commencs.  The Fire Service and Building Surveyor indicaced
chey had had similar approaches.           Comments were Chen made abouc delays in
receiving informacion and Mr. Ward indicaced thac if all else failed
telephone calls would have to suffice.           Mr. Purchon commenced upon che
possiblility of 'during performance' inspections and Mr. Ward indicaced
chac •this~va5'~a'_maCtffT_far~che policy report which would include                      ACTION
enforcemenc, etc.           It was important for people to make their views known,
preferably in writing on these issues.

Mr.      |asked the general question of ’who does what in the Council?'
Mr. Ward indicated that this will be explored in the policy review and Mr.
Page made the point that the procedure could be too slow.   Mr. Ward
indicated that obviously urgent and dangerous items must be brought to the
attention of the Council Immediately by celephone.   Mr. Purchon wenc on Co
mencion quescions about the reporting of accidencs and any attention which
Che first aiders have to give to people-   Mr. Bownes indicated that this,
of course, would be a matter far the policy review as far as enforcemenc
was concenied-

Mr. Ward wound up the meeting by reiterating that enforcement and ocher
policy issues would Tea the subject ox the review reporc and chat a n y
issues which anybody wanted to raise should be broughc up as soon as                  j
possible.




GP/262/DSB
30.8.89 •




 HB7AAQ/JL
Safety of Soorcs Grounds Advisory Group Meeting In the
Town Hall, Sheffield - Conference Room I - Department of
Land and Planning - Thursday, 14th September, 1983 at
2.00 p.m.

Attendance:-   Mr. J. Ward      )                                                    ACTION
               Mrs. F. Woodhead) (HALD)
               Chief Superintendent 3eal
               Superintendent D. Sleath
               Mr. T. F. Broomnead, (Acting ACC)
               Superintendent G- Marsh (SYPl
               Messrs. Grimshaw and __         (SY Fire Service}
               Mr.|            ^SYMOS)
               Mr. M. Ford (H&CS)
               Mr. A. Butler and Mr. % Blount ("Building
                 Surveyors)
               Councillor J.     Butler (Sheffield City
                 Council)




MINUTES OF LAST MEETING
                                                                3
                                                              ..'   - :


There were no comments arising out of tfee aeertiqg -feald.

APPLICATION OF GREEN GUIDE                  '

Generally speaking, the meeting assented to the .proposal that Cbe tiuifle
be strictly applied except when there are very substantial reasons for
not doing so.   The only reservationswere expressed byArthur ’Bstler, The
Building Surveyor.   Kis view was that the uiiide was merelyguidance for
professionals and that the professional view ought to prevail rather than
the Green Guide. Mr. Ward responded that tn'is va-s not disputed and
accepted that in certain circumstances, it may T» appropriate to relax
the provisions but that the Council should have that option and that the
starting point must always be the Green Guide- The principle aust be
that departures are made from the Green tJuide ar&y in very exceptional
circumstances. If there was a conflict, then the higher standard would
be applicable. Mr. Butler indicated he still.felt that the "Green Guide
could be restrictive and that there could be. difficulties if the .guide
was adhered to strictly.                    'ji

Mr. Blount said that there was a difference IjetWeen saying something was
more or less correct and saying something needed relaxing. >ir. "Jard
replied that if the Council were unaware of ^potential problems the
Council wil be in difficulties if questions. were, asked of Its officers.
The duty upon officers were to put the Council cn notice of problems.            !

There was really no alternative but to stick strictly ..to the .latter of
tne. law.                                .

 Mr. Blount said that this would prevent difficulties in view or the ract
 that the Guide was not as precise as perhaps it could he. '.ife.- ~’ard again
 emphasised that what the Council insist upon is not a sattef for this
 groups' It is up to officers to report to the Council to make decisions.
                                            -   2   -




3.   CAPACITY‘AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F00T3ALL CLUB

     Mr. Ward referred Co the letter from the Fire Service dated 30th August.
     He confirmed that this matter --as to be referred to the General Purposes
     Panel oc Friday, 15th September and comments were needed from the Fira
     Service and 3uildisg Surveyor.   The Fire Service were asiced whether or
     not they had anything to add to their latter.

     Mr. Grinshaw indicated that the consents only covered the Xop and the
     North-West area.  Their views upon the North-West terrace were r.ot in
     writing yet.  Due to lack, of plans, they have not commenced caiculati^-s
     for the South Stand.  He indicated that the evacuation time was the main
     issue and whether or not pitch perimeter gates were used as emergency
     exits.  Without using the pitch perimeter gates, it was possible to
     evacuate 16,300 people in the •8- minutes specified in-ths Greet! Guide-

     Tne police indicated that there contingency plans utilised the periaeter
     gates, depending upon the position of the fire.  If the fire was on t&e
     pitch, there would not use them.                     .'... .

     Mr. Grimshaw referred to Home Office advice which accepted that 10
                                                                                      #)
     minutes was a reasonable time to evacuate the pitch.   Their propc s al w as
     to use only normal exits to evacuate.   If the pitch perimeter ga-ssas-«eia
     used,, on the basis of one unit, they could evacuate in just over T
     minutes.   The Green Guide says that evacuation should be possible within
     3 minutes.

     Mr. I    1 from Health and Consumer Services, indicated that in his vias,
     the Green Guide snould be followed.

     The general view was that the Guide should be       adhered to and therefore
     the capacity should be reduced to 15,800.

     PITCH PERIMETER GATES AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

     Again, reference was made to the Fire Service letter of 30th August, ""The
     Fire Service indicated that originally, the difficul.rv was that the pitch
     perimeter gates were not signed for evacuation purpose;.   Now, all =rase
     signed as means of escape.  There was no dissent from the views expressed
     by the Fire Service in thair letter.

     With reference to paragraph 7 k the police said that the views expressed
     in tr.av paragraph were untrue.  The arrangements with the police-wgaie
     that the Club would only sell 4000 tickets leaving the balance as a -
     contingency.   The point was noted by the Fire   Service who said   thatii
     should not make any difference to exit numbers.

     CAPACITY AT          ID UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB PURSUANT TO REM0VA1        RADIAL


     The Fire Service commented that their calculation of capacity was
     approximately 11,000 on the basis of the evacuation time needed.          That.,
     was below the currant figura in the certificate. _W i t h reference to' tire
     Kop, the exits from the immediate vicinity were adequate.         Mr. Butler.,
     3uilding Surveyor, commented that his calculations had been done purely          l
     on tne holding c a p a c i t v and on that basis the removal of the radial feres j
     did not altar the position vis-a-vis the casacitv.-                              j
A second emergency item was raised at this point, that of the testing of         ACTION
barriers pursuant to the removal, of the radial fences.   In accordance
with the notice of consent for the carrying out of works issued on the
25th August, 1989, one requirement of that notice was that the barriers
were tested by the 15th September, 1989.   This is presenting difficulties
since both Arthur Sutler, the Buidling Surveyor and Eastwoods, on behalf
of the Club say that the cement will take 28 days to set.      It is
therefore recommended by the Building Surveyor that the period in the
notice is extended for 28 days running from the date the posts were
inserted.   Frances Woodhead asked whether, in view of that, the area was
safe for the admission of spectators.   Mr. 3utler took the view that it
was since when the load was tested, it was put on "overload",      Ke talked
about the curve of maturity of concrete.   He was of the view that the
concrete would already have the adequate strength to achieve the load
required but was not yet at full strength.   Therefore, to err on the side
of caution, the testing should not be undertaken as y e t . T h e police
pointed out that two matches have already taken place at -Bramall Lane
since the concrete was laid.   No large matches are anticipated in the 28
day period.   Mr. Butler indicated that he did not perceive'any likely
problems if spectators were admitted to the area in the meantime.               AHALD

OWLERTON SPORTS GROUND

Mr. Ward referred to documents C and F. attached to the agenda.      He
confirmed that the Council would be considering what to do with Owlerton
Stadium In the very near future and explained that the Director of Health
and Consumer Services was minded to issue a Prohibition Notice.      He asked
for the gr ou p ’s views upon this ground.  Mr.  Butler indicated that he
had nothing further to add pursuant to his written report.      The Fire
Service referred to their letter and referred to page 3, item C(2).       He
confirmed that the Panorama referred to the whole of the first floor not
to the Panorama Room as defined in the Entertainments Licence.      The
police and SYMAS had no comment to make.     The question therfore was
whether or not a Prohibition Notice should be issued or whether we shouLd
consider issuing a Safety Certificate in respect of the ground.       Mr.
Ford asked whether we had any alternative to issuing a Safety
Certificate.- Frances Woodhead advised on the requirements for issuing a
Safety Certificate and explained that members of the Council were now
moving away from their original view that a ground had to be up to a
certain standard before a Certificate-was issued.      The view seemed to.be
 that if a ground was safe, a Certificate was issued, if not, we
prohibited the use of it.     There was also some discussion about the
possible application for the re-designation of the Stadium by the Stadium
 itself.  Julian Ward said that he expected that the Council would oppose
 such an application and that the views of the Council would be sought by
 the Home Office if such an application was made.

The Fira Service confirmed that the cieans of escape would be acce stable
for day time use.   There were concerned that there was no es ergen
lignting and therefore the ground was unsafe for night time u s e . They
indicated that the need for emergency lighting had been brou gh t t o the
Club's attention two years ago.    Mr. Ward explained that the re we re two
options.  We could do nothing, but if we did nothing we had to ha ve
reasons for doing nothing.   Alternatively, we could issue a Sa fe t
Certificate or prohibit the use.    Mr.       lonfiraed that tn e pre sen c
Health and Safety legislation did not assist then in taking enf or tener t
action action asair.st the ground.   There were reliant uoon S 3*A ^V
                                          -   i   -




Mr. Ward referred to the Building Surveyor's report which ran to 29 pages
of immediate s a f e t y requirements.  Tnere was also the list of vor.; =
required by the Fire Service.       He said was there any reason not to issue
a Prohibition Notice.       The report clearly revealed immediate safecy
hazards.  The concensus ox the meeting was therefore that a Probition
Notice should be issued and a recommendation made to the General Purposes
Panel ax its meeting of 13th September to that effect.       Some dicsussion
then took place as to wha'cher use could be made of the bars.      It was
confirmed that they could because all we were doing was prohibiting the
use of tae premises for sport .njg activities.

^rhe-Fire -"Service raised the question or the use of the Panorama Room. •
Mr 7 Sard asked that the Director of Health and Consumer Services looked
at the problem of capacity.     Same discussion then took place as to
whether the Prohibition Order should be restricted to a particular sport
or a particular part of the Stadium.     As far as the Fire-Service were
concerned, most events are believed to have taken place in the afternoon
and therefore there was aot a problem.     They confirmed that .they have
subrairteg a similar report listing items of work two years ago and the
work had -not been carried out:.                            *
                                                                                       m
It was therefore concluded that the appropriate recommendation was that a
'ProniaiiS.cm Notice was issued in respect of Owlsrton Sports Stadium with
 L3aed±5ta"effect for all kinds o f soorts.
             ..   -,.U-              :1       -   ■ ■

SngTFTEII) WEDNESDAY CAR PARK
                                  - >•

Referents''was made to the memorandum from the Building Surveyor dated 6th
Saptesasrl' 1989.. Mr. Butler confirmed that he still awai-ting advice frora
the rfaij'-anS commented upon the lack of detail on the drawings.   The Firs-
Service'confirmed that the delineated parking area at the back of tne                Bui Idi to"
Training "facilities were satisfactory.   The police indicated m a t :neir           Surveyor
observatlirns revealed that the work had now been done and was simply                Fire
awaiting Tihe top coat of tarmac.   Further enquiries need to be made about
tf a iiS -           ■?
                  ■^ ;    -   >
5HEFFIEL5 UNITED - DISABLED FACILITIES
                  :M r-       ;     -
The letter from the Fire Service dated 4th August and the latter from                   ■*>y
Health ana Consumer Services dated 27th July were referred' to.   Mr.
Butler harmed in a memorandum setting out his comments.    There was some
disctisslon about wavs in which the facilities were inadequate.   The Fire
Service said that the stepping arrangements could be improved and there
was a need Tor handrails at access points.   The item was deferred co                Further
enablermembers of the Advisory Group to give further., consideration in              meeting
their individual capacities.
     v .''

SHcFFIELD tINITED SOUTH STAND - FAMILY ENCLOSURE

Julian "Raxd referred to the letter from tne Fire Service dated 12nd-
August.. Tne Fire Service made reference to the means of escape which had
been calculated on a 50/50 ba'sis.     They said they would need tne views of
the police as to how it works in practice.       The police considered tnat
there wars no problems, that the stand emptied very quickly but they were
unable to say how many people vent one way or the other. There was
therefore a possible imbalance upon the exits.       The police questioned hov.
tne stewards we re to b e .made aware of tne means of- access-across the
concourse and the er.ergenc •• prrcedures as r-rferrri ir p i n : : ' : - '.Z '
tr.eir iecter :: 1'nd Augu,~:.    .ha po.ice.re.: trr»: th- s : =wr. re s ,;=re
being asked to complete an impossible task and tnat it was no:
appropriate to put tnat onus on stewards.       The Fire Service         : tn e re
                                                           '    3    "




                  f!ll-a (-Keed f° r an0ther §aCe across the middle of the area and                   the police
                                                                                                           ?<
                  felt there was a need to monitor the area.          Butler said                        •-
                  concerned about the gats specification.      T    h   e    r
              “ “   3     thelr ! • « « • »•  3utler felt the „ t . should be I i i ° „ ,
              Firm's ^e ^reS niS" 3nd snouid lo°’
                                                * as if it could be easily opened.     Th-

         '    height^Se^';!!                           ^       “ “       ^       h a p p y   't 0   r e d u c e   th e ^


              Mr. 3utler mentioned the turnstiles at the Shorehaa Street entranc- a-d

              fJon, t e d z e o T t W ^          *° ^   7" * ™ -    ^  S*id ChaC iC was ?°ss^
              of the*‘t i " b f r J    -    ramp t0 *” * ci=3retts      and rubbish on the roof
              removed               r® rresnnJeTVt           saigge^ad that the cabin was
              question of r* ar*ret?ce to Cne -amaly enclosure area, he raised the

              it    ioildB P       rrr
              5o this and ™ * ° v a l.o* seats        There was no suggestion on the drawings to '
                                                         tu. w          * t i l l unintended since
              it would create a gangway xa an area wbere steps were twice the riser
              level tney should be.  It ,a, therefore a g r e e a ' t h a t ^ e « J t * r „ m L
              left m abeyance until further information was available.                 '

10.           STEWARDIMG


              nrS-H              th3t tbere             Tor an analvsis of the schedule
              provided by Sbeifield Unitea to * . undertaken.  The Building S u r v ^ r
              stiiar5ierfcSlee £nlS:      The ?iXE '5er7ic5 raised rbe quescion of che ‘
              stewarding on tne pitcn perimeter at Sheffield United F o ot b a’l Club
              They saia it cxd not tally sita tfe f i b r e s ia -the Schedule.


             Streeteltlnd                                l i r e _specif:ica tions at. the John
                             .“w ~”s- “  'c° 1- se« 2 to be identified on r.-.e Schedule with
             tne certificate.. It was
                                        agree- xairther comsiaeration would be -iven to
             th 6 E3 £ uST •

             WORKS REOCI*
                        JSXJj


             LV^cuirli                   had       ^                         U   taMta       »      co.pl.te

12   .       URGE!      BBSISESS


             Fo°otbfwCS b ° r'                                of       .t Sheffield Unit
             t o o c u a ^ Club. Clear tnat more Details are needed about -his   It « s
             S S / T S " * 1 “ *! * * * • * * e l i c i t , dii not „ m i c ' ' Z : - , £ i ; V 0
                : aw                ^   provision of liquor is also permitted sin-e tne
             Control or Alconbl Act does riot affect cugbi*.

             The Fire Service raised the Joint- of Sheffield Wednesday and "he ca-aci
                                                                                                                    tv
             ■'          ™    5™ d ’ ^   A'                   1. - - r o w e r chan I t ' s h o S £
                           capacity,  ^eed to;ooni t 8 * ‘eaergencv procedures w i ^ '
             u'= i.wiwu*ar reference to Upper Concourse Area.




             PGT
                                                                                                                                                                     St. A n d r e w s H o u s e
                                                                                                                                                                     23 K i n g i i e l d R o a d
        j    S T W O O D                    &       P A R T N E R S
                                                                                                                                                                     S h e f f i e l d S.1 1 9 A S
    /       | . ‘ (Consulting                   E n g in e e rs )
                                                                                                                                                                      Tel.: (0 7 4 2 )              554554
        /♦Qor* :                                                                                                                                                      Fax: (0 7 4 2 )               554330
            Eastwood                    :           3 =-"3
                                                             z    a   o'
}
                                                    - =    ? G S.. '

                                        3 e-s       3" ~      C :-S                ■
    A .A .W o o d                                            Vi ! A ' s M       V Cc»« -
                                        ?i$::*-£*•-                                                                                                                          Pr«mi>r                    Hous»
                                                                 V iC i              Si'-jc: -
        R .C .A .E as tw o o d           2 3c       C .i-S
                                                                                                                                                                             1 2 /1 3       H a tto n   G a t-d *n
                                            c Cng . c i C £           M !           =-
        G .S p ir                                                                                                                                                            .London            JEC1N          SAN
                                            9**. C                              M iS,,a" S                                                                                   7*1.; (01) 242 7436
        C.S.G r e a v e s
                                             35,,:CH.. «->= e
                                                            - S,,5!,UI!5                                                                                                     Tr- . yjs) 404 5424
        S. P re s to n
                                             S ic    C S n ,.. V            I   C        =
        G.M. S e a m a n
         D.S. S t e p h e n s                                                                                                                                  jas/sss/ii22B
                                                                                                                               Ou r Ret                  NE/

                                                                                                                                YOUf


                                                                                                                                                                                              1389
            clty of Sheffield .Metr^olitan ^ s t r i c t
                                                                                                                                                                      r. ’
            Administration ana Legal                                                     d -p

            T ow n Hall/
            Sheffield
            51 2HH




             Dear Mr. 3 owr.es ,
                                                             Sheffiel
                                                                      ^ Spor-o
                                                              g^fatv or rnAr" 5 ^
                                                                                i^yOUr.CS
                                                                                   — --------
                                                                        Baglai Fences

                                                                    t-a* the lengths                                                                      barriers^,                 =2
                           I write                   ■O c
                                                    to    o n r ^ m t-a-
                                                        c3r         *» -      20 on                                                                       a g n a i l .lax® t a r r - e
               42 and 48 or.Spion Kop anc^ 1 . ^                                                                    ^         procedure                                          . * * ■ « * -=
               were load tested,                                        rn*cco.                            ~                         M                    „
               the         'Green Guide',                                   °n F n a a y                           =■                                         showing,.
                                                                                                                                                                      the jasnliH
                             x eopv of e a c h or our                                                                                                ^         teasiBS, S3 . B / 1 0 0 C
                of the tests toge>_—                                                     »-                              ^ ^             ^               barriers tssts^ a^e
                'a n d     651S/102C showing the                                                        oca ....                                                ^       ^               cases tbs
                    e n c lo s e d .            You w i l l                     see =rom th. r-.u                                                                      ■■>£;/::

                    barrir                                                                                                    ot ^
                                                                                                                    ■ “ ’ * C2T S O •                                         . -       .
                                                             led in the next day
                         .1 be forva:
                                                                                                                   Yours         sincerelyr




                                                                                                 -     r       r
                                  v_.           n . capper
                                                                                                                                                                                                         R . i-1. G o d d s r
                                                                                                                                                                    C. M . Pollans
                                                                                                                                 j . M. V Jc o d                                                             : •   -    -   C. . ' - . i - '
                                                                                                     R. T a n d y                e t . ;.j, ^ V                     ;z’--, cj'-s- *•' -;                 i             *SVi'
                      j. A . S t r a n g s          A. J.                           -.                                           V       i r j ~ z
                                                                                                                                                                    V. '.S'.-uCi
                                                                                                                                                                                                         N'J



                                                                                                                                                                    -=33'.^. V
                                                                                                               C3 ” V   = e ? 'S - rS'      ~ = " ;3 " C
                             MEETING 'OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
                     (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                                     held 2nd October, 1989

                   PRESENT:   Councillors Moscrop (Deputy Chair), Ms. Fiore, Hussain,
                              Lamb, Mrs. McLLheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs.
                              Walton and White.


1    ■
             (1)   FH24 CERTIFICATION
                   RESOLVED: That the requests now reported of the Senior Film Officer
                   for permission to exhibit the following films under the conditions
                   relating to Category "12" be granted:-            .^    -

                   Film                              Present Category

         1         "Rebel Without A Cause"
                   "Stand and Deliver"
                                                          "PG"
                                                          "15"
j                  "Young Frankenstein"                   "15"
•i
             (2)   TRACK BETTING LICENCE
                             The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
                   submitted a report on an application for a track betting licence
                   submitted by Mr. Graham Mackrell on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday .
                   Football Club pic, in respect of the Hillsborough Stadium. Mr.
                   Mackrell attended the meeting with his Solicitor to support the
                   application. The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
                   reported that he had received no objections to the application*
                   RESOLVED: That the application now submitted be granted.

             (3)   SAFETY-OF SPORTS GROUNDS
                             The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
                   submitted a report on a number of issues relating to the safety o £
                   sports grounds which required matters' attention. The report
                   enclosed minutes of the meetings of the Safety of Sports Grounds
         )         Advisory Group held on 24th August and 14th September, 1989 and a
                   letter fran the Engineering Consultants for the Sheffield United
                   Football Club Limited indicating that barriers on the Spion Kop and
                   Bramall Lane terraces at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground had new been
                   tested and proved to be satisfactory. The Acting Head of
                   Administration and Legal Department also reported verbally on a
                   proposal of Sheffield United Football Club Limited to permit
                   Sheffield Eagles Rugby Club to hold matches at Bramall Lane Sports
                   Ground, stating that the Football Club had given an undertaking that
                   no alcohol would be on sale in the Ground when it was open for rugby
                   matches. He added that there was also a possibility of rugby being
                   proposed at the Hillsborough Sports Ground although the existing
                   safety certificates for the ground did not provide for the holding
                   of rugby matches.
                   RESOLVED: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be
                   noted;
                              (b) no objection be raised for the holding of rugby
                   matches at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground;
                              (c) the question of the possible use of the Hillsborough
                   Sports Ground for rugby football matches be referred for
                   consideration by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group;
Meeting of the General Purposes Panel (Municipal            Page 2
Enterprise and General Services Programme) 2.10.89


          (d) if necessary, the safety certificate issued in respect
of the Hillsborough Sports Ground be amended to permit the playing
of rugby; and
          (e) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
be requested to make arrangements for the Panel to visit and inspect
the Don Valley Athletics Stadium, now under construction, on
Thursday, 26th October, 1989, at 10.30 a.m.

AMUSEMENTS WITH PRIZES
           The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
reported verbally ,on anapplication...for, the grant of permits for
amusements with prizes under the Lotteries and Amusements Act 1976
and the Gaming Act 1968, in respect of premises at the Old Palace
Cinema, Manchester Road, Stocksbridge.
RESOLVED.; That the applications now submitted be granted.

THEam® IJX 3M SIN S     ? r :v
           The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
subm itted a report on an application for the grant of a provisioned,
theatre;licence in respect of the Lyceum Development, Tudor Way,
SheffieM.
RESOLVED: That (a) approval in principle be given-to the proposed
granting of a theatre licence in respect of the Lyceum Development,
Tudor “Way, on the satisfactory completion of the building works; and
           (b) should a theatre licence be granted, it is not the
Council’s intention to inpose a condition precluding the sale of
intoxicants, subject to the Council's approval of the areas where
intoxicating liquor may be sold and/or consumed in the premises.

EXCEIEICN OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
RESOLVED* That the public and press be excluded frcm the meeting
during the consideration of the regaining items of business on the
grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a
disclosure to them of exempt infomation as described in paragraphs
7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as
amended b y the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985,
relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons and
legal matters and advice.

HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
         .The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department

private hire licensing. The applicants in cases         I       1,
and       attended the meeting and the applicant in case         was
accompanied by his Solicitor.
RESOLVED: That (a) the applicants in cases                       and
      be given strong warnings as to their future conduct;
          (b)            the applications now submitted for the issue or
renewal of joint hackney carriage and private hire drivers' licences
be granted (i) for a period of six months in cases         and
and (ii) for a period of nine months in case
           (c) the applications now submitted for the renewal of a
joint hackney carriage and private hire driver's licence and a
private hire vehicle licence in case        Ibe granted for a period
of six months; and
          (d) the application now submitted for the issue of a joint
hackney carriage and private hire driver's licence in case |
deferred to enable the applicant to attend before the Panel.
Meeting of the General Purposes Panel (flfnnii-inai          Page 3
Enterprise and General Services Programme) 2.10.89



Application for Permission to Install Television Set
          The Head of ikininistration and Legal Department submitted
a report on an application for permission to install a television
set in a licenced hackney carriage. The applicant attended the
meeting to support his application.
RESOLVEDs That the application now submitted be not granted.


(NOTEs Consideration of an application for the grant of a cinsna
licence in respect of 'Woodthorpe Public Ifeuse, Mansfield Road, was
deferred at the request of the applicant to the next meeting of the
Panel*)
                                                            ira(vi.S     KjcccHx?



                                                                          J
           S H P F F - E L D   C I T Y    COU    N C I L


                      GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
      (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL PURPOSES PROGRAMME)


Meeting to be held on Friday, 13th October, 1989 at 2.3D p.m.
                       in the Town Hall


      PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETB8S

The documentation and items to be discussed in public lafc the meeting
may, in the first instance, be inspected by contact icgtfee l n m 3
Government Information Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield
The Service is open between 11.30 a.m. to 1.00.p.m. and 2-TJO .psm.
to 4.00 p.m. - Monday to Friday- For further details telsphcsse
734750. Certain information may not be available for p«fe'frrc
inspection.                                          '.y. . .

For items (if any) marked * it is anticipated tfaact t h e prcss aaad
public may be excluded from the meeting.

If indicated in the agenda, reports are either ncrt available "'Sss
the press and public or not available until 13ie start vif “Sae meeting
for the reasons shown.


                          A G E N D A

EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude tie
press and public.

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
Report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department m
(a) Capacity levels at Sheffield United Football TSround, Braraall Lane.

(b)    Proposals for the reopening of Owlerton
       Sports Stadium.
                                                    (Copy to;fon<Bf;}
                                                              ■' ° r<-a-^   Vj o c c 1h a .r




           S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y   C O U N C I L


                      GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
      (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL PURPOSES PROGRAMME)


Meeting to be held on Friday, 13th October, 1989 at 2.30 p.m.
                       in the Town Hall


      PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETING

The documentation and items to be discussed in public at the meeting
may, in the first instance, be inspected by contacting the Local
Government Information Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield 1.
The Service is open between 11.30 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. and 2.00 p.m.
to 4.00 p.m. - Monday to Friday. For further details telephone
734750. Certain information may not be available for public
inspection.

For items (if any) marked * it is anticipated that the press and
public may be excluded from the meeting.

If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not available to
the press and public or not available until the start of the meeting
for the reasons shown.


                         A G E N D A

EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude the
press and public.

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
Report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department on
(a) Capacity levels at Sheffield United Football Ground, Bramall Lane.

(b)   Proposals for the reopening of Owlerton
      Sports Stadium.
                                                  (Copy to follow)
       Gityof
          ^
              Sheffield
               liiMMAUan r\etn^t
                        M etropolitan Distnci

                                                                          A dm inistration and U g ii Otqartman*
                                                                          TownHiMr                    .
                                                                          ShaffiaM SI 2HH

       Ourrataanea
       You*rataiama
                         10th October, 1989



       TO THE MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL (MUNICIPAL
       ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE)



 4     Dear Councillor,

i      Safety of Sports Grounds

I      Further to the agenda for the meeting of the General
       Purposes Panel to be held on Friday, 13th October, 1989
f     Aenclose a copy of the relevant report of the Acting Head
'i    v-* Administration and Legal Department relating to Safety
       of Sports Grounds.

i     » Yours fiaithfullyP^




if"     Acting Head Q^a^fepartment




        Enclosure




        ^             For M toptum aoquifiw aathisiM tH rptM W ring.
                                              T a ta 6*243 (Mmintstntton ft lagai)
                              City of Sheffield
                     Administration and Legal Department


                         w /t M   i * c. £.    t r' C ft i
                            F R O N T     S H E E T




           GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE
           AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE)


'E Or COMMITTEE:         13TH OCTOBER, 1989


            SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS



                         MRS. F. WOODHEAD




                   Full derails of wnat. ccr.sti u~es conricsnzia-
                    exeras~ information are ava ilable on request
REPORT OF THE ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
TO THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL__________________________________


                           Safety of Sports Grounds



1*   Purpose of Report

     The Advisory Group is to meet on 'Wednesday, 11th October, 1989, to
     discuss the question, of capacity at Sheffield United Football Club and
     the proposals submitted by Owlerton Stadium for use of a portion of the
     Startjam.

2.   Capacity at Sheffield "United Football Club,

     The current maximum number of spectators which can be admitted to the
     sports ground are contained in the Safety Certificate which was issued
     on tie 11th August, 1989. HA cogy of Schedule 5 of the Safety
     Certificate is attached Which sets out the relevant figures by
     reference to the various areas of the sports ground. The question of
     capacity lias Iseen given consideration by the Fire Service and the
     Building Surveyor, .pursuant to the renewal of the radial fences
     authorised b y this Committee on the 25th August, 1989. The Fire
     Author!^ Isass sufanaitbed -aletter dated the 26th September, 1989,
     concemiEj xhe capacity. A. copy is attached for members information.
     Of jpar+innijir note is their view in paragraph 1 that the capacity of
     the esd±s o n tiae kqp is 11.,040. Members will note that this is
     substantially in excess of the capacity currently specified in the
     Safety Certificate. "The matter is to be discussed at length at the
     Ad^jsory Qaoc^ ineeting on "Wednesday, 11th October. The Building
     Surveyor and the Fire Officer will attend the meeting of the General
     Purposes Panel to advise matters further.

3.   Owlerton Stadium

     Proposals nave been jput forward for restricted use of the Stadium.
     Ttese proposals incorporate the use of the area in front of the
     Panarama Ttocm only. Detailed plans have been submitted by
     Eastwood ■& f&rtners, Consulting Engineers, on behalf of the Stadium.
     These have been circulated amongst members of the Advisory Group. The
     matters of the Advisory Group have also visited the Stadium and the
     proposals subnitted are to be discussed at the Advisory Group meeting
     on Wednesday, 11th October, at 2.00 p.m. The plans and full details of
     the proposals will be available for members at the meeting on the 13th
     O c t b b e R . : :y;\

4.   Conclusion^

     Maribers are asked to, note the contents of this report.


              ■'-r '   ■



MS2/AA.
                         SCHEDULE 5 - CCRDITICN NO-39
                           ~     ■ ■                  ♦
. . ■ '■>—*   r"
 the'nurofcer of spectators admitted to a specified activity shall not exceed.
-37,136.^..:'.                           ~
                  -                    •       —     ■- • -   --
•TSw-nttter of spectators admitted to each of the sports ground* listed
 bnlnrj shall not exceed the maadmam rmmhfirs she*©.

                          Maxinaan No. of Spectators

 South- Stand (Seats)               7,3®

 Sramall Lane                                                  -.3;? *:-
    Seats                            2,953                -   iW-'kt;-
                                    5,550

 John Street
    Timber Section Seats            1,23D
    Concrete Section Seats          1*3*®
    Branall Lane End                1,355)
    Kop End                         2,233

  Spion Kop
     Southern End                   3jT33D'
     Main Kop Area                 10.553

                                   37,^S
> U T H Y O R K S H IR E F iR E A N D C IV I L D E F E N C E A U T H O R I T Y



South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H.    E. Wright, Q.F.S.M., M .I.FtreE., F.B.l.M.                                                                     Command H.Q.,
              Chief Fire Officer                                                                                     Wellington Street,
                                                                                                                      Sheffield,
                                                                                                                       South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                                                   . - Telephone: Sheffield
                                                                                                                       STD (0742) 7272Q2

OurRef:      rei9/2/4B/RG/DG                       ^ urRef.                                         ■ ^            ^ Date;- 2 6 .0 9 .S f        ..

This matter is being dealt with by . .     P.^^^skaw............................................................      Ext. N a . . 27Q". . . . . . . . .



  Mr 0 Bownes
  Licensing Section
  Legal and Administration Department
  Town hall
  SHEFFIELD
  SI 2HH


     Dear Six
                                                                                                 ■ - ■      j

     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUHDS - HRAHALL TAHtt

     Please find listed below, the capacities of the spectator areas of tile BramaH
     Lane football stadium which are based on means of escape available.

     1.     Spion Kop - (eight minute evacuationtime)                                                              r !,                     ;

            The capacity of the exits is 11,040.

            The restricting factor is the design of the escape routes Cram t3>e rear
            of the Kop down to the John Street/Shoreham Street corner.

            Final exit gates to John Street give 20 units of exit width wiLicfa
            together with the other exits from the Kop are capable of exiting 14,880
            in eight minutes. The stairs from the rear of the Kop down t o These
            gates however, only give 12 units and will only allow 5,760 to use -them
            in eight minutes giving a total of 11,040 when added to the other exits
            from the Kop.

             The long walkway towards the Shoreham Street gate is of seven units in
             its early stages and widens out before reaching the final exit gats
             which is only slightly in excess of six units. Owing to the distance
             between the Kop and this gate however, it- is considered reasonable that:
             this route be counted as being of seven units.

     2.     John street Stand

     (a)    Timber Section (Two and a half minutesevacuation time)

             (i)          Seated area - capacity 1,200 seats

                          With six units available for egress at the end of a game, this
                          section could b& evacuated in five minutes*

                          With 12 units available for forward evacuation in case of. an
                          emergency, this section could be evacuated in 2.5 minutes.


                                Ail corr-nunications to De addressed to tne Chief Fire Officer.
Standing   araa - capacity specified in the Safety Certificate -
1,340.                                             . ^

With four units available, this area could be evacuated at    the
end of a game in 5.5 minutes

With the     nine units available through' the pitch perimeter
fence, the   2,240 people (1,340 plus 900 frpm seated section)
could be     evacuated on to the pitch in 4.15 minutes. If the
additional   two unit exit, from the end of the terrace is brought
into use     by provision of a steward and suitable signing, this
time could   be reduced to 3.3 minutes.

HB Whilst the exits can be considered as being capable of
exiting the stated occupancies as detailed above, due -to the
convergence of exit routes from standing and' seated areas
immediately before exit gates 'J' and    there iis actually a
reduction in exit route capacity.

It is recommended that the situation be monitored during games
to ascertain whether this causes any problems.         If so, a.
solution will need to be found.

Concrete section (eight minute evacuation)

Seated area - capacity 1,490 seats.

With six units available for both normal and          emergency
evacuation, 1,490 people could be evacuated in 6.2 minutes.

Standing     area - capacity specified in the Safety certificate -
2,050.

Of the 11 units available via gates '6' and 'H' to John Street
it can be assumed that six of the units are already accounted
for by people exiting from the seated area, leaving five
available units to accommodate people from the terrace.

The worst situation is evacuation in case of an emergency
because in addition to the 2,050 on the terrace, there will be
an additional 300 people evacuating forward from the seated
area of the timber section making a total of 2,350.

With the five available units through gates 'G' and 'B',     2,350
people could be evacuated in 7.8 minutes.

HB   As with gates 'J' and "K" referred to in 2(a) (ii) above,
whilst the overall capacity of the exit routes appears to be
adequate, due to the convergence of -exit routes from the
standing and seated areas immediately before exit gates 'S' and
'H ', again there is a reduction in exit route capacity which
should be monitored and rectified should this be deemed
necessary.

 In the above detail, gate 'G' has been calculated as being of.
 six units when in fact its width is 80mm less than the required
 3.3 metres, this being considered acceptable.
. 3.    Bramall Lane Stand and Terrace (eight minute evacuation time) '.
                                                                   •   r'


       . (a)      Stand - capacity of seats 2,958

                   Means of escape    are   considered to be adequate for the stand
                   accommodation.

         (b)      Terrace — capacity specified in the Safety Certificate — 5,660.

                    The exit route along gangway No.6 gives slightly less than 1.1m
               -./j on either side of the centre handrail, but even if this route
                    is to ba counted as only two units, with other exit routes,
                    there are a total of 13 units available which are capable of
                    exiting 6*240.

                   If the four unit gate to the car park behind the south stand is
                   brought Into use, as previously recommended, the capacity of
                   the exits from this terrace would be 8,160.

                   HB    The centre rail to the stair from gangway No.6 down to
                         the Bramall Lane exit is bent over slightly, causing a
                         reduction In the width available on one side, therefore
                         It requires straightening.

  4.    South Stand

        Capacity of seats is 7,948.

        The general means of escape available is considered to be acceptable for
         the number of spectators specified in the Safety Certificate, subject to
        -satisfactory    management   of   the   family   enclosure entrance/exit
         arrangement*
        •1' ' ...          '
        T*or the same reason given for the recommendation of alternative means of
         escape forward on to the pitch at the Hillsborough stadium, it is
         recommended that similar provision be made from the south stand at this
         stadium.    Gateways or openings at least 1.1m wide should be provided in
         'line with existing gangways.    Any gate fastenings should have the
         ■approval of this department and all the exits should be indicated by
         elgns bearing the words "Emergency Exit" with white letters on a green
         background and of a size to be determined on site.

  5.     Other Hatters

         A further Inspection of the ground is to take place to follow up the
         matters referred to in your letter dated 19th September, 1989 and to
         clear up any other outstanding items.

         'Tour recent letter requesting our observations in respect of crowd
          capacity following removal of the fence on the Kop, also dated 19th
          September, 1989, is answered by Section 1 above.

   The above matters should be brought to the attention of the other members of
   Advisory Group for their observations but if there are any queries, please do
   not: hesitate to contact the officer concerned.

   Yours faithfully




   Chief Fire Officer
 Meeting of the General Purposes Panel (Municipal Enterprise and
 General Purposes Programme) 13.10.89

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
Owlerton Sports Stadium               ~
           With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its
meeting held on 15th September, 1989, to issue a notice prohibiting
the entry of spectators to the Owlerton Sports Stadium, the Acting
Head of Administration and Legal Department -submitted''-a report on a
proposal of the proprietors for restricted use of the Stadium. He
also reported verbally on the recommendations made at a meeting of
the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group held on 11th October,
1989, regarding the proposals. The Managing Director and Secretary
of Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd., the Engineering Consultant to the
Company and a representative of the South Yorkshire County Fire
Service attended the meeting to speak on the proposal.
.RESOLVED: That approval in principle be given to the-proposal now
 reported for the use, during daylight hours, of the area in front of
 the ?anorama Room at Owlerton Sports Stadium for spectators while
 the Stadium is in use for greyhound racing .events, subject to
            (a) the completion to the satisfaction offthe Building
Surveyor of all outstanding necessary works f     "
            (b) the crowd capacity of the Stadium not exceeding the
 figure to be determined by the Building Surveyor, in the region of
 1500 persons;
            (c) no use being made of the Panorama Room while greyhound
 racing is in progress; and
            (d) no admission of spectators to the Stadium outside
 daylight hours.

Bramall Lane Sports Ground
           The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
submitted a report enclosing a letter from the South Yorkshire
County Fire Service which drew the attention of the Council to the
fact that, while the maximum crowd capacity for the Spion Kop
terrace
at Bramall Lane Sports Ground was specified in the relevant Safety
Certificate as 14,550, according to calculations based on the
requirements of the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds,
the capacity of the exits serving the area was 11,040. The meeting
was attended by the Engineering Consultant for Sheffield United
Football Club Ltd. and a representative of the South Yorkshire
County Fire Service and the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
Department reported verbally on the recommendations made in the
matter by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group at its meeting
held on 11th October, 1989.
           The Engineering Consultant stated that the Company wished
 to ask that the permitted number of spectators on the Spion Kop
 terrace at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground remain at 14,550 for at
 least three months to enable the Company to improve the access to
 accommodate that level, in view of the fact that walkways were
 somewhat wider than the figures used in the calculation, gates onto
 the pitch were permanently open and current Police practice was to
 hold certain sections of the crowd until others had left the ground.
 RESOLVED: That, in the circumstances now reported, the crowd
 capacity on the Spion Kop terrace at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground
 be restricted to 11,040.
                    GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
     (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)


Meeting to be held on Monday, 30th Octofeer, 1989 at 2»30 p»m»
                      in the Town Hall


     PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETING

The documentation and items to be discassed in public at the meeting may,
in the first instance, be inspected at the Local Government Information
Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield 1. The Service is open between 11.30
a.m. to 1.00 p,a. and 2.00 p.a. to -4.00 p.m. — Monday to Friday. For
further details telephone 73475CL.

Certain information may sot be available1‘fo t jjublic inspection.

For items Kif any) marked '* it is anticipated that the press and public
may be excluded from the meeting.

If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not available to the press
and jniblie or not available until the start of the meeting for the reason
shorn.

                           A G E N D A   *j-.'

EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude the press and
pub Iic.

Cl IT HAP.
Report of the Head of Administration and Legal
Department on structural reports submitted by
Eastwood and Partners, "Engineering Consultants, and
the Director of Land and 'Planning on the ceilings
and suspended fittings of the City Hall.
                                                (Copy herewith - "A*1)

HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
Report of the Head of Administration and Legal
Department on individual cases.                (Copy herewith - "B")

REVIEW OF HACKNEY CARRIAGE FARES
Report of the City Treasurer.                    (Copy herewith - "C")

FILM CERTIFICATION
(a) To confirm the action taken by the Head of
Administration and Legal Department in authorising
the public exhibition in Category "Sheffield 12" of
the following films:-

    In consultation with the Chair of the Panel -
    "K9".

    In consultation with the Deputy Chair of the
    Panel - "Eric the Vikiag” .
(b) Report of the Senior Film Officer on proposals
for the exhibition of uncertificated films and
certificated films in revised local categories.
                                                (Copy herewith - "P")

TOWN HALL AND EXTENSION - SMOKING POLICY
Report of the Director of Land and Planning.        (Copy herewith - "E"}

CERTIFICATE OF SUITABILITY
The Head of Administration and Legal   Department to
report verbally on an application to   renew the
Certificate of Suitability issued in   respect af tiss
Sheffield City Polytechnic Students'   Union BniIdlag,
Totley Hall Lane, Sheffield.

SAFETY OF SFORTS GROUNDS                         "^      4
(a) To consider-proposed arrangements for v i a i t a :' -
Hillsborough Sports Ground, Bramall Lane Sports
Ground, Owlerton Stadium and Don Valley Stadiaau

(b) Minutes of meetings of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Advisory Group held on 11th and 19th Xtetobec,
1989.                                        (Copies herewith - "F”)

(c) The Head of Administration and Legal Depeeaasrast
to report verbally on proposals of Sheffield Wednesday
and Sheffield United Football Clubs.

(d) The Head of Administration and 'Legal 'Deyaapsaaast.
to report verbally on the principle of issaiag^a
General Safety Certificate in respect of 'Dolertan
Stadium.

(NOTE: A copy of the Home Office Guide to Safety         Sports Grounds
(The Green Guide) is enclosed.)

STREET COLLECTIONS
The Head of Administration and Legal Department .-to
report verbally on the following applications—

Applicant         Organisation         Proposed                Proposed
                                       Location                  Date

                  Southern African     Tar^fie                 25.11.89
                  Resources Centre                , ;:     -

CINEMA LICENCE                              ''&■;$^
The Head of Administration and Legal Department, .to
report verbally on an application for thegrant.      »
Cinema Licence in respect of the Woodthorpe Pubtie .
House, Mansfield Road, Sheffield.           ...

STREET TRADING                                '
Report of the Head of Administration and Leg^il
Department on offers for street trading consents for
sites in Burgess Street and Dixon Lane, Sheffield.
                                                (Copy herewith - "G")

HOLLIS HOSPITAL CHARITY
To appoint a representative trustee of the Hollies
Hospital Charity in place of Mrs. K. Circuit who
has resigned.                                   •'
(NOTE: It is expected that the public and press will be excluded
from the meeting before discussion takes place on item 3 on the
grounds that, if the public and press were present, there would be a
disclosure to them of exempt information as described in paragraphs
7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972 as
amended, relating to the financial and business affairs of other
persons and legal matters and advice.)
                SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP

        Meeting in the Town Hall Sheffield. Committee Room 1
             Wednesday 11th October, 1989 at 2.00 p.m.

Attendance-: Mr. J. Ward      )_ Administration and         -
             Mrs. F. Woodhead) Legal Department               ' '
             Mr. I      _   1- Health & Consumer Services         '
             Mr- N. Beeden Inspector - South Yorkshire Police
             Acting Supt. J. Donnelly - West Bar            —
                 South Yorkshire Police
             Supt. Marsh - South Yorkshire Police
             Chief Inspector Roy Waring.-
               -South Yorkshire Police            ' 4     r        5'
           ' RonGrimshaw     ) _ South Yorkshire County
                                 Fire Service                     -
                           Station Officer SYMAS

               It should be noted that there was no one-
               representing the Building Surveyors.               '

MINUTES OF MEETING OF 28TH SEPTEMBER. 1989

Julian Ward commented that both he and Frances Woodhead had received
a number of queries from Departments wanting to know how far their
authority extended. He said that obviously officers who were
visiting the various sports grounds would have to answer comments to
the best of their professional ability but the Clubs must not be
under the impression that those comments amounted to agreement.
TOienever comment was passed, a caveat should be added saying that
the matter was subject to final confirmation by the Council.

Ken Hodgson then raised a particular problem he had had when he
carried out a food hygiene inspection of a temporary structure at
Sheffield United. He enquired to what extent could professional
comment be made without reference to members of the Advisory Group.
Julian Ward conceded that there would be urgent situations.

            then enquired whether there was a need for a Section 8
notification to be submitted in respect of the proposed temporary
structure. He said that he was aware that the Club wished to instal
ovens. Frances Woodhead commented that a formal Section 8
application should be made.

It was agreed t h a t w o u l d      telephone Sheffield United and
advise them about this and Frances Woodhead would write to them
asking for a formal written application to be referred to the
Advisory Group and ultimately to the General Purposes Panel.

Concerning the item on the minutes of the last meeting about the Don
Valley project, Ron Grimshaw confirmed that meetings with the
developers had taken place and that their representative was aware
of the needs of the Advisory Group.

Trances Woodhead advised about the plans and the fact that a meeting
would probably be scheduled in the near future to discuss the
proposals.
   ANNUAL INSPECTION - OUTSTANDING         M AT T T T P c




   made "apart dfrom6tho se "cont aine d In ^               additional C0I™ ^ t s to be
   Service confirmed t          h       a            t          i      n       ^   Fire
   had put in a reauesr fnr             j           ^       Bramall Lane Stand, they
  had not been done. This was M r t i c u S r l 51^” 5 t0 be installetL Thi
   fact that the stand was us^ed bv v t ^ *    7                in ^  of the
  commented that the stand should be s t e w f r d e d ^ r r e o “ 7 ’ a U °
  was available tot this was nn                        The required exit sig
  available. The PoXce    7 ^ 1  °    T t Z
                   Police c o n f i ^ d that            "i “ *
  now sm



  o « s ato5p.a^
  megfc^Tig-           n: s     s r ^ : ^ :£erreQ
                                            s s r tt0o in
                                                       ^ \the
                                                           s e7-had
                                                              minutes of carrie
                                                                          the

  Julian ¥ard suggested that the Club was eiven fhraa            ,
  out outstanding works and -i-f                g    n three weeks to carry
  matter s   h   o   u     l     to           ^     ComPleted. then the ^
  reference to Arthur t      e      S  J   r      l    P“ eV   ^      was also
  terracing and the f a c T t h S 2J?!   UP°n        conditi°n of the
  within the three week period Vo ma7 not te able t0 be completed
  theix l « t e r of the Z7t3i Septembar f r o ^ t h s ' r i r e ^ r 6 'C1“b haV> had
  agreed that the Club would be written to.                     Service. It was

  oprsTAmmG m as nott mmms „                                gTOgp             ^

                                              " T ' T       11 « •
 on the Sheffield Wednesday Safety Certifl' , the ™ tstarl'JlnS lte”s
 the t e m , Guide, the car part at Sh.ff^                   application of
 the weting to discuss the p r o p o s e s f o r D o f f n ^ 7 " d 3 date for
 Sheffield "United Football c L b sHJtT ^ r S i c ^ * 7 '            l*£t the
                    capacity * ■


 in line with their^ecent'ljtter "^Bo <1c°° C?e capacicy at the Kop
 no worries about capacity apart from                  Said that there were
 of stairways out of the John Street Stand °P ?xcep5 the monitoring
 Kop because there were only sufficient         * *S main concern was the
 That took account of thTexit ffo»          6; itScfor U ’°*° People,
 a seven unit gate which reduces to s i ^ i ^ b T ^                “ there
accepted as a seven unit gate because oT i l l ?            aS been
 exits are alright. Tha'»JnM«- •      u            length. The final
 stairways'from the Stand to thp        u configuration °f the
 twelve Units but^lg^re^needed                                  There
and accept that there is a bottle J e c k o n \ h r V * eCked th® matter
between two landings, there are onlv f              stairway.   in an area
area funnels. The area could               Y UHltS available and the
it because it would not increase t h e T *    ^   ^ would not be worth
justify; it.             increase the capacity sufficiently to

The police commented that-
large capacities, there may be a probl1^ 6” 16*1-that at matches with
their only spare capacity was in the Joh °“tSlde the Sr°und when
that pressure should be put on the Cl^b^V           Terrace* Th«y felt
that the Kop could be increased.  T ^ y said t S t i'^    t0 6nSUre
capacity was accepted as 18,000.                      St year’ the
/
        /
              The Fire Authority commented that they did know where the 18,000           ACTION
              capacity had come from. They accepted that the use of pitch
              perimeter gates increased the capacity by 4,000 and that the Fire
              Authority.wrote Eastwoods in 1986 but their comment was subject to
              referal to the Advisory Group even though it did specify an
              increased capacity.

              The Police said that a reduction in the capacity would present
              difficulties in their contingency plans vis-a-vis segregation-

              Julian Ward said that it would therefore be appropriate to pat
              indirect pressure on the Club to improve the Kop so that additional
              capacity could be accommodated.                                -

              The Fire Authority discounted the use of pitch perimetergates as      '
              exits in an emergency.                          .      ,I* '■«,*-

              It was therefore concluded that at General "Purposes ‘Panel on Friday
              13th October, it should be reconanended that a reduction iin capacity
              on the Kop was made to 11,040. The Fire Authority agreed that: they
    y         would attend the meeting.

        4.    DISABLED FACILITIES AND FAMILY ENCLOSURE - SHEFFIELD UNITEDFOOTBALL
              CLUB

              It was agreed that with, respect to the family enclosure, we »ere         HALD
              still awaiting details of the kitchen facilities.

        5.    EMERGENCY PROCEDURES

              The Police said they were "happy w3;t!h tlua fire alarm system but that
              there were still some proposals witli *Eastwoofts-.

        6.    PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM AND FIRE WARNING SYSTEM
              It was confirmed that the Club "had written       andconfirmedthatitmet
               the necessary requirements.

        7.    LOCKED NON-RETURN TURNSTILE

              The Police indicated that Mr. Xapper "was aware of this problem and
    >         the matter was being dealt with-

        8 & 9 THE INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS AND THE ADVISORY GROUP ROLE. ETC.

              It was agreed that it was better to defer these items due to the
              absence of the Senior Police Officer and the Building Surveyor.

        10.   OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM

              ___________ |refered to his memo of the 10th October and confirmed
               that work was in progress at the Stadium. The'renovation of the
               electrical system had been undertaken. He said that some matters
              were still outstanding from their report and referred to his memo of
               the 10th October.

              The Fire Authority confirmed that the exit signs had been added this
              morning.              Confirmed that Mr.           [wanted some
              advice about the use of panic facilities on gates.
  The Fire Authority said that it was difficult to fit                 k

                r:                                                                        i
  provided
  ani -r; °t the gate-
                  method11167
                         of operation
                              s*i      was clear a na^i
                                                    d     i                               !
  i f i t was available and s te w a rd Thiy said that t S             ^      ^   1
  further consideration to the type of system to £e use"7                  t0 8±" ]

  tnar the ClJb had°had sight^’o r t h e i r ^ r a f t ^ ^ 8*       concerned 1
  for circulation at this ftagef                     Proposals which were not j


                                                                      on *            i
 suite. The panorama room itself was n o t ^ ^ h f r o n t oftbelfcanorama            |
 was only to be as and when the necessary works m                                     !
 greyhound racing only in the daytime                       compl*t«d, far            |

 The Fire Authority confirmed that they were s a t i s f y ^      ^    '              I-

 i L r S o k ^ S e ^ S S ^ d   concreting*8 Frances


 Butler had not felt able to   co— nt ^       S E '& S ? —        « « .      ^
 ANY OTHER BUSINESS                                                              -f




                        eipressed c°nce™    ab»ut <*• ■ * • « «   oj   ««


noise in the North Scand^^sheffinlawin'1 a complaint about alleges,
letter in response t a S c a t L f S re              ? V ^
interest against public safety       He              balance .public «
information purposes only        7 ' * CaiSed the “ tte r            1




                                                                                 !
                                                                                 1-
SSGAAB/MA                                                                        |
                                                                                 I
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP
                                                                          ACTION
      Meeting held in the Town Hall, Sheffield, Committee Room No. 1
                 on Thursday, 19th October, 1989, at 10.00 a.m.


Attendance:   Mr.              (HCS)
              Messrs.   T. Broomhead, G. Marsh and D. Beal (SYP)
              Messrs.   Grimshaw and           (CFS)
              Mr.            T(SYMAS)
              Messrss   Butler and Sheriff (Building Surveyors)
              Messrs.   Ward and Bownes (HALD)


At the start'of the meeting'Mr. Ward indicated that he had a,few
minutes before received a telephone message from Mr. MackreH^of
Sheffield Wednesday (which was not precise in its terms) indicating
that he would be prepared to attend the meeting this morning if the
Police proposals affecting the ingress of Sheffield Wednesday fans to
certain matches were to be discussed. Neither Mr. Ward nor Mr. Bownes
knew anything about these proposals and Mr. Broomhead and Mr. Beal
said that there was a letter on its way about the relaxation of
certain Police practices relating to the ingress of Sheffield
Wednesday fans with effect from the football match on 28th October.
After some discussion it was thought that this letter perhaps had not
yet reached the Council. The letter may have been dated 11th October.
It was clear that when the letter had been received it would have to
be circulated and discussed at a later meeting.

1.   NOTES OF THE MEETING HELD ON 11TH OCTOBER

     It was noted that these were not yet available but were in the       HALD
     course of preparation at the moment and will be circulated as
     soon as possible. Mr. Ward went on to summarise what had
     happened at the General Purposes Panel Meeting on 13th October.
     Mr. Sheriff confirmed with Mr. Ward that the fixing of the
     capacity of 1,500 or so at Owlerton will be left to the Building
     Surveyor and the Fire Service confirmed that this   sort of figure
     was adequate for means of escape purposes. Mr. Butler    further
     confirmed with Mr. Ward that the Panel had approved the Owlerton
     proposals in principle only and that he was unaware of the
     discussions which had taken place at the Panel Meeting, indicated
     that he would shortly be sending a memorandum detailing the works
     required at Owlerton and that he had met Mrs. Woodhead on site at
     Owlerton.

2.   (a) Sheffield United - Disabled Facilities

     There was a brief discussion about these facilities with             BS 4 FS
     Mr. Grimshaw saying that there was a stepping arrangement that
     they needed to discuss with the Building Surveyor. Mr. Butler
     indicated that unfortunately owing to annual leave, etc. there
     had not been time to arrange this meeting. Both the Building
     Surveor and the Fire Service agreed to have a joint discussion on
     this issue as soon as possible.

     (b) Sheffield United - The Family Enclosure

     All present agreed that their comments could be passed on to the     HALD
     Club and Mr. Butler mentioned that of course some mattershad been
 discussed at a previous Advisory Group which should be included
 in those comments. Both the Fire Service and the Health and
 Consumer Services Department wished to see full details of the
 catering facilities mentioned in the proposals.

 THE INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

 This itnem was deferred.

 TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE ADVISORY GROUP, ETC.

 This item was deferred.

 SHEFFIELD UNITED - PAVEMENT REPAIRS

 It was agreed that this item did not need to come back^ to the
 Advisory Croup after officers* comments had been made.

 SHEFFIELD UNITED - LPC STORAGE COMPOUND

 When comments were received from Officers this item will;be
 resubmitted in view of its importance. Mr. Bownes mentioned that
 it was proposed to send to Eastwoods a letter asking for some
 information about the proposed ramp regrading which was shown on
 the plans in addition to the LPG storage facility proposals.

 SHEFFIELD UNITED - JOHN STREET STAND - ADDITIONAL GUARn RAILS

The Fire Service indicated they had no objections to this
proposal- Mr. Butler made a number of comments about the
proposal which he said would be confirmed in writing shortly.

SHEFFIELD UNITED - SPION KOP BARRIERS

Mr. Bownes introduced this item by saying that Mr. Strange of
Eastwood & Partners had telephoned some days ago asking if there
had been any indication from the enquiry about heights or types
of barriers to be used. Obviously this is of interest because
there would be little point in carrying out extensive works now
if further works would be required later when the final report
was available.

 Mr. Sheriff briefly outlined the history of circular section
"barriers and indicated that Dr. Eastwood had for a long time held
 the opinion that circular section barriers are the most
 appropriate. The Green Guide does however recommend rectangular
 section barriers but this whole area needs investigation. There
was a need for guidance and it might be appropriate to slow down
 some of the proposals which were coming from the Clubs. There
were however some barriers that needed repair owing to corrosion.
Mr. Butler indicated that in some cases a complete rethink would
be necessary and advice was needed. There would be difficulty if
 the green .guide were to be strictly applied. Mr. Butler went on
to explain that he had in mind situations like this when he would
not agree to the idea of strictly applying the Green Guide.
Mr. vferd indicated that as far as the Green Guide was concerned
it should be strictly applied unless it could be proved that
something could be made safer than the Green Guide requirement.
There was an implication that a relaxation of the Green Guide
/
                                                                               ACTION

          would result in a lowering of safety standards and not an
          increase in them.

          Chief Superintendent "Broomhead mentioned paragraph 111 of the
          Green Guide which gives an option in relation to barriers. He
          asked if the engineers were aware d£ the research referred to in
          that paragraph and Hr. Sheriff indicated that Dr. Eastwood was
          involved in the original research which was old. Hr. Broomhead
          asked what the research was and Mr- Sheriff reiterated his           HALD
          previous points. Hr. 'Bownes indicated that perhaps it would be
          appropriate to ask the Inquiry team "how far it had got in looking
          at the'question of heights and types and designs, of harriers and
          if it could assist in any way with the Council’s current problem.
          It might also be appropriate to ask the Home Office for details
          of the research referred to in paragraph 111. Hr. Bownes went on
          to point out to the 'Building Surveyor that where barriers
          required urgent replacement these should be identified
          immediately and «orks requested of the Clubs. Hr. Sheriff
          indicated that this would he done as soon as possible.               B.S.

          At a slightly lataer juncture in the meeting Chief Superintendent
          Broomhead referred to paragraph 110 which apparently gave clear
          guidance about the height of harriers. Hr. Bownes and
          Hr. Sheriff referred to various matters raised in the Inquiry
          about the heights{&£ the barriers which rendered that particular
          paragraph irarltfantw

    9. - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY- - NORTH STAND HOSPITALITY SUITE

          "Everyone was reasonably happy with these proposals but both the
          Fire Service and "the Health and Consumer Services Department
          mentioned the question of ventilation. Mr. Hodgson said he would     HCS
          talk to Eastwoods ito sort out the ventilation question and
          discuss the issue with the Fire Service. Mr. Grimshaw indicated
          that the less holes in the wall of the Hospitality Suite the
          better.

    10.   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY - THE YOUNG OWLS CLUB

          Mr. Butler reiterated at length his reasons for concern about the    B.S .
          possible access ibilijEy of the roof area by spectators. There was
          therefore a need to'prevent such unauthorised spectator access.
          Hr. Butler indicated that the steps should be gated and fenced.
          There should not simply be a "no exit" sign; it would not be
          sufficient. The Fire Service asked if this area was policed and
          Chief Inspector Beal Indicated that there was no static police
          presence or steward as far as he knew. The Fire Service
          indicated that any. sign should say something like "no
          thoroughfare? as -the Tno exit" sign was not appropriate.

    11.   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY - SPION KOP BARRIERS

          This item was deferred (see Item 8).

    12.   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY - SPION, KOP   - TUNNEL EXIT V

          There were no objections to his    proposal and the recommendation   HALD
          is that it should T>e approved.
                              \•:'
                                                                          ACTION

13.   MISCELLANEOUS POINTS

      Mr. Grimshaw indicated that there would be a letter coming to the   F.S.
      Council shortly on the South Stand at Sheffield Wednesday and be
      very briefly summarised the contents of it.

      Mr. Butler referred to the letters fTom the South Yorkshire
      Police referring to Professor 'Smith and the alleged corrosion on
      crush barriers at Sheffield Wednesday. Mr. "Ward summarised
      letter and Mr. Sheriff said that they -would ring Professor Smith
      to find out what was going on if at all possible.     ; ^

      Station Officer           asked about the means of escape at .
      Owlerton and fitting of panic bars on gates and if this was
      necessary if the gates were unlocked and stewarded. In the Fire
      Service view this was sufficient. He did however note that the
      Building Surveyor had indicated that panic bolt arrangements
      should be used. Mr. Sutler-indicated that he was very concerned
      about the management at the Stadium and that he had a. photograph
      of an exit door which was apparently available but was in fact
      secured by bolts, nails and barbed wire- If tae management
      continue to adopt this sort of practice then it it unlikely they
      will stick to agreed procedures about stesardissg, etc. Mr. Sassd
      then commented on the opening of Owlertun or a part of it by
      saying that this could be achieved either by serving an amended
      prohibition notice or issuing a General "Safety Certificate ami
      this issue was being considered at the ament* The Tire Service
      indicated that there were a Tuuaber of coaQltaoas They -wished to
      see imposed on Owlerton covering such matters as stewardingj eta.
      Mr. Butler suggested that he, the Fixe Service and tae
      Administration and Legal Department should attend at Owlerton and   HALO
      have a meeting with the Club to -make sure that -there were as
      misunderstandings.

      There then followed a general discussion about items 3 and 4 and
      amongst other things it was suggested that it would be helpful if
      agendas could be circulated at least 14 days in advance and the
      agenda could perhaps contain full details of aTi matters to he
      discussed.

      It was mentioned by Mr. Bownes that T3r. Vehster had now been,
      appointed Head of Administration and Legal Department and
      Group felt it appropriate to record their congratulations cc-
      Mr. Webster on his appointment-




GP/262/DMB
24th October, 1989

BH75/DMB2410
       Meeting of the General Purposes Panel (Muncipal Enterprise
       and General Services Programme) 30.10.89


(11)   .SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
        Visits to Sports Grounds
        RESOLVED: That (a) arrangements be made for members of the Panel and
        the Council’s representatives on the South Yorkshire Police
        Authority to visit the Hillsborough Sports Ground, Bramall Lane
        Sports Ground, Owlerton Stadium and Don Valley Stadium, on dates to
        be arranged by the Chair of this Panel; and
                  (b) attendance on such visits be recognised as anapproved
        duty for the purpose of the payment of allowances under Section
        177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act 1972.

       Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group
                 The Panel received copies of the minutes of meetings of
       the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group held on^'llth and 19th
       October, 1989 and, arising therefrom, the Panel -
       RESOLVED: That (a) arrangements be made for members•of the Panel and
       the Council's representatives on the South Yorkshire Police
       Authority to hold an informal meeting with representatives of the
       South Yorkshire ’Police to discuss matters relating to the Safety of
       Sports Grounds in Sheffield; and
                 (b) attendance at such a meeting be recognised as an
       approved duty for the purpose of the payment of allowances under
       Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act 1972.

"*     Proposed Alterations at Sports Grounds
       RESOLVED: That approval be given to the proposals now reported by
       the Head of Administration and Legal Department for (a) the
       replacement of timber fencing by steel handrailirig and mesh at
       Tunnel Exit V to the Spion Kop terrace at the Hillsborough Sports
       "Ground; and
                  (b)          concrete and tarmacadam ramp and pavement repairs in
       various areas at.Bramall Lane Sports Ground.

       Owlerton Stadium
                 With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its
       meeting held on 15th September, 1989 (page 672 of the printed
       minutes) to issue a notice under Section 10 of the Safety of Sports
       Grounds Act 1975 prohibiting the entry of spectators to the Owlerton
       Sports Stadium, the Head of Administration and Legal Department
       reported verbally on the principle of the Council-’s issuing, when
       appropriate, a general safety certificate or an amended prohibition
       order in respect of the Stadium.
                 The Panel noted the information reported.
                  S H E F F I E L D       CITY      C O U N C I L

                          GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
           (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

      Meeting to be held on Monday, 27th November, 1989 at 2.30 p.m.
                             in the Town Hall


           PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETING

(a)   The documentation and items to be discussed in public at the meeting may,
      in the first instance, be inspected at the Local Government Information
      Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield 1. The Service is open between 11.30
      a.m. to 1.00 p.m. and 2.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m. - Monday to Friday. For
      further details telephone 734750.

      Certain information may not be available for public inspection.

(b)   For items (if any) marked * it is anticipated that        the press and public
      may be excluded from the meeting.

(c)   If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not       available to the press
       and public or not available until the start of the      meeting for the reasons
       shown.

                                      A G E N D A

1.    EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
      To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude        the press and
      public.

2.    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
       (a) Report of the Head of Administration and Legal
       Department on:-

           (i) a proposed Safety Certificate for Owlerton
               Sports Stadium                          (Copy herewith        - "A")

          (ii) first aid and medical facilities at Sports
               Grounds                                 (Copy herewith        - "B")

        (iii) proposed works at Bramall Lane Sports
              Ground                                        (Copy herewith   - "C")

          (iv) access for ambulances at Hillsborough Sports
               Ground                                 (Copy herewith         - "D")

           (v) a letter from the South Yorkshire Fire Authority
               regarding the South Stand at Hillsborough Sports
               Ground                                  (Copy herewith        - "E")

          (vi) the Council's final submission to the
               Hillsborough Inquiry                         (Copy herewith   - '*F")

         (vii)   the proposed establishment of a Safety of Sports
                 Grounds Forum                          (Copy herewith       - "G")

        (viii)   outstanding requirements for works
                 at Bramall Lane Sports Ground.             (Copy herewith - "H")
(b) Survey of football supporters.                (Copy herewith - "I")

(c) Report on a meeting of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Advisory Group held on 9th November, 1989.
                                                (Copy herewith - "J")

HACKNEY CARRIAGE FARES
The Head of Administration and Legal Department to
report verbally on:-
(a) objections to proposed Hackney Carriage fare
increases                                    (Copies herewith - "K'*)

(b) a proposal that fares be reviewed annually on a
particular date.

GAMING ACT 1958 - AMUSEMENTS WITH PRIZES
The Head of Administration and Legal Department to
report verbally on the following applications

Applicant               Premises

                        Nutwood Cafe, Nutwood Trading Estate,
                        Wadsley Bridge.

                        Firth Park Bowling Centre, Sicey Avenue

NURSES AGENCIES ACT 1957 - LICENCES
The Head of Administration and Legal Department to
report verbally on the following applications for
the renewal of licences

Applicant                Premises




SEX ESTABLISHMENT
The Head of Administration and Legal Department to
report verbally on an application to renew the
Sex Establishment Licence issued to            in
respect of premises at

STREET COLLECTIONS
The Head of Administration and Legal Department to
report that, after consultation with the Chair, he
has issued Street Collection Permits as follows

Applicant        Organisation          Location           Date

                 C.P.S.A. Hardship     Castle Square      18 .11.89 and
                 Fund                                     25.11.89

                  Ambulancemen 1s      City Centre
                  Hardship Fund        and Hillsborough 11.11.89
                      Ambulancemen's                City-wide                14.11.89 to
                      Hardship Fund                                          31.12.89 or
                                                                             to cessation
                                                                             of dispute
                                                                             if earlier

CINEMA EXHIBITIONS
(a) To confirm the action taken in consultation with
the Chair to authorise the public exhibition of the
film "My Left Foot” in Category "12".

(b) Reports of the Senior Film Officer on:-

    (i)   film categories                                        (Copy herewith - "L")

   (ii)   a f i l m i n v o l v in g c r u e l t y to an a n im a l. (Copy h e r e w it h - "M")
                       ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT




                                                         CATEGORY OF REPORT


                                                         Not for Publication
                                                       (Exempt for purposes of
                                                     paragraphs)                  )



                                                       PRESS RELEASE REQUIRED

                                                                            No


                                                         EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
                                                            IMPLICATIONS

                                                         no               m x
                                                                    (See para.        )


REPORT TO:   General Purposes Panel          DATE:    27th November,19^9



SUBJECT:     Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as amended)
             The Sheffield Sports Stadium


REPORT OF:   Head of Administration and Legal Department



REPORT REFERENCE SO.


PURPOSE OF REPORT*     Request from Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd. for permission
                       to partially re-open the Sports Stadium




RECOMMENDATION:          -    D
                         See Report




BACKGROUND PAPERS USED IN COMPILATION OF REPORT:
                       GP/262/Sheffield Sports Stadium - Note some papers
                       are exempt
                     REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
                                   TO THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL


                           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 (AS AMENDED)

                  THE SHEFFIELD SPORTS STADIUM, OWLERTON, PENISTONE ROAD, SHEFFIELD




    1.       PURPOSE OF REPORT

    1.1      To consider a request from Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd., for permission to
              partially reopen the Sports Stadium for the Specified Activity of Dog
              Racing.


    2.       INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION

    2.1      Members will recall that the General Purposes Panel at its meeting on 15th
              September, 1989 decided to issue a Prohibition Notice under Section 10 of
              the 1975 Act.  The Notice prohibited sporting activities as defined by the
              Act from taking place at Sheffield Sports Stadium.

             The Club immediately commenced works at the Stadium with a view to opening
             part of the Stadium.

    2.2      On 14th November, 1989 Mr. Littlewood of Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd.,
              contacted my Assistant Solicitor, Mrs. Woodhead pointing out all works
              that had been requested would be completed in part of the Stadium by 24th
              November, 1989. He requested permission to reopen that part of the
              premises for Dog Racing.  I have attached a plan for your information
              which shows the area that Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd., wish to reopen.

    2.3      An inspection of the premises will be carried out by the Advisory Group on
              24th November, 1989; the results of the inspection will be made known to
              the Panel on the day.


    2.4      Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited have provided a First Aid facility sited
              in the Panorama Room Complex which as a temporary measure is considered
              adequate for the specified activity of Dog Racity.

    2.5      Discussions have taken place between the Company and Mr. Hodgson of the
              Health and Consumer Services Department regarding the provision of a
              facility that satisfies fully the requirements of the Council.   To
              expedite matters I have inserted a Condition (No. 44) in the Draft Safety
              Certificate which will require the Company to submit a scheme for a new
              First Aid facility to th-e Council within 28 days of the issue of the
              Certificate.

    2.6      Mr. Littlewood has asked that the Council consider whether or not it is
              necessary for a Medical Practitioner to be in attendance at the Sports
              Ground for the specified activity of Dog Racing.  The Company argue that a
              sufficient number of trained first aiders/paramedics from the voluntary
              services would suffice.

    2.7      Recommendation 41 of Lord Justice Taylor in his interim report states: —

              "The Club should employ a Medical Practitioner to be present at each match
              and available to deal with any medical exigency at the ground.  He should


SGlAAC/PGT
          be trained and competent in advanced first aid.  He should be present at
          the ground at least an hour before the kick-off and should remain until
          half an hour after the end of the match.  His whereabouts should be known
          to those in the Police Control Room and he should be immediately
          contactable.

2.8       The request was considered by the Advisory Group at its meeting on 20th
          November, 1989 who decided to recommend to the Panel that the holder
          employ at least one Medical Practitioner at the specified activity of Dog
          Racing.  This recommendation is reflected in Condition 8(c) of the Draft
          Safety Certificate attached.

2.8       Members will also note that there is no Condition requiring an ambulance
          to be in attendance at the specified activity.

2.9       Recommendation 42 states:-

          "At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance
          authority should be in attendance at all matches with an expected crowd
          of 5,000 or more."

2.10      In view of the proposed capacity, maximum 1,480, the Advisory Group have
          not recommended the provision of an ambulance.  Members are also asked to
          consider whether or not an ambulance should be in attendance at Che
          specified activity of Dog Racing.

3.    '    OPTIONS

3.1       The Panel has a number of options open to it:-

          1.    In the event of works still being outstanding to take no action in
                which case the original Prohibition Notice remains in force.

          2.    Issue an amended Prohibition Notice covering parts of the stadium.

          3.    Issue a General Safety Certificate for that part of the ground to be
                opened to the public and an amended Prohibition Notice which will
                cover those areas where works are still to be completed.

3.2       Attached to this report is a draft General Safety Certificate which was
          approved by the Advisory Group on Monday, 21st November, 1989.  If as a
          result of the inspection of the ground on 24th November the Advisory Group
          has made alterations to the draft Certificate they will be reported to you
          on the d a y .

4.        RECOMMENDATIONS

4.1       If all works have been completed to the satisfaction of the Council, in
          respect of the proposed area to be reopened to the public, I would
          recommend that the Panel authorise me to grant a General Safety
          Certificate which relates to those areas where works have been completed
          and to issue an amended Prohibition Notice for the remainder of the
          ground.




                               Mark Webster,
                               Head of Administration
                               and Legal Department,
                               SHEFFIELD   SI 2HH


          17th November,    1989
          SG1AAC/PGT
       me usr ltdnit!

 s4l




                                                                M
                                                                •*■—         "Ifit




v-                                                                     E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS
                                                                       C o n tu ltln p   E n g ln itri
                                                                       S t, A n d f t w i H o u t *
                                                                       2 3 K tn o flv ld R o » d
                                                                       S h e M U I d $11 9 A S           t.i
                                                    rcri
                                                                                                               SCALE
                                                               DRAWN

                                                               CH ECK ED
                                                                                                                        V

                                               V<S33V'S 3 '.                                             DnAVVINO No.   V.
                                                                                                                        t; -




          v.V 7-   V,;'T-'V   ••"y>: y;-:xr.
                            SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975 (AS AMENDED)
                         GENERAL SAFETY CEFTIFICA3H


Address of premises for which           Sheffield Sports Stadium,
this Certificate is issued              Penistone Road, Sports Ground,
                                        Owlerton, Sheffield S6 2DE

Occupier of the premises                Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd.
and Holder of this Certificate

Use of the premises in respect          Dog racing.
of which this Certificate is issued


1.     This Certificate is issued by Sheffield City Council in respect of
       the premises described above, being a Sports Ground designated by
       Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 (as
       amended) as a ground requiring a Safety Certificate.

2.      The terms and conditions set out in the Schedules attached hereto are
       hereby imposed.

3.     The terms and conditions hereby inposed are those which the Sheffield
       City Council consider necessary or expedient to secure reasonable
       safety at the Sports Ground when it is in use for an activity in
       respect of which this Certificate is issued.

4.      The words used in this Certificate and the Schedules attached hereto
       have the meaning assigned to them by Schedule 1 to this Certificate
       and Section 17 of the Act.

5.      The Schedules and Plan attached hereto all form part of this
       Certificate.

6.     This Certificate commences on the              day of               One
       thousand nine hundred and eighty nine for an indefinite period.




       D a t e ...............           Signed

                                                  Head of Administration and
                                                  Legal Department, on behalf
                                                  of and duly authorised by the
                                                  Sheffield City Council.




SG1AAA/JJJ
                                SCHEDULE 1

                          SHEFFLFTD CITY CCXJNCXL

     Interpretation of General Safety Certificates issued by the Council


Word/Phrase                Meaning

The Act                    The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 including
                           any modification or re-enactment thereof and any
                           subordinate legislation made thereunder.

Authorised Officer         Any Police Officer, any Officer of the South
                           Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority, ox
                           any Officer of the Sheffield City Council who is
                           authorised in writing.

The Certificate            The written General Safety Certificate issued by
                           the Council under the Act to the Holder of which
                           this interpretation document forms part.

The Council                The Sheffield City Council.

The Guide                  The current edition of the "Guide to Safety at
                           Sports Grounds" published by H.M. Government or
                           any succeeding code or guidance produced by H.M.
                           Government.

The Holder                 The person to whan the general safety
                           certificate has been issued.

Specified Activity         Dog Racing.

Spectator                  Has the meaning assigned to it by the Act.

The Sports Ground          Sheffield Sports Stadium, Penistone Road,
                           Owlerton, Sheffield S6 2DE




SG1AAA/JJJ
                                      3.


                                   SCHEDULE 2

                 Safety of Sports Grounds Certificate Conditions

General Safety


The Holder shall appoint in writing at least one Safety Officer who has full
authority to (a) take responsibility for safety at the ground and (b)
implement and supervise safety measures. A Safety Officer shall (a) be in
charge of the Sports Ground and the Holders Employees and (b) be in
attendance at the Sports Ground and in direct personal contnunication with a
central control point during a specified activity.


The Holder (and the Safety Officer(s)) shall take all necessary precautions
for the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to the Sports Ground and
shall ensure that all responsible persons (as defined in Section 12(2) of
the Act) are completely familiar with their duties under that Act and this
certificate.


The Holder shall not permit spectators at any specified activity to enter
any part of the Sports Ground other than those areas coloured blue on the
plan.


Where for reasons of safety the Council gives notice to the Holder that the
Sports Ground or any section or sections of it must not be used for the
accommodation of spectators the Holder shall not permit any areas so
indicated to be used.


The Holder shall provide and maintain such signs or notices of such type,
size and design as the Council may from time to time require for reasons of
public safety. The Holder shall ensure that the signs or notices so
required are clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all times.


The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no materials that
are capable of being used as missiles are accessible to spectators.


Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act the Holder shall
not cause or permit the Sports Ground or any of its installations to be
altered (which term shall exclude minor remedial works which do not in any
way affect the safety of the Sports Ground) in any manner whatsoever without
the prior written consent of the Council. In addition, no temporary
structure shall be installed without the prior written consent of the
Council. The Holder shall supply the Council with copies of such plans,
specifications and calculations as the Council may reasonably require to
enable any application for such consent to be considered and shall comply
with any conditions attached to that consent.


(a) The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Sports Ground to the
satisfaction of the Council a suitably equipped first aid room and shall
arrange for attendance of such number of qualified first aid attendants as
the Council may require but in any event there shall be in attendance at


SG1AAA/JJJ
                                             4.


      least one first aid attendant for every 1,000 spectators or part thereof.
      The attendants duties shall only relate to the administering of first aid.

      (b) The first aid rocm shall be capable of being lit by both the general
      lighting and the onergency lighting and shall be easily identified by means
      of signs.

      (c) The Holder shall anploy at least one medical practitioner to be present
      at each Specified Activity and available to deal with any medical exigency
      at the Sports Ground. He/she shall be trained and competent in advanced
      first aid. He/she shall be present at the Sports Ground at least one hour
      before the commencement of any specified activity and must remain until half
      an hour after the end of the Specified Activity. The medical practitioner
      must be imnediately contactable and his/her whereabouts known to the Safety
      Officer.


 9.   All press personnel shall be capable of immediate identification by means of
      distinctive dress.


10.   (a) In the event of a. spectator being injured in the Sports Ground, the
      Holder shall as soon as possible and in any case within 72 hours of the
      injury occuring submit to the Council a full written report on the
      circumstances of the injury. The Holder shall also supply such additional
      information as the Council may require.

      (b) In the event of a fatality at the Sports Ground or resulting from an
      incident/occurrence at the Sports Ground, the Holder, shall take all
      necessary steps to inform the Council of the incident at the earliest
      possible time and shall provide a full written report on the circumstances
      of the incident as soon as possible and in any case within 72 hours of the
      incident.

      (c) In the event of an incident or occurrence in the Sports Ground which may
      affect spectator safety, the Holder shall sufcmit a written report to the
      Council as soon as possible, and in my case within 72 hours of the incident
      or occurrence and of any investigation that has been instigated or taken
      place into the circumstances of the incident or occurrence.


11.   The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every specified activity of a
      Chief Safety Steward who is not the Safety Officer and such number of Safety
      Stewards as are specified in Schedule 3.


12.   The Holder shall ensure that the Safety Stewards are:-

      (a) fit and capable to carry out their duties;

      (b) properly trained and instructed;

      (c) readily identifiable by dress;

      (d) provided with written instructions as to their tasks/duties.

      (e) aged between 18 and 65 years unless in the circumstances of a particular
      case the Council permit an older or younger person to be employed.



      SG1AAA/JJJ
                                          5.


13.   The written instructions given to Safety Stewards must include the following
      tasks and duties. Safety Stewards must:

      (a) Under the direction of the Safety Officer or the Chief Safety Steward
      prevent overcrowding by ensuring the crowd limits in various parts of the
      Sports Ground are complied with.

      (b) Prevent spectators, as far as possible, from climbing fences and other
      structures (e.g. floodlight pylons), and from standing on seats. Where by
      virtue of the scale of the incident stewards are unable to prevent this,
      they must immediately report the matter to the nearest Authorised Officer or
      to the Chief Safety Steward or the Safety Officer.

      (c) Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear.

      (d) Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence in the Sports Ground
      which may affect spectator safety, reporting their findings to the Chief
      Safety Steward or the Safety Officer and the Holder. The Holder shall then
      ensure that in accordance with Condition 10(c) above the incident or
      occurrence is reported to the Council.

      (e) Know the location of and be able to operate effectively the
      fire-fighting equipment at the Sports Ground.

      (f) Know the location of the first aid room and any first aid equipment kept
      elsewhere.

      (g) Be fully conversant with any methods or signals used to alert staff that
      an anergency has arisen.

      (h) Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and suspect packages,
      reporting such findings immediately to the nearest Authorised Officer or the
      Chief Safety Steward or the Safety Officer.

      (i) Comply promptly with any instruction given in an emergency by an
      Authorised Officer, the Chief Safety Steward or the Safety Officer.

      (j) Remain at their allocated locations or maintain the performance of their
      tasks as individually instructed unless authorised or instructed to do
      otherwise by an Authorised Officer, the Chief Safety Steward or the Safety
      Officer.

      (k) Report to the Safety Officer any damage or defect which is likely to
      pose a threat to spectator safety eg. a damaged crush barrier.

      (1) Open the exit doors/gates and secure them in the open position on the
      initiation of the emergency procedure or when instructed to do so by the
      Safety Officer, the Chief Safety Steward or an Authorised Officer.


14.   Training exercises organised by the Safety Officer relating to the duties of
      stewards shall be held at least once every three months. A written record
      of the exercises shall be kept.


15.   All exit doors and gates for use by spectators in both ordinary evacuation
      and emergency evacuation situations shall be manned by Safety Stewards in
      accordance with schedule 4. The other duties detailed in schedule 4 shall
      be carried out by stewards.


      SG1AAA/JJJ
                                               6.


     16.   Where in the opinion of the Chief Constable the provision of special police
           services are required at a specified activity for the purpose of maintaining
           lawful and orderly behaviour amongst spectators the holder shall make
           arrangements with the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police for the
           provision of those services. The services shall be determined by the Chief
           Constable and he and his Officers shall be allowed full access to the Sports
           Ground.


     17.   The holder shall notify in writing the Sheffield City Council (Head of
           Administration and Legal Department) and the Chief Constable of South
           Yorkshire Police at least 28 days before any specified activity takes
           place.


|    18.   The Council reserves the right to require any specified activity to be open
           only to spectators having purchased tickets in advance of the specified
           activity and to specify the date and time of conmencement of the specified
i          activity.

           Spectator Areas

     19.   The Holder shall ensure that all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout the
           Sports Ground are maintained in good working order at all times. Particular
           attention shall be paid to doors, gates and turnstiles on spectator ingress
           and egress routes and also to pitch perimeter gates. The Holder shall not
           cause or permit any exit doors or gates to be altered in type, design or
           method of operation without the prior consent of the Council in writing.


     20. The means of ingress and egress and the gangways in the Sports Ground shall
         at all times be kept unobstructed.
'i
■»                 •»
J    21.   All floor surfaces and steps throughout the Sports Ground which are
i          available for use by spectators shall have even and non-slip surfaces and
           shall be kept unobstructed unrestricted and free fran trip hazards.
I          Adequate drainage shall also be provided where necessary.
1
     22. The entrances to and exits fran the Sports Ground and the means of access to
|        those entrances and exits shall be as specified in the plan which forms part
         of this certificate.


     23.   The Holder shall inspect each turnstile and measure its potential rate of
           flow and shall ensure that each turnstile is and remains capable of
           admitting spectators at the anticipated rate.


     24.   Vehicles other than for emergency purposes shall not be admitted to the
           areas of the Sports Ground used by spectators except as authorised by the
           Council and specified on the plan.


     25.   If in the opinion of the Chief Constable Special Police Services are
           required at a specified activity the Holder shall enter into a written
           agreement with the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police setting out
           the respective responsibilities of the Club and the Police for crowd safety
           and control. The agreement shall specify responsibilities for the filling

           SG1AAA/JJJ
                                          7.


      of all the spectator accomodation of the Sports Ground and the monitoring
      of spectators in such areas to avoid overcrowding. A copy of any such
      agreement shall be supplied to the Council within seven days of it being
      agreed. Any variation of the agreement shall be agreed in writing and the
      Council notified of the terms of the variation in writing within seven
      days.


26.   All gates in radial or perimeter fencing shall be painted in a different
      colour from the rest of the fence and marked "exit", and a 300 mm wide band
      shall be painted around the gate opening in the same colour as the gate
      which shall contrast to the fencing.


27.   The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that all undergrowth in
      areas open to the public be removed/cut back to ensure the reasonable safety
      of spectators admitted to the sports ground.


      Fire Safety

28.   The Holder shall provide and maintain a public address system which shall be
      audible in all parts of the Sports Ground to the satisfaction of the
      Council.


29.   The Holder shall institute and maintain a fire warning system to the
      satisfaction of the Council.


30.   The Holder shall provide and maintain at least such fire fighting equipment
      in such locations as the Council may from time to time specify.


31.   Except with the consent of the Council in writing the Holder shall not
      permit the storage in the Sports Ground of any flammable, explosive, toxic
      or corrosive liquid or compressed substance (except fire extinguishing and
      drinks dispensing apparatus). The Holder shall comply with any conditions
      attached to such a consent.


32.   Except with the prior written consent of the Council the Holder shall at all
      times maintain the Sports Ground in a clean condition and shall not permit
      any accumulations of rubbish or any other materials whether combustible or
      not.


      Lighting and Electrical Installations

33.   The Holder shall ensure that all parts of the Sports Ground to which
      spectators are admitted are,illuminated to a sufficient standard to enable
      such persons to enter or leave the Sports Ground safely.


34.   The Holder shall provide to the satisfaction of the Council a system of
      emergency lighting which shall, in the event of a failure of the general
      lighting be sufficient to enable spectators to leave the stadium safely.

      The emergency lighting shall (a) be powered by a source independent of the
      mains electricity supply and (b) come into operation immediately on the

      SG1AAA/JJJ
                                          8.


      failure of the mains lighting and (c) remain in operation for at least three
      consecutive hours when activated.


35.   The electrical installation for the Sports Ground shall be constructed and
      maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition. No alteration which
      significantly affects the installation shall take place without the prior
      written consent of the Council.


36.   Throughout each specified activity the electrical installation shall be
      supervised by a canpetent electrician who shall investigate, rectify (if
      possible) and report to the Safety Officer any defects which arise in the
      installation.


      Capacity

37.   The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part of the
      stadium at any one time shall not exceed the number specified in schedule 5.


      Inspections, Tests and Records

38.   Where any condition in this certificate requires written records to be kept
      such records shall be produced on demand to any authorised officer.


39.   ‘The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
      safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and/or inspections as may
      be specified in the notice. The Holder shall comply with any requ ir ement or
      conditions specified in that notice.


40.   If a significant defect is suspected or discovered pursuant to the normal
      use of the Sports Ground or any inspection or test carried out under the
      terms of this certificate the Holder shall immediately notify the Council
      and take steps to correct the defect.


41.   The Holder shall arrange for the tests and inspections listed in Schedule 6,
      to be carried out and for records to be kept or reports to be supplied to
      the Council in accordance with the terms of the schedule. Where reports are
      required to be supplied to the Council, they shall be supplied as soon as
      possible on completion of the inspections/tests. Where a Certificate is
      requested it shall be in a form that complies with the current and relevant
      standard to the satisfaction of the Council.


42.   Without prejudice to Section 6 of the Act or any regulations made thereunder
      the Holder shall maintain written records showing:-

      (a) the number of spectators admitted to each part of the Sports Ground for
      each specified activity;

      (b) the names and addresses of the stewards employed by the holder;

      (c) the names of the stewards on duty at each specified activity and details
      of their duties;


      SG1AAA/JJJ
                                          9.


      (d) details of the training exercises organised by the Holder for stewards
      in accordance with Condition 13 - the record shall show which stewards
      attended each exercise and the content of those exercises.


      Guidance to Holders

43.   The Council may from time to time issue written guidance to holders on
      safety matters. The holder must pay due regard to any such guidance.


      Provision of First Aid Facility

44.   The Holder shall within 28 days of the date this Certificate ccmes into
      effect submit a scheme for the provision of a first aid facility to the
      satisfaction of the Council.




      SG1AAA/JJJ
                        SCHEDULE 3 - COOITICN N0.10

The number of Safety Stewards excluding the Chief Safety Steward on duty at
each specified activity shall not be less than 16.

                        SCHEDULE 4 - CCNDITICN NO. 14

The Safety Stewards carry out the duties set out below: -

No. of Stewards         Duties

                         Manning of Final Exit Gates

2                       Gates "B" and "C" (to Lowther Road)

2                       Gates "D" and "E" (to Main Car Park)

                         Relief Stewards

1                       Gate "B"

1                       Gate "C"

1                       Gates "D" and "E"

                         Control and Direction of Spectators

3                       Panorama Viewing Slope (1 ateach exit)

2                       Panorama Roan sited at bothof the two
                         entrances to check that spectator capacity
                         is not exceeded

3                       Racing Lounge

                         Sited at each entrance/exit

                         Monitoring Viewing Slope to Deal with- Emergencies

1                       Sited at the. front of the Viewing Slope




SG1AAA/JJJ
                                    11.




                        SCHEDULE 5 - CONDITION NO. 37


The number of spectators admitted to a specified activity shall not exceed
1,480.

The number of spectators admitted to each area of the sports ground, listed
below, shall not exceed the maximum numbers shown.

Area                     Maximum No. of Spectators

Main viewing                       1,480
slope (to the
front of the
Panorama Room)

Panorama Room                        400   — Fire Service to inform
and Restaurant

Racing Lounge                        200   - Fire Service to inform




SG1AAA/JJJ
                           SCHEDULE 6 - CCNDITICN NO. 41


                       INSPECTIONS AND TESTS REQUIRED


GENERAL                         INCIDENCE        WRITTEN    WRITTEN REPORT
REQUIREMENT                                      RECORD     REQUIRED TO BE
                                                 REQUIRED   SUPPLIED TO
                                                            COUNCIL


A canpetent person shall        At least         No         Yes
inspect the structures which    once every
form part of the Sports         12 months.
Ground.

A canpetent person shall        Before and       Yes        No
carry out a general visual      after each
inspection of the Sports        specified
Ground to ensure compliance     activity.
with the relevant Safety
Certificate Conditions.

A canpetent person shall        At least         No         Yes
examine the electrical          once every
installation of the Sports      12 months.
Ground.

A canpetent person shall        At least         No         Yes
test and inspect all fire       once every
applicances (including          12 months.
extinguishers, hydrants
and water supplies).

The emergency lighting and      At least         No         Yes
fire warning (including         once every
the Public Address) systems     12 months.
shall be tested/inspected
by a canpetent person.

The emergency lighting          Not less         Yes        No
system shall be tested by       than three
a canpetent person.             hours nor
                                more than
                                six hours
                                prior to a
                                specified
                                activity
                                taking place.

All the fire warning           Not less than     Yes
detection public address       three hours
and other cannunication        nor more than
systems shall be tested        six hours prior
by a competent person.         to a specified
                               activity taking
                               place.



SG1AAA/JJJ
                             13.                               Schedule 6 - page 2


GENERAL                      INCIDENCE         WRITTEN    WRITTEN REPORT
REQUIREMENT                                    RECORD     REQUIRED TO BE
                                               REQUIRED   SUPPLIED TO
                                                          COUNCIL


All lighting systems         Not more than     Yes        No
(excluding the emergency-    twenty four
lighting) shall be tested    hours prior to
by a competent person.       a specified
                             activity taking
                             place.

All doors, gates and         Not more than     Yes        No
turnstiles throughout the    twenty four
Stadium shall be tested      hours prior to
by a competent person.       a specified
                             activity taking
                             place.

All turnstiles shall be      At least once    Yes         Yes - report to
tested by a competent        every 12 months.             include details
person to check their                                     and results.
operation and potential
rate of flow.

25% of the crush barriers    25% in each period           Yes - report to
and handrails in the         of 12 months. Once           include details
Stadium shall be tested      a barrier or handrail        and results.
by a competent person in     is tested it shall
accordance with the Guide.   not be tested again
The Council shall be         (unless specifically
notified in advance of       required by the
the dates of testing.        Council) within three
                             and a half years
                             after first testing,
                             but shall be tested
                             again within four
                             and a half years of
                             that date.




SG1AAA/JJJ
                      E A S T W O O D 8« P A R T N E R S
       1
                      C o n su ltin g E ngin**ft
MO
       1              St. A n d t a w i Hou»«
                      2 3 K ingfiald R o a d
     . i   1
                      S h « H l a t d S11 9A S     "t     .......... ...

                                                        SCALE
               DRAWN           •*r-
               C H EC K EO

                                                   D R A W IN G No.
               A PPR O V E D               1
                                      87 1         18 6 3 / 1.
                       ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT




                                                          CATEGORY OF REPORT



                                                          Not for Publication
                                                        (Exempt for purposes of
                                                     paragraphs)                  )




                                                        PRESS RELEASE REQUIRED

                                                          Yes               No


                                                         EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
                                                            IMPLICATIONS
                                                              t.

                                                         No           xxxmx
                                                                    (xmxseHm          )


REPORT TO: General Purposes Panel            DATE:     27th November 1989




SUBJECT:   Safety of Sports Grounds - First Aid and Medical Facilities




REPORT OF: Head of Administration and Legal Department



REPORT REFERENCE NO.


PURPOSE OF REPORT:     To inform members of proposed standards of first aid and
                       medical facilities




RECOMMENDATION:        See rePort




BACKGROUND PAPERS USED IN COMPILATION OF REPORT:
REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
PURPOSES PANEL


   Safety of Sports Grounds - Provision of First Aid and Medical Facilities at
                                 Sports Grounds

Introduction

Recommendation 40 of Lord Justice Taylor's interim report refers to the
provision of first aid and medical facilities.  The recommendation reads as
follows:-

     ’.’40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The
     number of such rooms and the equipment to be maintained within them should
     be specified by the local authority after taking professional medical
     advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate."

The Director of Health and Consumer Services has been making enquiries into this
recommendation and has produced two memoranda which are attached to this report
for members' information.

The memorandum of 26th October, 1989 sets out an appropriate standard for both
first aid rooms and first aid equipment.

The memorandum is self-explanatory but there is an amendment to recommendation
3.4.  The second paragraph of the recommendation should read "hypochlorite
disinfectant should also be provided, effective against HIV, Hepatitis B, etc.,
for cleaning of blood and body fluids.  Recommended concentrations for use are:
10,000 ppm to deal with spillages; 1,000 ppm for general washing purposes.” It
should also be noted that the correct title of the Ambulance Brigade is St. John
Ambulance Brigade.

The memorandum of 16th November deals with the provision of first aid facilities
in sports grounds in Sheffield.  The copy of this memorandum attached to this
report does not include Appendix 1 which is a copy of the 26th October
memorandum.

Conclusion

When the General Safety Certificates for the Clubs are next reviewed (which will
take place together with consideration of other policy issues when the final
report of Lord Justice Taylor is received) it is suggested that a new schedule
be attached to them detailing the standard referred to by the Director of Health
and Consumer Services.  In the meantime it is sufficient to ensure that the
Clubs are required to provide the various items of equipment and standards of
first aid room as have been described.

Recommendations

The Panel is recommended to:-

(a) Note the Director of Health and Consumer Services memoranda;

(b) Refer the Director's memorandum of 16th November to the Advisory Group for
    detailed consideration.
(c) Require Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday to provide the first
    equipment specified in the Director's memorandum of 26th October.

                                                 H. M. WEBSTER,
                                                 Head of Administration
                                                 and Legal Department.

Town Hall,
Sheffield.
November, 1989

BH6/DMB1011
                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      DirecCor of HealCh and Consumer        To     Head of Administration & Legal Departmen
                               .Services
                                                        For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes
Date      26th October, 1989
Ref       EPU/KH/YG
Tel Ext    4619 - Mr. Hodgson                    Ref




          (FINAL DRAFT)                                                     !_ .        „_L_J
          SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS - FIRST AID AND MEDICAL PROVISIONS                 __

          As a result of a meeting held on 8th September, 1989 which was attended by
          Mr.               Messrs.      Jand        (S.Y.M.A.S), Mr. A. C. Crosby
          (Consultant Accident & Emergency Royal-Hallamshire), Dr.   J.    Shortland
          (County Surgeon St.  John's Ambulance) and Mr.             (S t . John's
          Ambulance - Sheffield Area Training Officer) it is now possible to provide
          detailed specifications for medical and first aid facilities as required
          by the Taylor Report interim recommendations 40 and 41 (39 and 42 being
          self-explanatory and 43 the direct remit of S.Y.M.A.S).   Thespecifications
          are provided herewith, however, appropriate certificate conditions and
          schedules will need to be drafted.  The contents of this memo supercede
          any previous correspondence on this issue.

          RECOMMENDATION 40 - FIRST AID ROOMS

          1.0    Provision

          At least one first aid room should be provided to the satisfaction of the
          City Council and subject to the following minimum standard.

          1.1    The room should be readily available at all times when a specified
                 activity is being undertaken and should not normally be used for any
                 purpose other than the rendering of first aid.

          2.0    Location

          2 .1   The room should be positioned as near as possible, taking into
                 account the location and layout of the establishment, to a point of
                 access for transport to hospital and with easy access from all pares
                 of the sports ground.

          2.2    The room should be clearly identified as a first aid room, its
                 location publicised, and the route(s) to it clearly signposted.

          3.0    Facilities/Structure

          3.1    The room shall be of minimum area 300 sq.ft.    and of a regular
                 shape.

          3..    The door should be a minimum width of 2.2m.

                 -he room should have provision to treat 3 patients simultaneously
                 with adequate provision for privacy.




                                                                  /Contd.
                                          -2 -




3.4    The room shall be provided wich a stainless steel sink, work
        surface, wash-hand basin, adequate drainage and supplies of hot,
        cold and drinking water, soap and hand drying facilities.

       Disinfectant should also be provided for cleaning of blood and body
       fluids effective against H.I.V, Hepatitis B etc.

3.5    The room shall be a designated 'no-smoking' area, be effectively
       ventilated, lighted, heated and maintained and it shall be provided
       with at least 6 - 1 3 amp. socket outlets. All surfaces shall be
       hard, impervious and easy to clean.

3.6    The room shall be kept clean and well maintained and adequate
       provision made for the disposal at the end of each event of waste
       and refuse including clinical and 'sharp'    waste.

3.7    The room shall be in close proximity to awatercloset and a private
        waiting area provided with 6 chairs.

3.8    The room shall be provided with effective means of communication to
        and from the central control point and the emergency services. In
        most stadia the appropriate means will be by telephone link with an
        exclusive external line.

4.0    Equipment/Materials

4.1    The first aid room shall be provided as a minimum with the following
       equipment/materials which shall be compatible with and over and
       above that provided by the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
       Service.

          (i)    3 x      standard examination couches with steps.
         (ii)     12 x   green sheets.
        (iii)      3 x sets of stretcher poles.
         (iv)      1x    scoop stretcher wich carrying straps.
          (v)    2 x      carrying chairs.
         (vi)      2x    trolley stretchers
        (vii)      6 x cellular blankets
       (viii)      4 x pillows with plastic covers.
         (ix)    Disposable paper sheets.
          (x)    3 x      buckets with lids.
         (xi)      3x    washing-up type bowls.
        (xii)    1 x size F trolley mounted oxygen cylinder with variable
                 delivery and key. (To be provided at the holders expense by
                 the St. John's Ambulance Brigade) .
       (xiii)      1 x E.C.G. Monitor.
        (xiv)      1 x Sphygmomanometer and stethescope.
         (xv)      1x    lockable cabinet with contents as specified inAppendix
                 'A' .
        (xvi)      6 x snatchbags with contents as specified inAppendix *B 1.
       (xvii)      1 x infusion/intubation case with contents asspecified   in
                 Appendix 'C'.
      (::viii)   1 x mobile 'dressing' trolley.




                                                                  /Cored.
RECOMMENDATION 41 - MEDICAL PRACTITIONER

Some c o n f u s i o n has a r i s e n as Co Che meaning of Che Cerm " c r a i n e d and
compeCent i n advanced f i r s c a i d " . The o p i n i o n of Che meeCing i s chat such
a m e d ic a l p r a c C i t i o n e r would be compecenc i n Che t e c h n i q u e s of i n f u s i o n ,
i n c u b a c i o n , drugs a d m i n i s C r a t i o n and c a r d i a c moniCoring. The m edic al
p r a c t i c i o n e r mosc s u i t e d t o Chis task, i s a p r a c t i s i n g a n a e s t h e C i s C . For
t h o s e p r a c t i t i o n e r s who would wish to be Crained i n th e r e l e v a n t s k i l l s
and c e c h n i q u e s , Mr. Crosby i n d i c a t e d thaC s u i t a b l e G r ain in g c o u l d be
a r r a n g e d th r o u g h him aC t h e Royal H a l l a m s h i r e H o s p i t a l .

I t r u s t ChaC you f i n d c h i s informaCion of a s s i s C a n c e i n drawing up
suicable c e rtific a C e conditions.




K. Hodgson
Principal Environmental Proceccion Officer
                                                     APPENDIX 'A'




CONTENTS OF FIRST AID ROOM LOCKABLE CABINET




Triangular bandages - short life                     10

Sterile dressings:-   B.P.C.   '
Extra large                                           5
      large                                          10
      medium                                         10
      small                                          10
Eye Pads                                         5

Adhesive tape                                        2 rolls
Lint (500g)                                          2 packets
Gauze                                         2 packets
Cotton wool                                          2 packets
Mezolin squares (cartons of 100)
 5cm x 5cm                                            1 carton
10cm x 10cm                                           1 carton

Bandages:-   B.P.C.
      1"                           *                 20
      2"                                          20
      3"                                         20

First Aid Dressings (adhesive plasters)
      Various sizes                                  20 of each

Medi-wipes                                            1 drum
                                                     (contents 100)

Disposable Sterile Containers
                                                 APPENDIX ’B ’




CONTENTS OF SNATCHBAG


6 x No. 1 dressings

6 x No. 2 dressings

6 x No. 3 dressings

4 x 20 x 10cm waterproof adhesive dressings

4 x large burns dressings

1 x large scissors

6 pairs disposable gloves

1 x   'Petzel type'   caving lamp

1 x 'Brook'   type airway (professional model)
                                                                                            APPENDIX rC* *




CONTENTS OF INFUSION/INTUBATION CASE




   Ref:      ZW.D1/012                                                                              Revised   -   7/89




                             SOOTH YOECSHIBX SSTSOPOLITAH AKBCLAHCS SSRYIC3

                                               Extended Training Equipment


                                                         I H Y K H T O R T


     Carrying c a s e ......................                              Syringe Needles(19g).............. 2
     Laerdal R e s u s c i t a t o r .............                        Syringe Needles(21g)......... ....6
     Laerdal Adult M a s k ................                               Cannulae 16g.................. ....5
     Laerdal Child M a s k ................                               Cannulae 18g.................. ....5
     Airway Size 1 ......................                                 Cannulae 20g.................. ....4
     Airway Size 2 ......................                                 Administration S et ............ ....2
     Airway Size 3 ..................................................     Hartmanns Fluid 1VI 500mls....... 1
     Laryngoscope + 4 HP Batterias....                                    Haamaccel Fluid 171 300mls....... 1
     Laryngoscope Blade Size 3 ...................                        Pre-injection Swabs....... ......10
     Laryngoscope Blade Size 4 ........                                   Tape Adhesive/Hospital 20metres..l
     Laryngoscope Spare B u l b ..........                               -Tape Sleek 2.5cm.............. ....1
     Endotracheal Tube (cuffed) 6m m . ...                                Tape Sleek 5.0cm.............. ....1
     Endotracheal Tube (cuffed)7mm....                                    Vecafix........................ .       5
     Endotracheal Tube (cuffed) 8m m . ...                                Arm Splint 18"-4"................. 1
     Endotracheal Tube (cuffed)9mm....                                    Cotton W o o l ........................ 1
     Catheter Mount (anti-static)....                                     Gauze lmetre....................... 1
     Catheter Swivel C o n n ec t o r........                             Triangular Bandages............         2
     Adaptor F e m a l e ........... ........                             5.0cm Bandages - 5 m e t r e s ........2
     Lubricating J e l l y ........ ........                              7.5cm Bandages - 5metres..... ....2
     Syringes 10ml......................                                  Gauze Swabs........................ 2
     Stethescops........................                                  Mucus Extractor (infant)...........1
     Sphygmomanometer. ................                                   Oxygen M a s k ........................ 1
     Needle B o x .........................                               Oxygen Tubing 3metres............. 1
     Scissors/s h ear s...................                                Gloves (Disposable)..........           2
     Magill F o r c e p s ....................                            Antiseptic Solution............... 2
      Spencer Wells F o r c e p s ............                            Waterproof Sheet.................. 1
     Aspirator ......................... 1                                Micropore Tape 2.5cm............. 1
     Catheter (suction)                1 4 f g ......... 2                Patient Report Form P a d ...........1
     Catheter (suction)                12f g ......... 2                  Headlamp and Battery.............. I
     Yankauer S u c k e r ....................2                            Surgical Cloth.....................1
      T o u r n i q ue t ......................... 1                       Security Strap(and 2 k e y s ) ....... 1
      Catheter Mount C o n n e c t o r ......... 1




                          POJl Qualified ET Staff are also required Co carry

                                  Atropine Sulphate                       Img/lOnl...........       3
                                  Atropine Sulphate                     500mcg/5ral...........      3
                                  Ligr.ocair.e HC1 (2%)                  10Qmg/5nl...........       4
                                  Glucagon                                      l a g ...........   2
                                  Heosal                                  ,    5 ml ...........     4
                                   CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      Director of Health and Consumer                  To      Head of Administration & Legal Department
                              Services
                                                                   For the attention of Mr. J. Derricott
Date      16th November, 1989
Ref       EPU/KH/YG                                                       r       ADMINISTRATION & LEGA’.
                                                                          1          DEPT. SHEFFIELD
Tel Ext   4619 - Mr. Hodgson                               Ref
                                                                                    1 - jo e *     I - a r             L.S
                                                                              A


                                                                              R           1 7. NOV 89                  PM

                                                                               C las.iT 1          LIB    1   U JW -
                                                                                                                       CL
          THE PROVISION OF FIRST AID FACILITIES IN
                                                                              GSi
          SPORTS GROUNDS IN SHEFFIELD

          On 13th November, 1989 Station Officer Eason of S.Y.M.A.S. and myself
          inspected the first aid facilities provided at Hillsborough, Owlerton and
          Bramall Lane sports grounds to determine the extent to which these
          facilities meet the recommendations contained in Appendix 1, soon to be
          put before the Panel for consideration.

          The following observations were made:-

          HILLSBOROUGH

          The first aid room fails to meet the recommendations in the following
          respects:

          1.   Item 2.1 - During events, access to the first aid room is via stewards
               or officers in order to maintain separation of supporters.  This
               arrangement, however, would seem to be reasonable.

          2.   Item 2.1 - The room could be more clearly identified as                           afirst       aid
                room.  The access routes to it are not signposted.

          3.   Item 3.1 - The room is only approximately 225 ft.^ in area including
                the toilet area (195 ft.2 excluding the toilet area).

          4.    Item 3.2 - The entrance door is too narrow.

          5.   Item 3.3 - Only two patients could reasonably be treated
               simultaneously and there is no adequate provision for privacy.

          6.   Item 3.4 - Sufficient work surface is not provided;  neither is a
               separate drinking water supply.' The wash-hand basin is situated
               inside the toilet area.

          7.    Item 3.5 - Only three electric socket outlets are                   provided.

          8.   Item 3.6 - There appeared to be no provision made                    for 'sharp' waste
               storage and disposal.

          9.   Item 3.7 - A suitable private waiting area is not provided.

          OWLERTON

          The f i r s t a i d room f a i l s to meet t h e recommendations i n th e f o ll o w i n g
          respects:

          1.   Item 2.2 - The route to the first aid room is not presently
               signposted, but two signs are to be erected.  Additional signs will be
               required.

                                                                                                     /Contd.
2.   Item 3.1   - The room is only approximately 146   ft.^ in area.

3.   Item 3.2   - The entrance door is too narrow.

4.   Item 3.3   - The room does not have provision to treat .three patients
      simultaneously with adequate provision for privacy.

5.   Item 3.4 - The room is not provided with sufficient work surface, a
     wash-hand basin and a separate drinking water supply.  It is uncertain
     whether or not the electric powered instantaneous hot water heater
     will operate off an emergency power supply.

6.   Item 3.5 - The room is not sufficiently ventilated and has only two
     electric socket outlets.  There are drainage inlets set into the
     fl o o r .

7.   Item 3.6   - No comment can be made as the room was obviously not    in use
      at the time of inspection.

8.   Item 3.7 - The room is not in close proximity to a toilet, and a
     suitable private waiting area is not provided.

9.   Item 3.8 - A telephone is to be installed, but the expressed intention
     is to link it only to the general office.

BRAMALL LANE

The first aid room fails to meet the recommendation in the following
respects:

1.   Item 2.1 - The room is in an acceptable location but access from the
     pitch is via two sets of steps.
     During events access to the first aid room is via stewards or
     officials in order to maintain segregation of supporters;  this
     arrangement, however, would seem reasonable.

2.   Item 2.2 - The room could be more clearly identified as a first     aid
     room.  The access routes to it are not signposted.

3.    Item 3.1 - The room is only approximately 73 ft.^ in      area.

4. ’item 3.2 - The entrance doorway is too narrow.

5.   Item 3.3 - Only one person could reasonably be treated at any one
     time.  There is no proper provision for patient privacy.

6.   Item 3.4 - The room is not provided   with a stainless steel sink,
     sufficient work surface, nor with a   separate drinking water supply.

7.   Item 3.5 - The suspended ceiling construction and finish is
     unsuitable.   Only four electric socket outlets are provided.
     (Ventilation and heating are controlled via an air conditioning inlet
     located in the ceiling.   The Building Surveyor should be requested to
     comment as to whether additional ventilation should be provided).
     No emergency lighting is provided.

8.   Item 3.6 - There appeared to be no provision made for     'sharp'waste
     storage and disposal.



                                                                  /Contd.
9.   Item 3.7 - The room is not in close proximity to a toilet, and a
     suitable private waiting area is not provided.

10. Item 3.8 - A telephone (outside line) is to be installed.

SYMAS reports are attached as Appendix 2.

To summarise:

1.   None of the facilities provided at any of these sports grounds fully
     meets the recommendations.

2.   The main obstacle appears to be the size of the rooms provided.

3.   In the case of Hillsborough, additional space could    be provided by
      utilising the adjacent room, now used as the police   control centre.

4.   In the case of Bramall Lane, additional space could be provided by
      utilising the disused bath area of the visitors' changing rooms and
      the ball boys' room.

5.   In the case of Owlerton, the only adjacent space is used as a bar.
     Such an extension appears to be impracticable and suitable alternative
     accommodation needs to be considered.
     On 15th November, 1989 Station Officer Eason and myself inspected the
     'Away Team' changing rooms to determine their suitability as an
     alternative location for a first aid room.  A specification for
     conversion works (see Appendix 3) was discussed with the contractor,
     who is to submit, via Eastwood and Partners, appropriate plans for
     consideration by the Advisory Group.

The Panel should be requested to adopt the recommendations in Appendix 1
as conditions to be attached to safety certificates issued to Hillsborough
and Bramall Lane, for compliance so far as is reasonably practicable;  any
relaxation from the standard, however, must be approved beforehand by the
Panel.

Although the Taylor Inquiry interim recommendation No. 40 specifically
relates to the holding of football matches, it is considered that these
recommendations in Appendix 1 should equally apply to Owlerton, especially
in view of the eventual intention to re-open the whole of the ground as a
multi-purpose stadium.  It would be reasonable to allow until the end of
this calendar year for plans to be submitted for approval, and for works
to be carried out to convert the existing changing rooms into a suitable
first aid room.  In the interim period the reduced standard represented by
the existing first aid room should be accepted, but as a temporary
expedient only.

The management of the three sports grounds should be given the opportunity
of commenting on these recommendations to the Panel.




K. Hodgson
Principal Environmental Protection Officer
                               APPENDIX 2




                  SOOTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE

                                    R E P O R T

                                        (Ref £1:01.4)


FROM:     Mr                                            TO:       Mr
          Station Officer                                         ACMAO/Staff Officer




RE;     Meeting -with M r I Hodgson (Health and Conanaer Services Department -
        Sheffield City Council) for the purpose of on— site inspections of "tie
        First A i d Ro o m facilities at;

        (a)   SWFC - Hillsborough
        (b)   Owlerton Sports Stadium
        (c)   SUFC - Bramall Lane

I m e t Mr Hodgson at Hillsborough and along with Mr G Mackrell (Club
Secretary, SWFC) we visited the First Aid Room and noted the following
points in line with Recommendation 40 of Lord Justice Taylor's Report, and
the subsequent document provided by Health and Consumer Services, Sheffield
City Council.

Provision

1.1             The room has no other       function    other      than   that   of   providing
                First Aid facilities.

Location

2.1             Access is available from all parts of the Ground with the
                assistance of Club' Stewards and the South Yorkshire Police„
                The room is easily accessible for Ambulance Staff.

2.2             There is a St John's Ambulance sticker on the door, but no sign
                indicating 'First Aid Room'.
                                                              \
Facilities /Stmctnre

3.1             The room is less than the required 300 square feet.                    It is in
                fact 17' x 12'10'' or just below 221 square feet.

3.2             The door width is restricted to 0.84m wide.

3.3             At this time there is no adequate provision for patient privacy
                - the room may be adequate for dealing with two casualties
                effectively.



                                                                                      /continued
3.4         The room has a stainless steel sink unit but does not ha^e an
            adequate non-porous work surface.

            There is a wash hand basin within an integral WC.    There are
            h o t and cold water facilities but no separate drinking rater
            facility.

3.5        There is no 'No Smoking' advisory notice.
            Ventilation is provided by two window vents and a grill Tent.
            There are only three 13 amp sockets.
            There is provision for emergency lighting and heating utilizing
            a battery back up system.

3.6        The room requires cleaning and at present there       is no   'Sharps'
            container in situ.

3.7         There is an integral water closet.
            There is no private waiting area in the vicinity.

3.8         There is a direct telephone line within the room.

gjqnipwent/Materials

4.0         The levels of recommended   equipment do   not yet   comply to     the
            re c o mm endations.
Page 3


RECOMMENDATIONS - Hillsborough


 1         That the room be adequately marked 'First Aid Room'.

*2         That provision be made to direct people to the room by sign,
           and through the services    of Stewards and South Yorkshire
           Police.

            I suggested that SWFC m a y include the location of the room
            within their programme.     Mr Mackrell informed m e this "was
            feasible, but considered the message may only reach 50% of the
            attending spectators.

 3         The room should be extended to the required size.    This could
           be accommodated by encroaching into the adjoining Police room.

 4         The  Available    door   width    needs    to   be   made   larger by   1.35
           metres.

 5         That adequate    provision   be   made    to   ensure   individual   patient
           privacy.

 6         That   an adequate non-porous working surface be fitted.

 7         That separate identified drinking water facilities be provided.

 8         That three further 13 amp sockets be incorporated.

 9         That    the room be thoroughly cleaned and that all surfaces
           within the room be adequately treated by application of a noa-
            porous substance.

10         That  a waiting area (Private) be supplied within the vicinity
           with a facility for seating six people upon supplied chairs.

11         That    the  equipment within the  room  be updated to  the
            recommended levels and be compatible with that provided by
            SYMAS.
Page 4


Following our visit to Hillsborough, Mr Hodgson and myself moved on to
Owlerton Stadium, where we met Mr E Littlewood and Mr Carter who escorted
us to the First Aid Room.


Provision

1.1         The room has no other function.

Location

2.1          The location of    the   first     aid        room    can   be     considered
            satisfactory.

2.2          The room is marked up as First Aid Room, but would benefit by
            the substitution of a first aid room notice applied to the
            door.

            W o r k is currently being undertaken to publicise the location of
            and routing to, the room.

Facilities/Structure
3.1          The room is regular in structure,        but does not conform to the
            m i n i m u m area or 300 square feet.    It is in fact 11'2" by 8 '11"
            or just below 99 square feet.

3.2          The door width does not conform          to   the minimum width        of   2.2
            metres, it is 0.84 metres wide.

3.3         The   room   is  not   capable  of   treating   three                  patients
            simultaneously nor is there any provision for privacy.

3.4         The room has a stainless steel sink with hot and cold water and
            drying  facilities.    There  is no   separate drinking water
            facility.

3.5         The room is lighted and heated, it only has two 13 amp sockets.
            V entilation is provided by a louvered grill above the door.
            Emergency lighting and heating will be facilitated by generator
            when purchased.
            All surfaces require treating with a non-porous coating.

3.6         The room requires    cleaning and          there      is   no     'Sharps'   bin
            facility, nor provision for waste.

3.7         The room is not in close proximity to a toilet and there is *no
            private waiting araa.
                                                           I

                                                                                 /continued
Page 5


3.8        There is provision for a telephone link, but this will be in
            extension of the general office link - confidentiality?

Equipment/Materials

4.0        There is still no satisfactory provision of first aid equipment
           within the room,   this is brought in a first aid box from the
            general office.


gECCTMKHDATIONS - Owlerton


1          This   is a totally   unsuitable   room   in   line   with   the   give
            recommendations.

2          There   is room for extension to the existing facilities, but
            there are alternative rooms available. These were not viewed
            on this occasion.

3          I would recommend that these alternative options be considered
            as opposed to the current proposed room.

5          Visit  regarding above fixed for Wednesday 15 November        1989 at
            1000 hours with Mr K Hodgson.




                                                 \
Page 6


Having visited Owlerton, Mr Hodgson and I then proceeded to Sheffield
United Football Club, Bramall Lane, and Mr Capper (Club Secretary) escorted
us to the First Aid Room.



Provision
1.1         The    room is used solely for the purpose specified.

Location

2.1         T he   room is acceptable in this report.

2.2         The   room is adorned with a St John's Ambulance Brigade siga and
             does not have a sign indicating it to be' a 'First Aid Room.*

Facilities/Structure
3.1         The    room does not meet   the required area of 300 square feet.
             It is in fact 9' V* x      7'5%" or just over 73 square feet in
             area.

3.2         Th e  door w i d t h does not conform   to    the minimum width       of    2.2
             metres.  It is 1.59 metres wide.

3.3          The room is adequate to     treat   one     person   only.      There is    no
             p rovision for privacy.

3.4         The   room has none of the facilities mentioned other than a wash
             basin.

3.5          The room is equipped with four 13 amp sockets.

3.6          There is no   'Sharps' bin or adequate provision                 for waste.
             Thare is no provision for emergency lighting.

 3.7        The   room is not in suitable proximity to a water closed nor is
             there provision for a private waiting area.

 3.8         A telephone is to be installed in the near future.

 Zqqjtweat /Materials

 4.0         There is some provision for materials         but    these do    not as    yet
              reach the recommended standard.




                                                                               /coiitinued
Page 7


KECOMMEHDATIONS - SUFC


1          That the room be adequately marked 'First Aid Room'.

2          That provision be made to direct people to the room b y sign and
            through the services of stewards and the South Yorkshire
            Police.

3          That the room be extended to meet the required area. This may
            be achieved by encroaching upon the existing facilities for
            Ball Boys and the redundant bathing area within the visitors
            changing room.

4          That the door width b e   extended    by 0.6 metres    to comply with
           the recommendations.

5          That adequate   provision be   made   to   ensure   individual   patient
           privacy.

6          That the room be equipped with a stainless steel sink, with hot
            and cold running water, a non-porous work surface of adequate
           size and a supply of drinking water.

7          The surfaces should be treated with a non-porous substance, the
            roofing tiles should be replaced or treated as above and that
            the room be thoroughly cleaned.

8          That provision be made to supply emergency heating and lighting
            and to supply two further 13 amp sockets.

9          A Water Closet should be supplied in close proximity to the
            area and a private waiting area suitable for seating six people
            should be included within the vicinity.

10         That the telephone link should have an outside line.

11         That the equipment within the room shou l d be updated to the
            recommended levels and be compatible with that provided by
            SYMAS.


In line w i t h the inspections it may be worth considering applying an
additional First Aid Room/Area at both the Football Grounds.    These would
be strategically placed in relation to the existing facilities and would
greatly reduce the distances covered from some points within the Grounds.

This matter is only for consideration and I feel given that the Clubs reach
the required standard for an acceptable First Aid Room, then the matter is
not a priority.
                                  APPENDIX 3

Comments on proposed conversion of existing 'Away Team' changing area into
a first aid room with integral waiting area and toilet accommodation.

1.   Item 1.1
     Satisfactory.

2.   Item 2.1
     Satisfactory.

3.   Item 2.2
     Signs need to be provided.

4.   Item 3.1
     The proposed treatment room, waiting area and two toilet compartments
     combined, plus the additional space created by demolishing the
     partition wall in the entrance lobby, approximates to 315 ft.2. The
     proposed treatment room is regular in shape;  the waiting area is more
     irregular in shape, but still acceptable.

5.   Item 3.2
     The side entrance door into the proposed treatment room needs to be
     widened as far as practicable (1.5m?);  this would necessitate
     repositioning of the external soil pipe and alterations to external
     drainage.

6.   Item 3.3
     A door needs to be installed in the opening between the proposed
     treatment room and the waiting area.

7.   Item 3.4
     The existing shower units and plumbing need to be dismantled.  A
     stainless steel sink and a wash-hand basin need to be produced in the
     proposed treatment room, complete with adequate drainage and constant
     hot and cold water supplies.  (Hot water can be provided from the
     existing system).  Suitable and sufficient work surface and a separate
     drinking water supply, taken directly off a rising main, also need to
     be provided.  The existing wash-hand basin in the proposed waiting
     area need to be dismantled.

8.   Item 3.5
     All internal partition walls in the proposed treatment room need to be
     demolished.  The concrete floor needs to be covered or treated so as
     to provide a durable impervious finish on completion;  the two trapped
     floor gullies should be retained to facilitate hosing down of the wall
     and floor areas.  The existing ceramic wall tiling is acceptable.

     The one fixed window in the proposed treatment room needs to be
     replaced by an additional opening casement.  The external waste pipe
     from the first floor needs to be repositioned in order to allow one of
     the existing casements to fully open.

     Additional artificial lighting is required in the proposed treatment
     room.

     Adequate means of heating needs to be provided both in the proposed
     treatment room and in the waiting area.
     At least six electric socket outlets need to be provided in the
     proposed treatment room, their position to be determined by the
     proposed layout and furnishing of the room.

     The inspection chamber cover in the proposed waiting area needs to be
     made airtight.

9.   Item 3.6
     Suitable and sufficient waste storage receptacles will need to be
     provided.

10. Item 3.7
     Toilet provision is satisfactory.   Seating needs to be provided in the
     proposed waiting area.

11. Item 3.8
     A telephone link, with an exclusive external line, needs to be
     installed.
                       ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT




                                                           CATEGORY OF REPORT



                                                          Not for Publication
                                                        (Exempt for purposes of
                                                      paragraphs)                 )



                                                        PRESS RELEASE REQUIRED
  ...
                                                           Yes               No


                                                          EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
                                                              IMPLICATIONS

                                                          No
                                                                     (        )


REPORT TO:   General Purposes Panel           DATE:     27th November 1989




SUBJECT:     Saf ety of Sports .Grounds - Proposed works at Sheffield United




REPORT OF:   Head of Administration and Legal Departmeet



REPORT REFERENCE NO.



PURPOSE OF REPORT:     To inform members of proposed works at Sheffield United




RECOMMENDATION:         See report




BACKGROUND PAPERS USED IN COMPILATION OF REPORT:
Report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department
To The General Purposes Panel______________________________


SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - PROPOSED WORKS AT SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

Introduction

Messrs- Eastwood & Partners have recently submitted to the Council a number of
proposals in relation to works at the Sheffield United Sports Ground.  Details
of these proposals are summarised below, and plans will be available for members
to inspect at the Panel meeting.  It is also likely that the club/and or its
representatives will be present at the meeting.

The Boundary Walls at Sheffield United

On 6th October 1989, Eastwood & Partners submitted plans 11238/6 and 7 which
show the ground layout and various items of work which need to be done to the
boundary walls at Sheffield United.  Following telephone conversations with the
Building Surveyor further plans and calculations were submitted on 15th
November.

The Advisory Group at its meeting on 9th November, made no comment on the
proposals other than to indicate that if the Building Surveyor was satisfied
with them it would raise no objection.  The Building Surveyor is still studying
the proposals, but it is hoped that his comments will be available by the Panel
date.

LPG Storage Compound

On 11th October 1989, Messrs. Eastwood & Partners submitted plan 11238/6 in
relation to proposals to install a new LPG storage compound.  A copy of that
letter is attached to this report.  Members may know that LPG (Liquified
Petroleum Gas) is a substance which can present special fire risks and
therefore, requires special treatment.

The Director of Health and Consumer Services and the Fire Service have commented
on the proposal.   The Director has indicated that a suitable barrier needs to be
constructed around the proposed compound at the proposed 3 metre separation
distance in order to prevent vehicles being parked very close to it-   Both the
Fire Service and the Director agree that a break glass type box will be
appropriate for the provision of fire extinguishes, and that this should be
sited on the outside of the compound adjacent to the exit.   The provision of
fire extinguishers should be in accordance with the Health and Safety Executive
guidance note CS4.

At its meeting on 9th November the Advisory Group approved the proposal in
relation to the compound -and agreed that the comments of the Fire Service and
the Director of Health and Consumer Services should be complied with.


                                                         ./Cont'd.
The John Street Stand Additional Guard Rails

On 10th October 1989, Messrs. Eastwood & Partners submitted plan 11238/7 showii'
details of some additional guard rails to be sited in the John Street Stand.
The Plan was submitted pursuant to a list of comments made by Officers which
were submitted to Sheffield United on 17th August.  The Advisory Group
considered the proposal at its meeting on 19th October, and agreed with the
proposals.  The Building Surveyor has also indicated that the work needs to be
carried out in accordance with plan 11238/7.

The Spion Kop Exit Routes

On 30th October, Messrs. Eastwood & Partners submitted three plans showing a
proposal to increase the existing capacity of the staircases leading front the
back of the Spion Kop.  Attached to this report are copies of a Fire Service
letter dated 6th November 1989, which contains various comments on the proposal
and a letter of 9th November 1989, from Eastwood & Partners.

The Advisory Group at its meeting on 9th November, considered the proposal and
felt that it would be appropriate subject to comments from the Fire Service and
the Building Surveyor.  The Building Surveyor has not yet commented on the
proposal, but it is anticipated that he will do so, prior to the meeting on 27th
November.  At the Advisory Group meeting the Police in particular were keen to
see the capacity of the Kop increased if possible, so that potential crowd
problems could be avoided.

According to Dr. Eastwood's letter of 9th November   1989, the Club wished to
increase the capacity of the Kop by means of these   works by 1,920 persons.  The
legal situation here is that the Club should apply   to the Council for an
amendment of the Safety Certificate to incorporate   this increase in capacity.

Recommendations

The Panel is recommended to:

1.    Subject to any comments made by the Building Surveyor approve the   boundary
      wall proposals as outlined above;

2.    Approve the proposed LPG storage compound subject to the comments of the
      Director of Health and Consumer Services and the Chief Fire Officer;

3.    Approve the John Street Guard Rail's proposal as submitted by Eascwood and
      Partners.

4.    Subject to any comments made by the Building Surveyor, and taking account
      of the Fire Service comments dated 6th November, approve the Spion Kop
      exit route proposals as shown on plans 11238/10,11 and 12.




                                                 •/Cont'd.
                                       - 3 -


In order to assist Sheffield United Football Club Limited, the Panel may wish to
authorise me to amend the General Safety Certificate in respect of Sheffield
United Football Club to reflect an increase in capacity of 1,920 persons on the
Kop as and when the works are completed to the satisfaction of the Building
Surveyor and the Chief Fire Officer.  It will also be necessary for the Club to
apply formally for an amendment to the General Safety Certificate.


N O T E : The legislation permits the Council to make a resonable charge in respect
of an application for the amendment of a General Safety Certificate; if the
Sheffield United Certificate is amended, then a report will be presented to the
Panel in due course recommending a fee to be charged for that process.


                                                    H. M. Webster
                                                    Head of Administration and
                                                    Legal Department

Town Hall
SHEFFIELD

November 1989




1/DB2011/MS
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                                      St. Andrews House
                      (Consulting Engineers)                                                                                             23 Kingfield Road
Directors :
                                                                                                                                         Sheffield S11 9AS
W . E a stw o o d
                                                                                                                                         Tel.: (0742) 554554
                                    F.Eng.. 8 . Eng.. Ph.D .. D.Eng.,
                                    C.Eng.. F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E..                                                                   Fax: (0742) 554330
                                    F.l.M e ch.E ., F.G.S.. M.Cons.E.
A .A .W o o d                       B.Eng., Ph.D .. C.Eng.. F.I.C.E..
                                    F .I.S truct.E ., M .I.W .E .M .. M .Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                                                       and a t :
R .C . A .E a s tw o o d            B.Sc.. C.Eng.. M I C E., F.I.S truct E.

G .S p ir                           C.Eng., F.I.C.E.    M .I.M ec h.E                                                                       P r e m i e r Ho u s e
C .S .G re a v e s                  8 . Eng.. C E n g .. M I C E.    M l.Struct.E
                                                                                                                                            12/13 Hatton Garden
                                                                                                                                            London EC1N 8AN
S.       Preston                    B.Eng., C.Eng., M l C.E., M .I.S truct.E .
                                                                                                                                            Tel.: (01) 242 7436
G .M . S e a m a n                  B.Sc.. C.Eng.. M I.C.E.. F.I.Struct.E.                                                                  Fax.: (01) 404 5424
D .S . Steph en s                   C.Eng.. F.I.C.E.. F .I.Struct.E.. F.8.I.M .


                                                                                                      O u r R e f:              WE/JAS/KB/11238
                                                                                                      Y o u r R e f:



City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,                                                                                        11 October 198 9
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
Sheffield Si 2HH.


For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes


Dear Mr. Bownes,
                                                  Sheffield United Football Club Ltd.
                                                  Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
                                                                 L.P.G. Storage Compound
                       Referring to item 7 on page 7 of the Officers Comments,                                                                                     sent
to Sheffield United on 17 August 1989, we have pleasure in enclosing
six prints of our drawing 11238/6 showing details of a new L.P.G.
Storage Compound.
                       It is proposed to locate the compound in the area presently
used for tenant car parking, but away from the toilet block, with a
3m wide strip all round, cleared from vegetation and covered with
a 150mm layer of crushed stone.
                       Reading through previous notes about the L.P.G. compound
there is reference to fire fighting equipment.                                                                             We proposed to have
provided a 9 kg dry powderextinguisher located in the compound.
Would the Fire Service please advise whether or not the extinguisher
should be contained in a 'break-glass'                                                                type box to keep it away from
vandals and the weather.


                                                                                           Yours sincerely,


c.c. Mr. D. Capper, S.U.F.C.
A s s o c ia te s :
J. A. Strange                A. J. Clough                       R. Tandy                    J.M.Wood                   C. M. Pollard               R. K. Godden
 C .Eng., F. I. Struct. E.   8.A., C.Eng.. M.C.I.B.S.E..            C.Eng.. F.I.Struct.E    B.S^.. C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.,   B.Eng.. C.Eng.. M.t.C.E,.   F.S.C.A. (A c co u n ta n t
                              M .I.M ech.E.                                                 M.y.Struct.E.              M .I.S truct.E .            8t A d m in is tra tio n
                                                                                            ^                                                       M anager)

                                               An Unlimited Company. Registered in England - No. 1833144
S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E F iR E A N D C I V I L D E F E N C E A U T H O R I T Y



South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H. E. Wright, Q.F.S.M., M .I.FiraE , F.B.I.M.                                                      Command H.Q.,
             Chief Fire Officer                                                                    Wellington Street,
                                                                                                   Sheffield,
                                                                                                   South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                                   Telephone: Sheffield
                                                                                                   STD (0742) 727202
                                                                                                   Fax: (0742) 726894

Our Ref:             * * 1 9 /2 /4 3 “ / “            Your Ref:                                     Date:       6.11.89

This matter is being dealt with by . . .
                                                     DO Grimshaw                                    Ext. No. . . 2 7 1 ,

       Sheffield City Council,                                                       ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL
       Licensing Section,                                                               nPPT. SHEFFIELD
       Legal and Administration Department,
       Town Hall»                                                                A      -8 8 ?       1          ST
                                                                                                                     t f
       SHEFFIELD,
       SI 2HH.                                                                  !B         Q 8. NOV 89               PAA

       For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes                                        T “   O.S.VL. | UB         1        CL
                                                                                 GS

       Dear Sir,

           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - BRAMALL LANE - SPION KOP - EXIT ROUTES

       In reply to correspondence from Eastwood and Partners dated 30th October,
       1989 and which enclosed plans numbered 11238/10, 11 and 12, please find the
       observations of this Department in respect of means of escape, listed
       below:-

           1. The new flight of steps, detailed at Section A-A on plan number 11238/12
              is considered to be satisfactory. It is noted however, that the height
              of the risers is indicated as being 145mm when paragraph 73 of the Green
              Guide indicates that the preferred height of risers should be 150mm but
              not more than 190mm.

           2. Paragraph 78 of the Guide recommends that protection should be provided
              on both sides of stairs and landings and where next to open well3 or
              spaces should be not less than 1.1 metres in height. The barriers on the
              left hand side (going down) of the new flight of steps and the widened
              set of steps indicated at Section B-B, should accordingly be to 1.1
              metres in height.

           3. Some of the measurements indicated on the drawings do not correspond to
              measurements taken with a scale rule. Subject to all measurements being
              as indicated on drawing number 11238/12 and these being clear widths
              between barriers, the improvements are considered to be acceptable anrf
              will give a total of 16 units of exit width as referred to in Eastwood's
              letter.   This is an increase of 4 units and would enable the total exit
              route capacity of the Spion Kop to be increased by 1,920 to 12,960.

           If there are any queries on the above matters, please do                                not      hesitate       to
           contact the Officer concerned.
      *>
  S        V m ifa   f a t f h f i i l l n _________________




           uiABf tire umj.cer ••

                                   All communications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
E A S T W O O D & PA R T N E R S                                                                                                      St. Andrews House
                 (Consultin g Engineers)                                                                                              23 Kingfield Road
Directors :                                                                                                                           Sheffield S11 9A§
W. E astw o o d                    F. Eng., B.Eng.. Ph.D., D.Eng.,                                                                    Tel.: (0742) 554554
                                   G E ng., F.I.C.E.. P.P.I.Struct.E.,
                                   F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S., M .Cons.E.                                                                    Fax: (0742) 55433C
A. A. W ood                        B. Eng.. Ph.D.. C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                                   F .l.Struct. E., M.I.W.E.M., M .Cons.E.

R.C.A. E astw o o d                B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.. F.I.Struct.E.                                                                                             and a t :

G .S pir                           C.Eng.. F.I.C.E., M .I.Mech.E.
                                                                                                                                           P r e m i e r Ho u s e
C.S. G reaves                      B.Eng.. C.Eng., M .I.C.E..M .I.Struct.E.                                                                12/13 Hatton Garden
S. P resto n                       B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E„ M .I.Struct.E.                                                                 London EC1N 8AN
G.M. Seam an                       B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                           Tel.: (01) 242 7436
D .S .S tep h en s                 C.Eng., F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E., F.B.I.M.
                                                                                                                                           Fax.: (01) 404 5424

                                                                                                O ur R e f:                          WE/KB/11238
                                                                                                Y o u r R ef :                       GP/262/DMB

Administration and Legal Department,                                                                                                 9 November 1989
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
Town Hall,                                                                                                       1
Sheffield SI 2HH.                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                 ? ............. ^
                                                                                                                 |' i    , -                                            i• ^
                                                                                                                                                                       1*W#'•
                                                                                                                                      •■        4

For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes                                                                               I
                                                                                                                 |&                  1 3. ■ NOV 89                      PM
Dear Mr. Bownes,                                                                                                 LC-^                      1   UB       1 COMV
                                                                                                                                                                        CL
                                        Sheffield United Football Clii^S, '                                                    -

                                        Spion Kop - Exit Route Towards
                                 Shoreham Street/John Street Corner
                 Thank you for your letter of 7 November giving us the time­
table for consideration of our proposals.                                                                     John Strange will be
telephoning in the next day                                                 or so to see if you can give him
any information about the reaction of the Advisory Group.                                                                                                  If
a favourable recommendation is being made to the General Purposes
Panel of the City Council on 27 November, the intention is
to have a contractor geared up and ready to start so that the
work can be completed before the games over the Christmas period.
Fortunately there will be only one first team home match between
27 November and Christmas Eve.                                                     (That is against West Bromwich
Albion on Saturday, 2 December). We will of course expect to
liaise with you and the members of the Advisory Group regarding-
the state of the works on the day of that match.
                 The work which is being carried out will have the effect of
increasing the number of exit widths along that particular route
by four compared with the figures which were calculated by the
Fire Service.                      The capacity of the exit route will therefore be

A s so ciates:

J. A . Strange          A. J. Clough                       R. Tandy                 J .M .W o o d                 C. M . Pollard                    R. K. Godden
C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.   B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S.E.,        C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.    B.Sc.. C.Eng.. M.I.C.E.,      B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E..         F.S.C.A, {A cc o u n ta n t
                        M .I.M ech.E.                                               M .I.Struct.E-                M .KStruct.E.                     & A d m in is tra tio n
                                                                                                                                                    M a n a g e r)

                                         An Unlimited Company. Registered in England - No. 1833144
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                     SHEET




 increased by 1920.   It would be very much appreciated if
 advance arrangements could be made with the Panel at its
 meeting on 27 November to approve an increase in the licensed
 capacity of the Kop by that number^ subject to the work being
 completed to the satisfaction of the Advisory Group.


                            Yours sincerely,




 c.c. Mr. D. Capper
      Mr. D. Dooley
                        ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT




                                                           CATEGORY OF REPORT


                                                           Not for Publication
                                                         (Exempt for purposes of
                                                      paragraphs)                )



                                                        PRESS RELEASE REQUIRED

                                                           Yes               No


                                                          EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
                                                             IMPLICATIONS

                                                          No
                                                                     Ooeeoflasm   ■ )

REPORT TO:    General Purposes Panel          DATE:     27th November 1989




SUBJECT:     Safety of Sports Grounds - Access for Ambulances to the pitch at
             Sheffield Wednesday


REPORT OF: Head of Administration and Legal Departmeet


REPORT REFERENCE NO.


PURPOSE OF REPORT:.      To inform members of the arrangements for
                         ambulance access




RECOMMENDATION:          See report




BACKGROUND PAPERS USED IN COMPILATION OF REPORT:
REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
PURPOSES PANEL


       Safety of Sports Grounds - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
       Access for Ambulances between the North Stand and Spion Kop


On 18th October, 1989 Messrs. Eastwood & Partners wrote to the Council
drawing -its attention to the Ambulance access to the football pitch at
Sheffield Wednesday. A copy of the letter is attached to this report for
members information along with a copy of the plan which I believe makes
the situation very clear.

The South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service have also written a
letter (copy attached dated 1st November, 1989) which indicates that the
services does not feel that the width of the access way will be
sufficient. Again the letter is self-explanatory.

Both Sheffield Wednesday and South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
Service representatives are likely to attend the meeting.

Recommendation

That after hearing from both Sheffield Wednesday and the Ambulance
Service, the Panel decide whether or not it is necessary to require the
Club to replace the disabled persons access ramp in the area between the
North Stand and the Spion Kop and in what timescale.


                                              H. M. Webster,
                                              Head of Administration
                                              and Legal Department.


Town Hall,
Sheffield.

November, 1989.


SD2AAD/JL
A.22.11.89.
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                                                  St. Andrews House
                      (Consulting Engineers)                                                                                                         23 Kingfield Road
Directors :
                                                                                                                                                     Sheffield S11 9AS
W . E a stw o o d                   F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D .. D.Eng.,
                                                                                                                                                     Tel.: (0742) 554554
                                    C.Eng.. F.I.C.E., P.P.(.Struct.E..                                                                               Fax: (0742) 554330
A .A .W o o d
                                    F .t.M ech.E ., F.G.S., M .C ons.E.
                                     B.Eng.. Ph.D.. C.Eng., F.I.C.E..
                                     F .I.S tru c t.E .. M .I.W .E .M .. M .C ons.E.
                                                                                                    !i                 v
                                                                                                                                -\               - V 't -   ;
                                                                                                                                                                                     and a t :
R .C . A .E a s tw o o d             B.Sc., C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., F.I.Struct.E.

G .S p ir                           C.Eng.. F.I.C.E.. M .I.M ech.E .                                                                                ,. P r e m i e r      House
C .S .G re a v e s                   B.Eng.. C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., M .i.S tru c t.E .
                                                                                                                                                     ' 1 2 / 1 3 H a tto n G ard en
                                                                                                                                                         L o n d o n EC1N 8AN
S.        P reston                   B.Eng., C.Eng.. M .I.C .E ., M .i.S tru c t.E .
                                                                                                                                                        T el.: (01) 2 4 2 7 4 3 6
G .M . S e a m a n                   B .S c.. C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., F.I.Struct.E.                                                                        F ax.: (01) 4 0 4 5 4 2 4
D .S . Steph en s                    C.Eng.. F.I.C.E.. F .I.S truct.E .. F.B.I.M.


                                                                                                            O ur R e f:
                                                                                                                                           WE/KB/11237
                                                                                                            Y our R e f :


Administration & Legal Department,                                                                                                         18 October 198'9
Town Hall,
Sheffield SI 2HH.


For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes


Dear Mr. Bownes,
                                     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                       Access for Ambulances between North Stand and Spion                                                                                          Ko      p

                       It will be recalled that on the day of the disaster there
was difficulty in getting ambulances on to the pitch.                                                                                                       They were
obstructed by, first of all( the position of the gates between the
North stand and the Kop.                                                     The gates were located close to the
North stand wall and when ambulances passed over the concrete footing
of the ramp from the disabled enclosure,they were tilted sideways
so that one of the .ambulances was damaged by rubbing against the
gate.
                       As the ambulances approached nearer to the pitch they had
to manoeuvre between the structure of the disabled ramp and the
inclined raking members of the safety fence at the foot of the Kop.
Again there was some damage to an ambulance.
                       Immediately before the season started it was agreed that the
ramp to the disabled enclosure would be taken down, as this could
be done quickly whereas moving the main gates is a major structural
op©ra’"kion which would take time and, of course, needed the approval
of the City Council.
                      We have prepared a scheme which will make it perfectly accessible
for the ambulances even with the disabled ramp reinstated.                                                                                                            Firstly,
the main gates are being widened by 900mm.                                                                                Secondly, the "mound” of
 A s so c ia te s :

 J. A. Strange             A. J. Clough                            R. Tandy                J. M. Wood                       C. M. Pollard                       R. K. Godden
 C.Eng.. F.I.Struct.E.     B .A .,C .E ng.,M .C X B .S .E .,       C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.   B.Sc.,C .E ng., M .I.C.E.,       B,Eng,, C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,           F.S.C.A. (A c co u n ta n t
                            M .I.M ech.E .                                                 M .i.S tru c t.E .               M .i.S tru c t.E .                  & A d m in is tra tio n
                                                                                                                                                                 M a n a g e r)

                                                 An Unlimited Company. Registered in England - No. 1833144
                                                        SHEET       2.
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




                                                          ’ I   '



 concrete at the base of the ramp is being reconstructed so
 that'the concrete feathers out parallel to the North stand
 gable.   The sideways slope which was present on the day of
 the disaster is being completely removed so that ambulances
 will no longer be tilted towards the opposite side.    That
 would not be a difficulty in any case because the gates will
 now be 3ft. further away from the ramp than they were on 15
 April, so that even, if the ambulances were tilted it would
 not cause them to rub against the gates.
          At the pitch end of the ramp the two raking steel
 members which protruded in front of the boundary fence have
 now been removed.
          The situation which will prevail is illustrated on the
 enclosed plan 11237/12A.    The narrowest part of the route
 through which the ambulances will have to pass is 610mm
 greater than the width over the mirrors of the ambulances.
 It will obviously not be possible to drive through at high
 speed, but it should be possible to drive through at the slow
 speed which will be necessary all the way from the point where
 the ambulance leaves Penistone Road to come into the ground.                In '
 an emergency it is likely that, large numbers of people will be
 exiting towards Penistone Road.The ambulance driver will have to
 pick his way through between them no doubt using his siren to
 clear the way.    By the time the ambulance is passing between the
 North stand and Spion Kop it is likely that there will be very
 few people about so that the route will be less obstructed.
          We believe that the proposal we are putting forward will
 permit ambulances to enter on to the pitch with no more than
 the odd second of delay compared with the time it would take if
 the disabled ramp were permanently removed.
          If the Club is not allowed to reinstate the ramp at its
 previous location it will have to be placed alongside the pitch
 and the length will have to be nearly twice as long because we
 shall lose the advantage of the slope of the ground.      Alterations
 will also have to be made to the handrailing.     The total cost
  including new foundations would be several thousand pounds.            A
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                     SHEET   3.




  further significant penalty will be that the exit route
  for the disabled will be approximately doubled in length.
  Bearing in mind that they can only be moved relatively
  slowly the evacuation time will be significantly increased.
          As an alternative the Ambulance Service have suggested
  that a lift should be installed so that the disabled can be
  either raised to get them into the stand or lowered to enable
  them to leave.   We have recently installed such a lift in one
  of our National Health     Service projects and the cost was £12,000.
  The height to which the patients are lifted is only about half
  as great as that to the disabled seating.      Apart from the
  cost,the time taken to evacuate 30 disabled people, one at a
  time on a slow moving lift, including manoeuvring them on to
   it at the top and off at the bottom would be so great as to
  constitute a distinct safety hazard.      It would also be
   inconvenient.
          On behalf of the Club I make a strong recommendation
   that with the works shown on our drawing 12A they should
   be permitted to reinstate the ramp to its previous position.
   I understand that the City Council is taking steps to include
   in the Advisory Group representatives of the Club and supporters.
   It might be considered that this is a matter which could be
   left for discussion at a meeting when the Advisory Group has
   been enlarged, provided of course that this is not going to result
   in too much of a delay.

                                    Yours sincerely,




   c.c.   Mr. G. Mackrell, S.W.F.C.
                                                                                                      DISABLED   TOILET.                            SPION            KOP.



                                                                                                                                     EXISTING PERIMETER FENCE




                                                                                                                                AMBULANCE WIDTH OVER MIRRORS
                                                                                                                                7700 mm
                                                                                                                                CLEARANCE* 610 mm [ 2 — o ')




            lit w   /   C   e > a e K    6 \ t   \ i » v j < = > •> -» < ; ,   ■
                                                                                                             o~A

                                                                     ^ NORTH                  STAND.        A C C 1S&

                                                                                                                                                                        > tt> .



                                                                                                                                                                                      SC Al E

 E A S T W O O D 8t PARTNER S                                                      SH EFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. P I C . HILLSBOROUGH.                   DRAWN


                                                                                   SAFETY CERTIFICATE WORK 1989                                       CHECKED                      l:50
(Consulting Engineers)
 St. A n d r e w s H o u se
                                                                                   P IA N ON AREA BETWEEN NORTH STANO % SPION KOP.                    APPROVED                     D R A W IN G No
 2 3 K ing fietd R o a d
 S h e f f i e l d S1 1 9 A S
                                  smss«
                       f»* <074?) SS030
spmwCTBBnwewpiwii'JUM i.# ji
                                        »•» iot<?i

                                     ■ ujtmiM
                                                                                                                                                     DATE
                                                                                                                                                                 .Ce*:T.® 7JU r
                                                                                                                                                                                  11237 / 1 2 .      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                         l
                         S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E M E T R O P O L IT A N A M B U L A N C E S E R V IC E

                                                    AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                         FAIRFIELD. MOORGATE ROAD.
                                                             ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                                    TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 323320



                         OUR REF: A p / p E / j R    •                                        Mr. A. PAGE. JP. F.A.S.L
                         YOUR REF:                       *                                            C r !: F MET= C P O L i T A N

                         Please ask for:




    1st November 1989.                                                                                    C: uccv.L 5


    Mr. D. Bownes,                                                          ! ,1 .         _•_,jj,,,M ,..'.•'waiumiiw*-.'- II——'
    Administration and Legal Department,
    Town Hall,
    Sheffield.
    SI 2HH
                                                                            Is       2 “

                                                                            j 0 O.S.M.
                                                                                            uGV

                                                                                              LIB
                                                                                                        i o wo

                                                                                                       1 ELMS J?SO
                                                                                                                     ‘i'/Arv



                                                                                                                     \ ^
                                                                            SGS




    Dear Mr. Bownes,

    In reply to your letter (plan no 11237/12A) and further to our recent
    correspondence, I would advise you that the position of SYMAS remains
    unchanged in this matter. I would reiterate the following points

    The envisaged available space is totally unacceptable, at best using
    Eastwood and Partners measurements, there is an available width of 305 mm
    either side of a centrally placed vehicle. Under emergency evacuation
    conditions I would envisage pedestrians or casualties leaving by this route
    would not be forming orderly lines to pass by the emergency services using
^   the area and subsequently there is a grave risk of crushing or injury.

    The risk is compounded by the projection of a pipe at the base of a wall
    outside of the disabled toilet, which is again a hazard when considering
    the available space whilst emergency vehicles are utilising the area.
    Further to this, I consider that under the type of conditions which may
    prevail should an incident of any kind occur, the limited space available
    would impede the emergency services access and egress within that area of
    the ground and I do not consider that the comments made in Eastwood and
    Partners letter dated 18th October 1989 - by the time the ambulance is
    passing between the North Stand and the Spion Kop it is likely there would
    be very few people about, so that the route would be less obstructed -
    should be considered as realistic or valid, as the likelihood of such a
    scenario is unknown.




                                                                                                                    CP65/32586
1st November 1989.


Mr. D. Bownes,
Sheffield City Council.


Finally, with reference to Eastvood and Partners letter dated 19th October
1989, it is SYMAS policy when considering these matters to establish as
priorities the access, treatment and evacuation of casualties. This is of
paramount importance regardless of the need to consider inconvenience or
cost.

If you require any further assistance on this matter, please do not
hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely,




a. rage,
CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER
                       ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT




-                                                          CATEGORY OF REPORT


                                                          Not for Publication
                                                        (Exempt for purposes of
                                                     paragraphs)                  )



                                                        PRESS RELEASE REQUIRED

                                                           Yes              No


                                                         EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
                                                             IMPLICATIONS

                                                         No               xK*ax
                                                                    (SaaxRJwrax       )

REPORT TO:   General Purposes Panel          DATE:     27th November 1989




SUBJECT:     Safety of Sports Grounds - South Stand at Sheffield Wednesday




REPORT OF:   Head of Administration and Legal Department



REPORT REFERENCE NO.


PURPOSE OF REPORT:         bring to the Panel's attention a letter from the fire
                        service




RECOMMENDATION:         See report




BACKGROUND PAPERS USED IN COMPILATION OF REPORT:
REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
PURPOSES PANEL


Safety of Sports Grounds - The South Stand at Sheffield Wednesday Sports Ground

The Fire Service have sent the Council a letter dated 24th October in connection
with the South Stand at Hillsborough. A copy of this letter is attached to this
report.

For ease of reference I have summarised the Fire Service recommendations below.
The Fire Service are expected to be represented at the Panel meeting along with
the Club.

Recommendation 1 - In some rows of seats in the stand there are more than the
green guide recommended limit of 28 seats. The recommendation is to remove any
seats in excess of the green guide limit and ensure that all gangways are at
least 1.1 metres wide.

Recommendation 2 - The capacity of the upper area of the South Stand be reduced
to 5,120.

Recommendation 3 - Two of the stairways are fed by channel widths which are well
below green guide standard. The recommendation is that these are made to comply
by repositioning the two barriers that sub-divide the channels on either side of
the central fence to create two 1650mm wide channels.

Recommendation 4 - The '.'concertina" gates be replaced with outward opening gates
fitted with panic type fastenings and appropriate signs.

Recommendation 5 - It is desirable that alternative means of escape from the
stand in a forward direction be provided.    The Club should be asked to submit a
scheme to achieve this.

Recommendation 6 - Screens of 1 hour fire   resisting standard are to be provided-
across the concourse in such positions asto separate the routes of the three
stairways down to ground level.

Recommendation 7 - The wall between the "players' lounge" and the concourse and
the vomitory between the Hillsborough Lounge and the players' lounge is to be
improved to 1 hour fire resisting standard.

Recommendation 8 - The double leaf fire resisting doors opening out from the
’
.’Steps" restaurant onto the concourse must be fitted with self-closing devices
and the panic bolts must be such that they are compatible with the self-closing
devices to ensure that the doors can close fully into their rebates.

Recommendation 9 - A system of automatic smoke detection is to be installed in
the Stand- as soon as possible.

Recommendation 10 - A night time test of the emergency lighting has recently
taken place and reports will be submitted shortly.

Recommendation 11 - The lower section of the South Stand be reduced in capacity
to 1,920 and the gangway widths be increased to 1.1 metres.

Recommendation 12 - Until such time as the above recommendations can be
implemented the Club be more vigilant with respect to fire risk. The Club's
attention has been specifically drawn to this recommendation in a letter dated
27th October, 1989.
Options Open to the Panel

The Panel could in respect of Recommendations 2 and 11 amend the Sheffield
Wednesday General Safety Certificate to reflect capacity reductions.
Recommendations 1, 3 to 9 and 11 could be made the subject of requirements upon
the club to inspect and submit schemes for the Council's consideration under
additional Condition 9 of the Safety Certificate. Recommendation 10 could be
simply noted.

Condition 9 states:

'.'9. The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and/or inspections as may be
specified in the notice. The Holder shall comply with any requirement or
conditions specified in that notice."

Recommendations:~

The Panel is recommended (subject to any submissions made on 27th November) to:-


1.   Authorise the Head of Administration and Legal Department to amend Schedule
     3 of the Sheffield Wednesday General Safety Certificate to reduce the
     maximum capacity of the "south stand upper" from 5,567 to 5,120 and of the
     "south stand lower'.' from 3,310 to 1,920;
          I
2.   Authorise the Head of Administration and Legal Department to serve a notice
     under additional Condition 9 requiring (a) an inspection of the south stand
     with particular reference to the comments of the Fire Service in their
     letter of 24th October; (b) the submission‘by Sheffield Wednesday of
     scheme(s) including details of work proposed to deal with the Fire Service
     comments; (c) Sheffield Wednesday to specify timescales for the completion
     of works;

3.   Request the Head of' Administration and Legal Department to report back to
     the Panel on receipt of the information.



                                             H. M. WEBSTER,
                                             Head of Administration
                                             and Legal Department.

Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD.
November 1989




BH6/JD911
S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E F IR E A N D C I V I L D E F E N C E A U T H O R I T Y



South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H. E. Wright, Q.F.S.M., M.I.Fire.E., F.B.I.M.                                                                            Command H.Q.,
             Chief Fire Officer                                                                                          Wellington Street,
                                                                                                                         Sheffield,
                                                                                                                         South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                                                         Telephone: Sheffield
                                                                                                                         STD (0742) 727202
                                                                                                                         Fax: (0742) 726894

Our Ref:            »19/2/«A S8/IQ                        y0|JrRef.                                                      Da|e;        24.10.89

This matter is being dealt with b y ................D9. Gr.in fs^ aw .................................................     Ext.        No. . . . 2 ? l ......



         Sheffield City Council,                                                                           ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL
         Licensing Section,                                                                                   DEPT., SHEFFIELD.
         Legal and Administration Department,                                                                HEAD OF (ASSISTANT
                                                                                                           A   DEPT. 1 HEAD     L.S.
         Town Hall,
         SHEFFIELD,                                                                                         B      2 7 OCT 1S8S PAA
         SI 2HH.
                                                                                                           C    O.S.M.j    LIB    | ELNS      PSO
         For the attention of Mr. D . Bownes                                                               GS
                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                               cc


         Dear Sir,

         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - HILLSBOROUGH - SOUTH STAND

         Further to your letter dated 16th August, 1989 requesting ground capacity
         figures   for   Sheffield   Wednesday Football Club,   and our subsequent
         correspondence to you dated 30th August and 26th September,      1989,  the
         figures based on means of escape calculations       for the South Stand are
         included below.  Also, bearing in mind the current policy of the City
         Council  in that the green guide should be strictly adhered to, and the
         recommendation in Lord Justice Taylor's  Interim Report that each Safety
         Certificate   in force should be reviewed, observations and recommendations
         relative to green guide standards are also made.

         As commented on in previous correspondence, the production of this       report
         has     again been made difficult by the lack of up to date plans with which to
         w o r k and because of this, the observations made in respect of numbers of
         seats     in a row,    widths of gangways and any reduction in seat capacity to
         achieve green guide standards, will need further investigation.

         It has to be stressed again that the recommendations made in                                                         correspondence
         to you dated 3rd August, 1989 are still outstanding.    Then,                                                       it was pointed
         out, amongst other matters,    that the necessary surveys                                                           could   not be
         undertaken satisfactorily without the provision of up to date                                                        plans.

         UPPER SECTION (Capacity based on the number of seats is 5,567)

         1.     Means of Escape

               (a) There are 12 vomitories onto the concourse, each of 2 units of exit
                    width, giving 24 units down on   to the concourse level.       5,567
                    spectators could therefore be evacuated onto the concourse via these
                    24 units in 5.8 minutes.




                                     All communications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer
Sheffield City Council                     2                      24.10.89

         Note: The above evacuation time is based on a flow rate of 40
         persons per minute which is dependent on widths of seatways and
         gangways, and numbers of seats in a row etc. As previously referred
         to by Health and Consumer Services Department, areas exist in this
         stand where there are more than 28 seats in a row (28 being the
         maximum specified in paragraph 126 of the green guide) and the
         average width of gangways is little more than one unit wide (550mm)
         when the guide recommends 1.1m.

         Recommendation 1

         It is considered that the recommendations made by Health and
         Consumer Services should be complied with, i.e. gangways and numbers
         of seats in a row should comply with the green guide.

   (a)   From the concourse there are three stairways down to ground level,
         one at each end and one to the West of the middle section.       This
         latter stairway is the only one conforming to green guide! standards,
         being divided into two channels of 1130mm and 1100mm and is
         acceptable as a 4 unit escape route.

         The stairways at each end are divided into four channels, the width
         of each channel (on both stairways) being between 860mm and 930nm,
         clearly well below the required 1.1m. _

         Whilst the channels of the two end stairways do not comply with the
         guide, the overall width equates to six units, therefore, with 2 x 6
         unit and 1 x 4 unit stairway there are 16 units available from the
         concourse down to ground level.

         Recommendation 2

         In eight minutes, these are capable of evacuating 5,120 at a flow
         rate of 40 persons per minute. In order that normal egress at the
         end of an event can be achieved in eight minutes (Paragraph 56 of
         the green guide), it is recommended that the seating capacity of the
         upper section of the stand be reduced to 5,120.

         Recommendation 3

         With respect to the channel widths of the two stairways which are
         well below green guide standard, it is recommended that these are
         made to comply by repositioning the two barriers that sub-divide the
         channels on either side of the central fence to create 2 x 3 unit
         (1650mm) wide channels.

   (b)   The final exit openings at the foot of each stairway are adequate in
         width but all three are fitted with "concertina" type gates.
         Paragraph 62 of the green guide recommends that all doors on exit
         routes should be capable of opening outwards, particularly within
         covered stands and at the foot of stairways.

         Recommendation 4

         It is recommended therefore that the "concertina" gates be replaced
         with outward opening gates fitted only with panic type fastenings,
         the method of operation of which should be clearly indicated e.g.
         "Push Bar to Open". The doors should also be indicated with "Exit"
         notices with white letters on a green background and letters of a
         size to be determined on site.
Sheffield City Council                   - 3 -                    24.10.89

   (c)   The number of people that can safely be accommodated in the stand is
         either its holding capacity, the capacity of the exit system to he
         used  in normal circumstances at the end of an event (referred to at
         (b) above), or the emergency exit system, whichever is the smallest
         (Paragraph 220 of the green guide).

         With respect to emergency evacuation, all the exits from this stand
         discharge down onto the concourse, the upper six vomitories being
         particularly vulnerable due to their routes passing through the
         highest point.

         If a fire occurred and became so serious as to totally smokelog the
         concourse,  then all the vomitories down onto       it could become
         unavailable for use.  In this situation it would be necessary for
         spectators to evacuate forward towards the pitch.

         As referred to    in previous   correspondence relating to the North
         Stand, paragraph 179 of the green guide states that there should be
         more than one emergency exit route from a stand or terrace in case
         one becomes blocked and that the exits should be as widely separated
         as practical planning considerations will allow to minimise the risk
         of them all being blocked by the same cause.

         Recommendation 5

         It is recommended therefore that consideration be given to the
         provision of   alternative means   of escape in a forward direction.
         This should consist of link bridges with associated steps, ramps and
         handrails  (to green guide standards) as necessary and of a minimum
         1.1m wide and discharging via gangways of at least 3 units in width
         through the   lower section of seating then forward through openings
         of similar width onto the pitch.

         The bridges should be in line with the gangways in the upper section
         which should be widened in accordance with recommendation 1 and
         which as far as possible should be positioned centrally between each
         set of vomitories in order that spectators cam turn their backs on
         any vomitory and make their way to a link bridge via a gangway.

         Any gate fastenings should have the approval of this Department and
         all the exits    should be indicated by     signs bearing the words
         "Emergency Exit" with white letters on a green background and of a
         size to be determined on site.

         Conspicuous notices bearing the words      "In case of fire, move
         forwards on to the pitch"  should be positioned where they can be
         seen from the whole seated area.

2. Fire Separation

   (a)   The South Stand is a very complex building.  Beneath the seated area
         are offices, lounges, changing rooms, kitchens licensed club rooms
         and a variety of other area uses that contain a high fire loading
         and add to the risk of fire occurring.
Sheffield City Council                   - 4 -                    24.10.89
      V *
         Since the Safety certificate was issued in 1979, a number of
         apparently unauthorised changes in the way areas are used, has taken
         place. These include bar areas, players lounges and obstruction and
         fire risks within escape routes (kitchen yard area), and have
         resulted in a reduction in the fire separation provisions.   Drawing
         these matters to     the Club's attention seems to have had little
         impact and in the light of LordJustice Taylor's Interim Report and
         inaccordance with your     letter of 16th August, 1989, it has been
         felt necessary to re-assess the stand from afire risk point of view
         and in accordance with the green guide.

        (i)    In order that any fire occurring at concourse level does not
               affect the use of all exit routes down to ground level, the
               concourse     should be    sub-divided  by  fireresisting
               construction.

        Recommendation 6

        It is recommended that screens to one hour fire resisting standard
        should be provided across the concourse in such positions as to
        separate the routes to the three stairways down   to ground level.
        Any doors in this screen should be to thesamestandard and if for
        circulation purposes it is desirable that these be held in the open
        position, this may only be achieved by way of magnetic door holding;
        devices controlled by a smoke detection system.    The screens and.
        doors must comply with the enclosed note FS 901.

        The provision of such screens would ensure that even if one of the
        larger exit routesbecame unavailable for use, there would be   still
        a total of 10 units onto the concourse which together with the- 10
        units forward towards the pitch would be capable of evacuating 5,120
        spectators in 6.4 minutes in an emergency. This evacuation time
        would be considered to be reasonable if all       the other matters
        referred to in this report were to be implemented.

        (ii)   Paragraph 157 of the green guide recommends that the spectator
               area in a stand should be separated from any other adjacent
               circulation   space   or void by construction having fire
               resistance of not less than half an hour.

               To achieve this around the 12 vomitories onto the concourse
               would be very difficult and expensive and may cause further
               obstruction of exit routes therefore it is felt that subj ect
               to all other matters in this and previous reports being
               implemented i.e. automatic fire detection, the exit routes
               being   segregated,   protected   by 1 hour fire resisting
               construction and maintained free of all obstructions and fire
               risks (as the kitchen yard area), it would be reasonable to
               dispense with the recommendation for the half hour separation
               referred to.

        (iii) On the plan attached to the General Safety Certificate issued
              1979, the room onto the concourse presently used as a player's
              lounge was designated as an office and the timber section of
              wall between this room and the concourse was previously
              indicated as a screen separating the concourse from a bar
              area.
Sheffield City Council                   - 5 -                     24.10.89

       Recommendation 7

        The wall between this room and the concourse and vomitory 8 must be
        to one hour    fire resisting standard. It must be emphasised again
        that any alterations that take place must be brought to the
        attention of the Advisory Group in order that works carried out are
        to the correct standard.

        (iv)   The double leaf fire resisting doors    opening out   from the
               steps restaurant onto the concourse have not been fitted with
               self closing devices in the belief that the doors are normally
               kept closed and     fastened by the panic bolt's.     It is now
               understood that this area is used as an   "Executive"  area on
               match days,   the normal route of entry and exit from the
               concourse being v ia the above mentioned doors.

               It is essential that these doors be maintained in the closed
               position in order to protect the concourse from the effects of
               any fire occurring in the steps restaurant.

        Recommendation 8

        The doors must be fitted with self closing devices   and the panic
        bolts must be such that they are compatible with self closing
        devices to ensure that the doors can close fully onto their r e bat es.

Other matters under this subject such as fire separation between rooms,
shutters on fans and fire protection to the kitchen yard area have been
dealt with in previous correspondence.

3. Automatic Fire Detection

   Automatic smoke detection (paragraph 163 of the green guide)    has been
   recommended  for all the areas below the seated area of this stand on
   previous occasions and it is understood that the Club has agreed to   its
   provision in principle but the time scale of its implementation has never
   been determined.

   Recommendation 9

   Due to the nature of this stand i.e. its complexity and fire loading,  it
   is essential that automatic smoke detection, installed in accordance with
   BS 5839: Pt 1: 1988, be installed as soon as possible.  The system should
   be tied   in to the existing fire warning system and Police control and
   could also be used for actuation of smoke operated fire shutters that are
   to be provided in various parts of the stand.

4. Emergency Lighting

   As each section of the ground has been investigated, a number of areas
   have been discovered where emergency lighting has not been provided.

   Recommendation 10

   The Club is to be contacted in order to arrange an inspection under night
   time conditions when only the emergency lighting will be on.    This will
   highlight any further need for emergency lighting and the results will be
   forwarded to you when available.
Sheffield City Council                                           24.10.89

LOWER SECTION (Capacity based on the number of seats is 3,310)

There are 9 vomitories from the rear of the seated area onto a narrow
walkway between this section and the main stand building. There is also a
gangway along the front of the seats but this only leads to an exit route at
the kop end, this being of 2 units.

Other than the front lateral gangway, again the width of all other gangways
does not comply with the green guide (1100mm), the average being about
670mm. The widths of vomitories range between 1010mm and 1060mm and the
narrow walkway is reduced down from an average of 1380mm to 1070mm at pinch
points caused by the protrusion of structural steelwork for the stand.

If the 2 units at the front corner adjacent to the kop are used to full
potential,  640 spectators can exit this way in 8 minutes (assuming a flow
rate of 40 persons per minute). This leaves 2,670 spectators   to use the
rear walkway.

If the vomitories and the walkway are to be accepted as being of 2 units
each, the 2,670 could only be evacuated through the ends of the walkway (2
units at each end) in 16.7 minutes. The capacity of this escape route in 8
minutes is 1,280 therefore together with the capacity of the front c o m e r
exit route, the total capacity based on the exit routes available and an
evacuation time of 8 minutes i 1,920.

Recommendation 11

It is recommended therefore that gangways should be increased to 1.1m by
removal of seats and the capacity of this section be reduced to 1,920 until
such time as an increase in the capacity of exit routes is achieved.

The requirement for alternative means of escape from this section should be
met by the provision of gangways and openings through the pitch perimeter
wall that have been recommended as part of the alternative means of escape
from the upper section.

The openings through the pitch perimeter wall however should be indicated as
"Emergency Exits." with notices bearing white letters on a green background.
If gates are to be used, the type of gate-fastenings to be used should meet
the approval of this Department.

Recommendation 12

Interim Measures

Until such time as the above matters can be implemented it is considered
that the Club should be more vigilant with respect to fire risk. Greater
emphasis should be placed on the need to keep exit routes free from
obstruction and risk of fire and to this end, all outside organisations
dealing with catering and bar facilities must be made fully aware of the
conditions of the Safety Certificate that directly affect them, particularly
the effect that their operations have on escape routes. All fire doors onto
the escape routes must remain closed at all times and to assist in this, it
is recommended that two additional stewards be appointed specifically to
patrol beneath the South Stand on match days, ensuring that the fire
resisting integrity of the escape routes is maintained and the obstructions
and risk of fire referred to do not occur.
Sheffield City Council                 - 7 -                    24.10.89

Conclusion

If the above measures are implemented, the positions of "Exit" signs and
provision of stewards will need further consideration.

The only remaining area requiring investigation is the West Stand and
terracing.   As this area is to be made subject of an upgrading scheme, the
full investigation obviously cannot be carried out at this stage.

Arrangements will be made however to provide you with a report on the seated
area.

The above matters should be brought to the attention of the other members of
the Advisory Group for their observations but if there are any queries,
please do not hesitate to contact the Officer concerned.

Yours faithfully,_________




Chief Fire Officer
                        ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT                             /




                                                           CATEGORY OF REPORT


                                                           Not for Publication
                                                         (Exempt for purposes of
                                                      paragraph(s)                  )



                                              *          PRESS RELEASE REQUIRED

                                                           Yes -           No


                                                          EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
                                                             IMPLICATIONS

                                                          No              XJKfc&X
                                                                     (See para.         )

REPORT TO:   General Purposes Panel           DATE:     Monday 27th November 1989




SUBJECT:     Recommendations to the Hillsborough Inquiry




REPORT OF:   Head of Administration and Legal Departmest


REPORT REFERENCE NO.


PURPOSE OF REPORT:     To inform Members of the recommendations    to the Inquiry




RECOMMENDATION:        Note the recommendations




BACKGROUND PAPERS USED IN COMPILATION OF REPORT:
 THE    H I L L S B O R O U G H    S T A D I U M   D I S A S T E R

                         15th April, 1989




Recommendations to the Inquiry on behalf of Sheffield City Council
REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
PURPOSES PANEL


   Recommendations to the Hillsborough Inquiry on Behalf of the Sheffield City
                                     Council


Lord Justice Taylor during the course of the Inquiry into the Hillsborough
Disaster indicated that he would be happy to receive written submissions
consisting of recommendations for the future of safety at sports grounds*

I have prepared recommendations on behalf of the Local Authority and submitted
them to the Inquiry. They are attached to this report for members' information*

The recommendations were prepared in consultation with members and contributions
were also received from the Building Surveyor and the Directors of Health and
Consumer Services and Family and Community Services.

Recommendation

The Panel is asked to note the recommendations which have been submitted to the
Inquiry.

                                                 H. M. Webster,
                                                 Head of Administration
                                                 and Legal Department.

Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD.
November 1989




BH5/L811
                           I N TRODU     CTION




These recommendations and suggestions have been drawn together from

representatives with various interests within Sheffield City Council.


They are submitted having taken time to assess the effect of the

Hillsborough Disaster, the Inquiry and the Interim Recommendations of Lord

Justice Taylor which are being implemented in Sheffield.
Clarification and Codification of Legislation

If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the
existing legislation then the opportunity could be taken to codify and
clarify the legislation.

The provisions, which are currently*contained in the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975, the Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987,
various Regulations and statutory guidance could be remodelled to create one
Act and Regulations (with functional statements) requiring certain standards
to be- achieved.

Improvement/Prohibition Notices

The 1975 legislation (as amended) makes provision for the issue of a
Prohibition Notice to the holder of a certificate. It is suggested that
consideration should be given to including an intermediate course of action.
The Health and Safety at Work, Etc. Act 1974 makes provision of the issue of
Improvement Notices and Prohibition Notices. An Improvement Notice requires
the employer to carry out certain works within a given time. If the
employer fails to comply with the Notice, they are guilty of an offence.

The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a useful intermediate step
where a Prohibition Notice is not appropriate, but where some formal Notice
is required.

Periodic Certificates and Inspections

The Popplewell Report recommended (at paragraph 3.68) that there should be
(i) annual renewal of safety certificates issued under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975; (ii) a duty on the local authority annually to inspect the
premises prior to re-issuing the certificate; and (iii) power for the local
authority to revoke the certificate.

The interim recommendations compliment the first proposal; the second
recommendation was implemented in statutory guidance after the Popplewell
Report; the third recommendation has not been acted upon.

With regard to the first recommendation, annual certificates focus the
parties' minds on the whole situation and not on a particular application or
inspection. It tends to promote an overall review of the circumstances
surrounding the re-issue of a certificate.

With regard to the second recommendation, it is suggested that prior to
re-issuing the certificate there should be an inspection, but that there
should also be inspections on a half-yearly or quarterly basis with guidance
given as to timing, e.g., prior to renewal, end of season, start of season,
during season (obviously this is less relevant to multi-use stadia where
"seasons" are not as clear cut.)

Visits to the ground should be carried out whilst it is empty and during use*
but the limitations on "during use" inspections, by their very nature must be
recognised.

Model Safety Certificate Conditions

The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety
certificate conditions should be drawn up. A standardised form of
conditions could form the nucleus of all certificates. Additional
conditions could be added to cover local conditions. This would enable some
                                      Page 3


     degree of national uniformity of application of conditions. It would seem
     appropriatethat the Heme Office draw up the standard conditions as it has
     done in respect of byelaws for example.

5.   Resource Implications - Fees

     At present it is suggested in Circular No. 72/1987 that the statutory
     inspection should not result in significant resource implications but that
     in general inspections are not expected to take more than about two man days
     per ground. This point is made in the context of emphasising the scope of
     inspections, together with associated report work and are not intended to be
     as detailed or extensive as that often required by the holder of the
     certificate.

     Clearly, more time is spent on safety of sports grounds than the Home Office
     anticipates. The resource implications involved for local authorities'and
     their advisers from other services to implement the existing provisions and
     the new recommendations must be recognised.

     Although the certificating authority is allowed to charge fees for dealing
     with applications for the issue or amendment of a certificate (by virtue of
     the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) there is no express provision
     for fees for the ongoing work of enforcing the provisions of the Act and
     dealing with inspections that have to be carried out at least once a year.
     The Inquiry may wish to consider whether express provisions should be made
     to allow a certificating authority to make some reasonable charge. There
     are many examples of legislation where local authorities are empowered to
     charge a reasonable fee to cover the cost of administering and enforcing a
     particular licensing function.

6.   Definition of Roles

     The Popplewell Report recommended that there should be urgent consultation
     between the Health and Safety Executive and the Fire Authorities and Local
     Authorities as how best to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and
     reports (paragraph 3.95).

     It has again become clear during the Inquiry that a lack of clarity in the
     definition of roles, is well as a lack of communication, can cause problems.
     This is particularly relevant in relation to the Police who are involved in
     the safety, of sports grounds in a number of roles, e.g. a member of the
     Advisory Group, upholders of law and order and their role inside and outside
     the Ground. It is also relevant to consider if and at what point in an
     emergency the role of the safety officer is subsumed by the emergency
     services.

     Clarification, following consultation, is needed of the different roles
     Authorities are required to fulfil and the means of communication between,
     them.

7.   The Advisory Group

     The Police and the Building Authority and, for metropolitan districts
     subsequent to local government reorganisation, the Police and the Fire
     Authority, have to be consulted by the certificating authority by virtue of
     the legislation. Sheffield City Council have included officers from the
     Building Authority and Health and Consumer Services in their Advisory Group
     prior to this Inquiry.
The legislation therefore, provides the basis of expert opinion on which the
Local Authority makes decisions.

The decision making process can take a number of forms, but perhaps the two
extremes are:-

(a) where all the experts are in agreement that decision is delegated to an
officer of the Council, where one or more experts differ - that decision is
delegated to an appropriate committee of the Council;

(b) the appropriate committee considers all matters relating to works
carried out at the- sports ground.

Further guidance could be given over and above that contained in the interim
recommendations as to the preferred course of action.

In addition to the statutory consultees, together with those recommended in
the Interim Report, i.e., the Ambulance Service, the Club and the recognised
Supporters' Club, consideration should be given as to whether any other
bodies should be involved in the wider Advisory Group, e.g., Health and
Safety Executive.

It may also be necessary to have a consultation group consisting of Police,
Fire, Building Authority, Environmental Health, Ambulance Service in
addition to the wider Advisory Group.

Members should be able to have professional advice from officers.

Pooling of Information

Some consideration should be given to pooling information on a national
basis to improve the flow of that information.

Information should be available to all certificating Authorities and their
statutory consultees. This would assist to achieve a degree of uniformity
throughout the country and enable all Authorities to learn from each others
experiences.

This is particularly relevant to regional level where the emergency services
will cover a number of District Authorities.

Safety Management and Safety Planning

Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as essential
aspects of their business and not an adjunct to it. It is essential for
safety responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of
accountability to be included. Any regulations or the "Green Guide" could
usefully develop this theme. The term safety planning is preferable to that
of emergency planning in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should
promote better safety standards. All relevant agencies should be included
in the planning process. Safety planning is aimed to prevent disasters as
well as providing contingency plans to ensure emergencies and disasters can
be coped with.

Status and Content of the "Green Guide"

A comprehensive review of the status and content of the Green Guide is
required. The present guide to safety of sports grounds is predominantly
written for football single use stadia. Multi use stadia are becoming more
popular and it is suggested that the guide be expanded to cover spectator
safety requirements pertaining to a wider variety of sports, e.g., speedway,
stock car racing, hockey, archery, shooting, etc. and other potentially
dangerous activities.

In addition, either by expansion of the guide or by the creation of a
similar document, requirements for spectator safety of fully enclosed stadia
should be created.

,,Flexibility,,

The 1986 edition of the Green Guide, paragraph 6, states as follows:-

"Deviations from individual guidelines are possible without necessarily
detracting from the overall safety of the ground. The variety of type,
function and layout of sports grounds means that a flexible approach should
be maintained to take account of the particular circumstances at individual
grounds”.

And paragraph 8 states: -

"It should be borne in mind when using the guide to assess whether existing
circumstances provide adequately for the safety of spectators the criteria
to be aimed for is that of a reasonable degree of safety. It would be
unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the absolute safety of
everyone attending a ground".

And, again in paragraph 11:-

"The principles referred to in paragraphs 4-10 above should be kept in mind
by both ground management and, where applicable, by the local authority when
applying the guide to an individual ground. The guide is an aid to, not a
substitute for, professional judgment and common sense".

There is a problem in affording the Green Guide this kind of status. What
is "flexibility" to one mind may be slap-dash permissiveness to another.
Clearly, emphasis on flexibility was and is well intentioned, but the effect
is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where non-compliance
can be justified as falling within the scope of some flexible discretion
allowed to the relevant authority.

For the future perhaps the Inquiry would wish to considerrecommending that
the approach of the Green Guide should move away from that of "flexibility"
to, for example, an approach of the following kind:-

"That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the club itself,
should always seek to establish whether there is some reasonable cause why a
relevant guideline is not complied with, and that in the absence of some
such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the guideline should be
achieved or insisted upon". A recommendation not to comply with a relevant
guideline should be in writing and approved by the certificating authority.
If such a decision is considered by the relevant committee of the Council
then the public will have access to that information.

Parts of the existing guide could become regulatory andother parts
re-issued (in a revised form) as a guide cf. the majority of the Approved
Documents to the Building Regulations or an "Approved Code of Practice" cf.
status of an approved code of practice under the Health and Safety at Work,
Etc., Act 1974. In the case of documents similar to the Building
Regulations compliance would therefore not be necessary, yet failure to
                                                               Page 6


      com ply wicfa th e G uide c o u l d be t a k e n a s b e i n g e v i d e n c e t e n d i n g to show t h a t
      t h e r e q u i r e m e n t s had n o t b e e n m e t , u n l e s s i t c o u l d be d e m o n s t r a t e d by t h e
      p a r ty c o n c e r n e d , u s in g o t h e r m eans, t h a t the r e q u ir e m e n ts o f th e l e g i s l a t i o n
      had b e e n s a t i s f i e d .

11.   S p e c i f i c Recommendations i n r e l a t i o n to th e S t r u c t u r e and D es ig n
      R eq u irem en ts f o r a S p o r t s Ground

      G eneral F ab ric

      I t i s recommended t h a t t h e h eadroom f o r t u n n e l s be i n c r e a s e d from 2 . 4 m e t r e s
      t o a t l e a s t 3 m e t r e s to f a c i l i t a t e o v e r h e a d v i e w i n g o f any c r u s h i n g o r o t h e r
      p r o b le m s o c c u r i a g a l o n g i t s l e n g t h .

      Due to t h e p o s s i b l e r i s k o f e x p l o s i o n , i t i s s u g g e s t e d t h a t g a s
      i n s t a l l a t i o n s s h o u l d n o t be p e r m i t t e d i n any b u i l d i n g i n t h e s t a d i a u s e d f o r
      s p e c t a t o r accom m odation.           c f . to w e r b l o c k s .

      To c a t e r f o r d i f f e r e n t s p e e d s o f t r a v e l th r o u g h t u n n e l s o r r e s t r i c t e d
      p a s s a g e w a y s l o n g e r t h a n , s a y , 5 m e t r e s , a minimum o f 4 u n i t s o f e x i t w i d t h
      s h o u l d be p r o v i d e d .

      Ingress

      S e g r e g a t i o n o f e n t r a n c e s f o r s u p p o r t e r s o f o p p o s i n g teams i s     recommended a s
      a p e rm a n e n t d e s i g n c r i t e r i a .

      P erm an en t u n o b s t r u c t e d a c c e s s t o t h e p i t c h a r e a f o r em erge n c y v e h i c l e s t o be
      p r o v i d e d i n a t l e a s t two p o s i t i o n s , and t h e s e b e i n g a t o p p o s i t e e n d s o f t h e
      gro u n d ( w h e n e v e r p o s s i b l e ) .

      The " g u i d e " s t a t e s a maximum n o t i o n a l r a t e o f 750 p e r s o n s p e r t u r n s t i l e p e r
      h o u r , h o w e v e r i t d o e s n o t s t a t e t h e d e s i g n t i m e , i . e . , t h e ti m e w i t h i n w tiich
      a l l s p e c t a t o r s a re ca p a b le o f b e in g a d m itte d .         I t i s su ggested that a
      r e v i s e d c o d e s h o u l d s t a t e a maximum i n g r e s s d e s i g n tim e o f s a y , 4 5 m i n u t e s .
      For m u l t i u se s t a d i a , in p a r t i c u l a r , i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f th e flow r a t e sh o u ld
      b e c a r r i e d o u t a s r a t e s may d i f f e r , e . g . , f o r f a m i l i e s w i t h y o u n g c h i l d r e n .

      Terraces

      Where t e r r a c e s a r e to be s u b - d i v i d e d s o a s t o a v o i d m a j o r m i g r a t i o n and
      s i d e w a y s s u r g e , e a c h s e c t i o n s h o u l d be fo rm ed by i n s e r t i n g r a d i a l b a r r i e r s .
      R a d i a l f e n c e s s h o u l d be a v o i d e d .

      I t i s c o n s i d e r e d t h a t s p e c t a t o r a c c o m m o d a tio n s h o u l d n o t be l o w e r t h a n t h e
      p i t c h l e v e l o r p i t c h p e r i m e t e r p a th l e v e l ( w h i c h e v e r i s t h e h i g h e r ) , so t h a t
      s p e c t a t o r s do n o t h a v e t o s t e p up from t h e s p e c t a t o r a c c o m m o d a t i o n .
      I n t h e p r e s e n t " g u i d e " , i t s t a t e s " g r a d i e n t s s t e e p e r th a n 1 : 2 ( 2 6 ® , 3 4 ' )
      c o u l d be d a n g e r o u s " ( p a r a g r a p h 9 4 ) .     In T able 1 b a r r i e r r e q u ir e m e n ts a r e
      s p e c i f i e d f o r t e r r a c e g r a d i e n t s o f up to 30° o r 1 : 1 . 7 , t h e r e f o r e
      c o n t r a d i c t i n g the p r e v io u s s t a te m e n t.        From a g r a p h i c a l i n t e r p o l a t i o n and
      e x t r a p o l a t i o n o f a l l t h e r e l e v a n t d a t a t h e maximum g r a d i e n t s h o u l d be 3 1 ° ,
      3 0 '.       T h is e q u a t e s to a p p r o x i m a t e l y 1 : 1 . 6 3 .

      C rash B a r r i e r s - D e s i g n

      To a v o i d r u s t i n g i n u n s e e n and n o n - m a i n t a i n a b l e p l a c e s , o v e r c l i p p e d b a r r i e r
      r a i l s u p p o r t s s h o u l d no l o n g e r be a c c e p t a b l e .    A l l p a r ts o f b a r r i e r s should
      be c a p a b l e o f d i r e c t i n s p e c t i o n and m a i n t e n a n c e .
                                                         Page 7


Welding of a l l j o i n t s would a c h i e v e the aims s e t o u t i n t h e above p ara g r a p h
and w i l l c r e a t e a s t r u c t u r a l c o n t i n u i t y where the f a i l u r e o f an i n d i v i d u a l
element would minim ise th e r i s k o f c o l l a p s e .

C o n s i d e r a t i o n s h o u l d be g i v e n to t h e a p p l i c a t i o n o f h o r i z o n t a l , ( i n a d d i t i o n
to l a t e r a l ) f o r c e s .      T h is c o u l d be ta k e n as 5 % o f t h e h o r i z o n t a l f o r c e th us
r e s i s t i n g t o r s i o n a l and s e c o n d a r y e f f e c t s .

The recommended h e i g h t s o f t h e b a r r i e r r a i l s s h o u l d be r e - a s s e s s e d .
C l a r i f i c a t i o n i s a l s o r e q u i r e d ( p r e f e r a b l y by s k e t c h ) to show where t h i s
measurement s h o u l d be t a k e n from .                   The p r e s e n t " g u id e " a p p e a r s t o make an
a s s u m p t i o n t h a t t h e b a r r i e r r a i l i s i n th e same v e r t i c a l p l a n e as t h e
terrace r i s e r .          When t h e s e v e r t i c a l p l a n e s d i f f e r , t h e method o f h e i g h t
measurem ent may a l s o d i f f e r .               The a c i d t e s t b e i n g a t what l e v e l a normal
p e r s o n wou ld s t a n d who was c o m f o r t a b l e , i m m e d i a t e l y b e h in d t h e b a r r i e r .

The o p p o r t u n i t y s h o u l d be ta k e n t o r e - a p p r a i s e t h e r e q u i r e d t e s t and d e s i g n
lo a d s.       An i n c r e a s e would a c h i e v e a g r e a t e r r e s i s t a n c e t o c o l l a p s e b u t may
i n c r e a s e t h e r i s k o f i n j u r y due t o r e s i s t i n g g r e a t e r crowd p r e s s u r e s .       A
d e c r e a s e , h o w e v e r , may r e s u l t i n e a r l i e r c o l l a p s e , y e t may p r e v e n t f a t a l
in ju ry .

Crush B a r r i e r s - T e s t i n g

I t i s s u g g e s t e d t h a t e a c h b a r r i e r span s h o u l d be t e s t e d s e p a r a t e l y ( f o r r a i l
s t r e n g t h ) and th e n a d j a c e n t s p a n s be t e s t e d t o g e t h e r t o d e t e r m i n e r a i l and
support s t r e n g t h .

The s p e c i f i c a t i o n o f t h e t e s t s h o u l d b e m o d i f i e d to c l e a r l y s t a t e how
r e c o v e r y d e f l e c t i o n i s to be c a l c u l a t e d .     Such a m o d i f i c a t i o n s h o u l d b e i n
a c c o r d a n c e w i t h t h e t e s t i n g p r o c e d u r e s i n BS 5950 and o t h e r s i m i l a r B r i t i s h
S tan dard d o cu m en ts.

To a v o i d any f u r t h e r d o u b t , a s t a n d a r d i s e d t e s t s p e c i f i c a t i o n and p r o c e d u r e
i s now r e q u i r e d .  T h is s h o u l d i n c l u d e a s p e c i f i c a t i o n o f a s t a n d a r d i s e d
t e s t i n g r i g and a s t a n d a r d i s e d t e s t r e s u l t s h e e t .

S t a n d s w i t h s e a t e d accommodation

A lth o u gh s t e e p e r g r a d i e n t s can c r e a t e b e t t e r fo r w a rd v i e w i n g f o r th e
s p e c t a t o r s , v e r y s t e e p g r a d i e n t s w i l l have th e e f f e c t o f c r e a t i n g e q u a l l y
s t e e p r a d i a l gangways and may c r e a t e a domino e f f e c t d u r i n g an e v a c u a t i o n
where a l l p e r s o n s may be s t o o d - i n s t e a d o f b e i n g s e a t e d .                 No maximum
g r a d ie n t i s d i r e c t l y s t a t e d in the p r e s e n t gu id e f o r s e a t e d a r e a s ; th e o n ly
t e n u o u s r e f e r e n c e b e i n g t o t h e maximum c a l c u l a t e d g r a d i e n t f o r s t a i r w a y s i n
p a ra grap h 73 a s b e i n g 3 4 ° , 9 ' .            I t i s c o n s i d e r e d t h a t s e a t e d a ccom m o d atio n
g r e a t e r than 30° s h o u l d h av e i n t e r m e d i a t e c r u s h b a r r i e r s a t a p p r o x i m a t e l y 5
m etre c e n t r e s .

P itc h P erim eter Fences

The P o p p l e w e l l R epo rt (p a r a g r a p h 4 . 1 3 6 to 4 . 1 3 8 and a l s o A p pend ix ' E ' ,
p aragraph E29) recommended t h a t c o n s i d e r a t i o n s h o u l d be g i v e n to th e d e s i g n
o f a standard e f f i c i e n t p erim eter f e n c e , w ith proper e x i t s .

As a d i r e c t r e s u l t of th e H ill s b o r o u g h d i s a s t e r i t has been s u g g e s t e d t h a t
s p e c t a t o r s may f e e l r e a s s u r e d by th e p o s s i b i l i t y o f forward es cap e o n to the
p i t c h from a l l s i d e s o f the ground.
                                                         Page 8


I f p i t c h p e r i m e t e r f e n c e s a r e to r e m a i n , i t i s s u g g e s t e d t h a t a t l e a s t 50Z
o f i t s l i n e a r l e n g t h i s o p e n a b l e and s u c h o p e n i n g s a r e e v e n l y s p a c e d s o a s
t o p r o v i d e maximum b e n e f i t f o r s p e c t a t o r s ' s a f e t y .

Where p i t c h s i d e p o l i c e o r s t e w a r d s r e q u i r e a c c e s s i n t o t h e s p e c t a t o r a r e a
th r o u g h r e l a t i v e l y s m a l l d o o r s o r g a t e s , t h e s e may b e p r o v i d e d a s a d d i t i o n a l
o p e n in g s or as w ic k e t g a t e s in the l a r g e o p en in g p a n e l s .

So as to a v o i d s u d d e n fo r w a r d m ove m en t, a l l s u c h g a t e s s h o u l d be v e r t i c a l l y
m u l t i - h i n g e d and o p e n t o w a r d s t h e p i t c h .      C o l l a p s i b l e p a n e l s s h o u l d n o t be
a cc ep ta b le .       I t i s a f u r t h e r p r e - r e q u i s i t e t h a t t h e r e l e a s e m e ch a n is m s h o u l d
be : —

a ) c a p a b l e o f b e i n g o p e r a t i o n a l r e m o t e l y i n tandem w i t h o t h e r s ;

b) c a p a b l e o f i n d e p e n d e n t o p e n i n g w h i l s t u n d e r crowd p r e s s u r e ,     by t h e
   o p e r a t i o n o f a q u ic k r e l e a s e , m a n u ally o p e r a te d c a t c h ;

c ) a l l o p e n i n g d e v i c e s m u s t be c a p a b l e o f u s e u n d e r crowd l o a d i n g
    co n d itio n s.

I n o r d e r t o s i m p l i f y any new d e s i g n s o f c a t c h f o r p i t c h p e r i m e t e r g a t e s and
b e a r i n g i n mind t h e f a c t t h a t t h e r e s h o u l d be no s p e c t a t o r s on t h e p i t c h
s i d e o f t h e o p e n i n g s e c t i o n s o f t h e p e r i m e t e r f e n c i n g , t e s t l o a d i n g on
p e r i m e t e r f e n c e s c o u l d be r e d u c e d t o , s a y 3 KN/m.

Estimation of Space Capacity - Terraces

Under t h e p r e s e n t " g u i d e " , t e r r a c e s i s good c o n d i t i o n ca n be c a l c u l a t e d a s
c a p a b l e o f h o l d i n g a maximum o f 54 p e r s o n s p er 10 rsp- , t h r o u g h o u t t h e
a v a ila b le terraced a rea.               I t i s , h o w e v e r , a c c e p t e d t h a t some p a r t s o f t h a t
a r e a a r e "peak v i e w i n g a r e a s " and a s s u c h w i l l a c h i e v e i n p r a c t i c e a g r e a t e r
p o p u l a t i o n d e n s i t y due t o t h e i r p o p u l a r i t y .    The f i g u r e o f 5 4 / 1 0 m2 i s
t h e r e f o r e an a v e r a g e , w i t h o u t t h e peak v i e w i n g p a r t s b e i n g g i v e n a maximum
p a ck in g d e n s i t y .

I t i s c o n s i d e r e d t h a t t h e 5 4 / 1 0 m^ s h o u l d b e t r e a t e d a s b e i n g t h e maximum
and t h e r e f o r e o n l y be a p p l i e d t o t h e a r e a s o f p e a k v i e w i n g .        O th e r a r e a s o f
t h e t e r r a c e s h o u l d b e * c a l c u l a t e d as h a v i n g a l o w e r p a c k i n g d e n s i t y , s a y
4 0 / 1 0 m2.

In o rd er to p r a c t i c a l l y a c h i e v e th e c o n s i d e r a t i o n s e t o u t i n the above
p a r a g r a p h , i t w o u l d be n e c e s s a r y t o : -

(a)       D e f i n e t h e s i z e and p o s i t i o n o f "peak v i e w i n g a r e a s ' 1.

(b )       S urrou n d t h e a r e a s o f " p e a k v i e w i n g " u s i n g r a d i a l b a r r i e r s     as opposed
           to r a d ia l f e n c e s .

 ( c)     D e t e r m i n e by e f f e c t i v e s t e w a r d i n g o r p o l i c i n g t h a t t h e crowd d e n s i t y
          o f e a c h "peak v i e w i n g a r e a " i s a t a s a t i s f a c t o r y , s a f e and c o m f o r t a b l e
          le v e l.

Flow R a t e s

 T h r o u g h o u t t h e I n q u i r y , t h e f l o w r a t e o f 40 and 60 p e r s o n s p e r m i n u t e p e r
 u n i t o f e x i t w i d t h h a v e b e e n h e a v i l y c r i t i c i s e d a s b e i n g b a s e d on
 in c o n c lu siv e resea rch .           A p r a c t i c a l l e s s o n t h a t has been le a r n e d i s th a t
                                                                          Page 9


■y            when p e o p l e a r e v e r y t i g h t l y p a c k e d , t h e i r a b i l i t y to f l o w th r o u g h e x i t s i s
 |            d r a m a t i c a l l y r e d u c e d . U n t i l t h e o u tcom e o f f u r t h e r r e s e a r c h i s known, i t i s
               s u g g e s t e d t h a t f l o w r a t e s a r e re d u c e d to t h e f o l l o w i n g : -
1
                (a)       "Peak v i e w i n g a r e a " o f t e r r a c e s - 30 p e r s o n s per m in u t e p e r u n i t o f
                          e x i t w idth.

                (b )      A l l o t h e r a r e a s - 40 p e r s o n s p er m in u te p e r u n i t o f e x i t w i d t h .

'j            I t i s c o n s i d e r e d t h a t th e em ergency e v a c u a t i o n tim e s h o u l d re m a in a t 2 i
               m in u tes.
§
Vi      12.     S te w a r d s
q
|             T r a i n i n g o f S tew a r d s s h o u l d be c a r r i e d o u t by p e o p l e who have e x p e r i e n c e m
               t r a i n i n g and s a f e t y .    T r a i n i n g s h o u l d be r e g u l a r to remind e x i s t i n g Stew ards
               o f p r o c e d u r e s and e n s u r e t h a t new S te w a r d s r e c e i v e a p p r o p r i a t e t r a i n i n g .

                The a c c e p t a b l e ag e ran g e f o r S tew ards s h o u l d be s p e c i f i e d a s b e i n g b etw een
                e i g h t e e n and s i x t y f i v e y e a r s , i n a d d i t i o n to t h e c u r r e n t r e q u i r e m e n t s
                r e l a t i n g to f i t n e s s e t c .

                A Steward ( o r a p o l i c e o f f i c e r ) c a r r y i n g o u t i s o l a t e d t a s k s , e . g . external
                g a t e d u t y , s h o u l d be p r o v i d e d w i t h an e f f i c i e n t means o f co m m u n ica tio n w i t h
                th e S a f e t y O f f i c e r .

        1 3 . N a t i o n a l F i r s t Aid G u i d e l i n e s

                There i s t h e n e e d f o r n a t i o n a l f i r s t a i d g u i d e l i n e s w h ich a r e drawn up w i t h
                p a r t i c u l a r r e f e r e n c e to o c c a s i o n s when l a r g e numbers o f p e o p l e a r e l i k e l y to
                be p r e s e n t , e . g .        f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s , pop c o n c e r t s e t c .

                I t i s a l s o i m p o r t a n t f o r th e i n d i v i d u a l s e x p e c t e d to p r o v i d e f i r s t a i d t o
                r e c e iv e ap p rop riate tr a in in g .

        14 . C o u n s e l l i n g and Support f o r Victim s

                S u b s t a n t i a l k now le d ge and e x p e r i e n c e now e x i s t s a b o u t th e s e r v i c e s t h e
                p u b l i c and t h o s e d i r e c t l y a f f e c t e d by a d i s a s t e r n eed a f t e r w a r d s .                 These
                r e s p o n s e s a r e inform e d by an u n d e r s t a n d i n g o f th e p o t e n t i a l l y l o n g - t e r m
                needs o f v i c t i m s .           I n i t i a t i v e s must be ta k e n i m m e d i a t e l y a f t e r th e d i s a s t e r
                w i t h o u t w a i t i n g f o r r e q u e s t s f o r h e l p and be a v a i l a b l e f o r a p e r i o d o f a t
                l e a s t two y e a r s .         T h e i r e s t a b l i s h m e n t and c o - o r d i n a t i o n w i t h th e v o l u n t a r y
                s e c t o r and b etw e e n s t a t u t o r y o r g a n i s a t i o n s n e e d s to be u n d e r t a k e n on th e
                b a s i s o f an a g r e e d g e n e r a l p l a n .            The s e r v i c e s have to be c a r e f u l l y
                p r o v i d e d , managed and l a s t a p p r o p r i a t e l e n g t h s o f t i m e , i f t h e b e r e a v e d ,
                s u r v i v o r s and r e s c u e s t a f f a r e n o t to s u f f e r l a s t i n g damage.                        These
                c o - o r d i n a t e d s e r v i c e s a r e e x p e n s i v e to p r o v i d e and o u t s i d e o f t h e norm al
                p r o v i s i o n made by l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s .           T h e r e f o r e t h e i r e s t a b l i s h m e n t and
                c o n t i n u a n c e i s d e p e n d e n t on new and a d d i t i o n a l r e s o u r c e s b e i n g made
                av a ila b le.         Such s e p a r a t e f u n d i n g n e e d s to be made a v a i l a b l e .

        15.     P u b l i c Appeals

                The l e g a l i s s u e s s u r r o u n d i n g p u b l i c a p p e a l s a r e c o m p l i c a t e d , e . g . c h a r i t a b l e
                s t a t u s , tax e t c .       G u i d e l i n e s a r e r e q u i r e d on th e e s t a b l i s h m e n t ,
                a d m i n i s t r a t i o n and t e r m i n a t i o n o f d i s a s t e r a p p e a l s to e n s u r e t h a t f u n d s a r e
 ,$             d i s t r i b u t e d a s f a i r l y , q u i c k l y and e f f e c t i v e l y as p o s s i b l e .
 1



    1
16.   Pre-Match Entertainment

      F u r t h e r t o r e c o m m e n d a t io n 25 i n t h e I n t e r i m R e p o r t , c o n s i d e r a t i o n s h o u l d be
      g i v e n a s t o w h e t h e r p r e - m a t c h e n t e r t a i n m e n t and a s s o c i a t e d a c t i v i t i e s can
      i n f l u e n c e t h e t y p e o f crowd a t t e n d i n g f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s ( i n p a r t i c u l a r ) and
      f o r e x a m p l e can t h e r e f o r e be u s e d t o e n c o u r a g e f a m i l y a t t e n d a n c e .         Such
      e n t e r t a i n m e n t may a l s o r e s u l t i n s t a g g e r e d e n t r y t i m e s .

17.   Day and Time

      C o n s i d e r a t i o n s h o u l d a l s o be g i v e n t o w h a t e f f e c t c h a n g i n g t h e day a n d / o r
      t i m e o f k i c k o f f o f f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s , i n p a r t i c u l a r , may h a v e on crowd
      b e h a v i o u r and t h e r e f o r e crowd s a f e t y .

18.   F o o t b a l l Membership Schemes -                I.P .    Cards

      The P o p p l e w e l l R e p o r t recommends ( a t p a r a g r a p h 4 . 1 2 8 ) t h a t c o n s i d e r a t i o n
      s h o u l d be g i v e n t o some form o f m em b ersh ip sch em e f o r f o o t b a l l l e a g u e c l u b s
      i n E nglan d and W a l e s .

      H o w ev e r, i n v i e w o f t h e e x p e r i e n c e s a t H i l l s b o r o u g h , c a r e f u l c o n s i d e r a t i o n
      n e e d s to be g i v e n to any n a t i o n a l f o o t b a l l m e m b ersh ip s c h e m e .            I t w ou ld
      c l e a r l y be u n d e s i r a b l e i f any s u c h schem e r e s u l t e d i n s i g n i f i c a n t d e l a y s a t
      tu rn stiles.

      T here a r e o t h e r p r a c t i c a l c o n s i d e r a t i o n s w h ic h m u st b e ta k e n i n t o a c c o u n t ,
      e . g . , p a t t e r n s o f a t t e n d a n c e , d i f f e r e n t method o f e n t r y , s p a c e r e q u i r e d f o r
      a c o m p l e x a d m i s s i o n s y s t e m , i . e . , two t u r n s t i l e s y s t e m s , number o f
      t u r n s t i l e s r e q u i r e d , a d d i t i o n a l p o l i c i n g / s t e w a r d i n g r e q u ir e d to c o n t r o l the
      crowd and e j e c t i n d i v i d u a l s , w h e r e t o e j e c t i n d i v i d u a l s from and how and
      r e d u c i n g f u r t h e r t h e ground c a p a c i t y .

19.   A ll T ic k e t Entry

      I n o r d e r to i n c r e a s e t h e s p e e d o f i n g r e s s o f s p e c t a t o r s , c o n s i d e r a t i o n c o u l d
      be g i v e n t o r e q u i r i n g a l l t i c k e t e n t r y f o r e v e n t s w h e r e g r e a t e r t h a n , s a y ,
      70% o f t h e t o t a l a v a i l a b l e c a p a c i t y c o u l d be e x p e c t e d .




 HB8AAC/JJJ
                         ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT




                                                               CATEGORY OF REPORT



                                                             Not f o r P u b l i c a t i o n
                                                           (Exempt for purposes of
                                                        paragraphs)                            )



                                                            PRESS RELEASE REQUIRED

                                                               Yes                  No


                                                              EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                 IMPLICATIONS

                                                              No                  mm,
                                                                            (See para.             )

REPORT TO:    General Purposes Panel            DATE:        Monday, 27th November 1989




SUBJECT:      Safety of Sports Grounds For um




REPORT OF:    Head of Administration and Legal Department



REPORT REFERENCE NO.



PURPOSE OF REPORT:     Outline proposed establishment of the Safety of Sports
                       Grounds Forum




RECOMMENDATION:        See conclusion




BACKGROUND PAPERS USED IN COMPILATION OF REPORT:
R e p o r t o f t h e Head o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and L e g a l D epartm en t t o t h e G e n e r a l
Purposes Panel


S a f e t y o f S p o r t s Grounds -
P r o p o s e d e s t a b l i s h m e n t o f a " S a f e t y o f S p o r t s Grounds Forum"


1.     Purpose o f Report

       To o b t a i n Members' v i e w s upon t h e p r a c t i c a l s t e p s n eed ed t o im p lem e n t Lord
       J u s t i c e T a y l o r ' s recotnmenda t i o n t h a t a c o n s u l t a t i o n group i s s e t up to
       con sid er s a fe ty is s u e s .

2.     Background

2 .1   Recommendation 17 o f                 Lord J u s t i c e T a y l o r ' s i n t e r i m r e p o r t r e a d s a s f o l l o w s :

        "To a s s i s t t h e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y i n e x e r c i s i n g i t s f u n c t i o n s , i t s h o u l d
        s e t up an A d v i s o r y Group c o n s i s t i n g o f a p p r o p r i a t e members o f i t s own
        s t a f f , r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f t h e P o l i c e , o f t h e F i r e and Ambulance S e r v i c e s ,
        o f t h e B u i l d i n g A u t h o r i t y , o f t h e Club and o f a r e c o g n i s e d s u p p o r t e r s '
        clu b .       The A d v i s o r y G ro u p 's term s o f r e f e r e n c e s h o u l d en com pass a l l m a t t e r s
        c o n c e r n e d w i t h crowd s a f e t y and s h o u l d r e q u i r e r e g u l a r v i s i t s t o t h e ground
        and a t t e n d a n c e a t m a t c h e s .      The A d v i s o r y Group s h o u l d have a ch airm an from
        t h e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y , and an e f f e c t i v e p r o c e d u r e .    I t s r e s o l u t i o n s s h o u l d be
        r e c o r d e d and i t s h o u l d be r e q u i r e d t o p ro d u c e r e g u l a r w r i t t e n r e p o r t s f o r
        c o n s i d e r a t i o n by t h e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y . ' . '

2 .2    The P o l i c y Committee a t i t s m e e t i n g on 2 6 t h S eptem ber 1989 ( p a g e s 653 and
        6 5 4 o f t h e p r i n t e d m i n u t e s ) c o n s i d e r e d t h i s recomm endation and r e s o l v e d : -

        "(C) . . . . A u t h o r i t y be g i v e n f o r ( i ) t h e c o n t i n u a t i o n i n o p e r a t i o n i n i t s
        e x i s t i n g form o f t h e A d v i s o r y Group w h ich c o m p r i s e s a p p r o p r i a t e
        p r o f e s s i o n a l o f f i c e r s and i s c h a i r e d by a s e n i o r o f f i c e r i n t h e
        A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and L e g a l Departm ent w hich a d v i s e s t h e C i t y C o u n c i l i n Che
        e x e r c i s e o f i t s f u n c t i o n s und er t h e S a f e t y o f S p o r t s Grounds A c t 1975 and
        ( i i ) t h e e s t a b l i s h m e n t o f a s e p a r a t e group on t h e l i n e s now i n d i c a t e d and
        i n c l u d i n g r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f t h e s t a d i a and r e c o g n i s e d s u p p o r t e r s ' c l u b to
        be c h a i r e d by an e l e c t e d member o f t h e C i t y C o u n c i l , whose f u n c t i o n would
        be t o make r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s to t h e A d v i s o r y Group and th rou g h i t t o th e
        C o u n c i l on m a t t e r s o f p a r t i c u l a r c o n c e r n to t h e grou p ; . . . "


3.     The C u r r e n t S i t u a t i o n

3 .1    P r e l i m i n a r y s t e p s h av e now b e e n ta k e n to s e t up t h e new " A d v i s o r y Group"
        e n v i s a g e d by b o th t h e I n t e r i m Recommendation and t h e P o l i c y C om m ittee.             It
        i s s u g g e s t e d f i r s t o f a l l t h a t t h e new Group be c a l l e d t h e " S a f e t y o f
        S p o r t s Grounds Forum',' i n o r d e r t o a v o i d c o n f u s i o n w i t h t h e S a f e t y o f S p o r t s
        A d v i s o r y Group w h ic h w i l l c o n t i n u e i n i t s p r e s e n t form .     L e t t e r s have been
        s e n t t o S h e f f i e l d Wednesday (c o p y a t t a c h e d ) , S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d and O w lerton
        S p o r t s S tad iu m i n w h ich t h e f o l l o w i n g i s s u e s a r e r a i s e d

3 .2   F r e q u e n c y o f m e e t i n g s - i t has b een s u g g e s t e d t h a t i t m igh t be a p p r o p r i a t e
       f o r t h e Forum .to m eet a p p r o x i m a t e l y on ce e v e r y t h r e e or f o u r month s;

3 .3   l o c a t i o n o f m e e t i n g s - p e r h a p s room c o u l d be p r o v i d e d a t t h e Town H a l l
        o r p e r h a p s a t o t h e r v e n u e s i n th e c i t y ( f o r exam ple c l u b p r e m i s e s ) ;
3*4     i s s u e s t o be d i s c u s s e d b y t h e Forum - t h e I n t e r i m R ecom m end a tion ( s e t o u t
        a b o v e ) i n d i c a t e s t h a t m a t t e r s c o n c e r n e d w i t h crowd s a f e t y s h o u l d be
        d isc u sse d ;

3 .5   v i s i t s t o f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s - p e r h a p s e a c h member o f t h e Forum s h o u l d
        a r r a n g e t o a t t e n d f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s a t l e a s t two o r t h r e e t i m e s p e r y e a r .

4.     Procedure o f         the    Forum

4 .1   I t w o u ld p e r h a p s be a p p r o p r i a t e i n t h e f i r s t i n s t a n c e to h a v e a
        p r e l i m i n a r y m e e t i n g t o a s t o e s t a b l i s h t h e method o f o p e r a t i o n o f t h e
        Forum.          I t se e m s l i k e l y t h a t t h e Forum w i l l p r o b a b l y be s e r v i c e d by     the           /
        C ou n cil.

4 .2    I n t h e l e t t e r s t o t h e Companies i t h a s a l s o b e e n made c l e a r t h a t t h e Forum
        i t s e l f w i l l h a v e no a u t h o r i t y a s s u c h b u t t h e C o u n c i l w ou ld o b v i o u s l y t a k e
        n o t e o f a n y comments w h i c h i t c h o s e t o make.                I n a d d i t i o n t h e C om p an ies
        have been ask ed f o r d e t a i l s o f any r e c o g n is e d s u p p o r te r s c lu b s as r e f e r r e d
        t o i n R e c o m m e n d a tio n 17 s o t h a t t h e y t o o c a n be a s k e d f o r t h e i r v i e w s .        As
        y e t no r e s p o n s e h a s b e e n r e c e i v e d t o t h e s e l e t t e r s .

4.3     The P a n e l may a l s o l i k e t o g i v e c o n s i d e r a t i o n a s t o who s h o u l d c h a i r t h e
        new Forum; t h e P o l i c y C om m ittee r e s o l u t i o n i n d i c a t e s t h a t an e l e c t e d
        r e p r e s e n t a t i v e sh o u ld perform t h i s f u n c t io n .

5.     C o n clu sion

        The P a n e l i s a s k e d ( i ) t o n o t e t h e c o n t e n t s o f t h i s r e p o r t ; and t o g i v e
        p r e l i m i n a r y c o n s i d e r a t i o n t o ( i i ) t h e c h a i r m a n s h i p o f t h e Forum; ( i i i ) t h e
        f r e q u e n c y o f m e e t i n g s ; ( i v ) i s s u e s t o be d i s c u s s e d ; ( v ) t h e g e n e r a l r e m i t
        o f t h e forum .

When t h e v a r i o u s c o n s u l t a t i o n p r o c e s s e s h a v e b e e n c o m p l e t e d a f u r t h e r r e p o r t
w i l l b e s u b m i t t e d t o t h e P a n e l on t h e p r o p o s e d Forum.




                                                                                    H.M. W e b s te r
                                                                                    Head o f D e p a r tm e n t

Town H a l l
S h e ffield

November 1989




P B /5/L 811
                               ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
                                                                                                                  J
                                                                                CATEGORY OF REPORT



                                                                              Not for Publication
                                                                            (Exempt for purposes of
                                                                         paragraph(s)



                                                                             PRESS RELEASE REQUIRED

                                                                                  'ies:                      No


                                                                               EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES
                                                                                  IMPLICATIONS

                                                                               No                        ¥^S
                                                                                                   (See para.         )

REPORT TO:   G e n e r al     Purposes    Panel.                 DATE:       27th    N ov e m b e r   1989

                          «


SUBJECT:     S a f e t y of S p o r t s G ro u nd s
             S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d F o ot b al l    Ground



REPORT OF:   He ad of A d m i n i s t r a t i o n    a nd    Legal   Department



REPORT REFERENCE NO.


PURPOSE OF REPORT:
             To i n f o r m m e m b e r s w o rk s r e q u i r e d at the g ro u nd : and ask w h a t a ct i on
             m e m b e r s wi sh to tak e to e n s u r e w a r k s / i n s p e c t i o n s are c o m p l e t e d



RECOMMENDATION:
             S ee   report




BACKGROUND PAPERS USED IN COMPILATION OF REPORT:
             G P /2 6 2     Sheffield     U n i t e d - N o t e so m e p a p e r s a r e e xempt
REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
PURPOSES PANEL


     Safety of Sports Grounds - Sheffield United Football Club Limited


1•   Introduction

     1.1. Following the annual inspection at Sheffield United, the Club was
          written to on 17th August, 1989 with a list of comments made by
          the various Inspecting Officers. The list contained a number of
          items which required attention.

     1.2. On 25th August, 1989 Sheffield United wrote saying that many of
          the comments made in the Officers report has been dealt with as
          part of the normal maintenance programme at Sheffield United.
          The letter also indicated that work was continuing on those items
          which had not as yet been dealt with, and a programme of work was
          being drawn up. The letter concluded by indicating that the
          majority of the necessary work would be completed prior to a home
          game on Saturday 9th September. A copy of the letter is
          attached.

     1.3. On 19th September, 1989 the various Officers were requested to
          check to see whether works had in fact been done at Sheffield
          United, and over the next two weeks or so, inspections were
          carried out. The inspection reports revealed that some work had
          been done, but other matters were still outstanding.

     1.4. These outstanding matters have now been collated into the
          Schedule which is attached to this Report.

     1.5     A number of comments from Officers have been received recently
            and it would seem appropriate to include them in this exercise.
            These include recent comments are identified in the Schedule by
            means of an asterisk.

2.   Summary and Conclusion

     2.1.    The Club has had ample opportunity to complete the works and
            inspections (identified in August) and members are asked to
            consider what action is now needed to ensure that the
            works/inspections are completed.

     2.2. The asterisked works or inspections are capable of completion by
          the dates shown in the schedule.

     2.3.    It is open to members to authorise the serving of a notice on
            Sheffield United, under the terms of Condition 41 of the General
            Safety Certificate issued to that Company. Condition 41 says:-

            "The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of
            public safety* require the holder to carry out such works and/or
            inspections as may be specified in the notice. The holder shall
            comply with any requirement or conditions specified in that
            notice."

     2.4. Members should appreciate that some of the items referred to in
          the Schedule may have been completed by Sheffield United. I do
          not consider that any of the items referred to are sufficient in
                themselves to justify the Council taking steps under the
                Prohibition Notice procedure of the Safety of Sports Grounds
                Legislation.  If it appears that Sheffield United have not
                carried out works by the dates specified in the notice, a further
                report will be presented to the Panel.

3.     Recommendation

       Members are advised to authorise the Head of Administration and Legal
       Department to serve a Notice under Condition 41 of the General Safety
       Certificate in accordance with the attached Schedule.


                                            H. M. Webster,
                                            Head of Administration
                                            and Legal Department,


Town Hall,
Sheffield.

November 1989

SD1AAW/JL
A. 2 3 . 1 1 . 8 9 .
                                                                                             ■ij:
             l9a9                                                                      VO.
     lus'-




n- * ^ * > < 6 ° i a ^
A      t *
        v®u '
                                                                                 -   Cj?£i
    * $ *                                                                                                 «**&
                                                                                           vioutV*
                                                                    V $ 0                1 ^ " ' d e 3-11
                                                       $ $ 0 ^-                 ■U^'     \3e©^
                                                                            i^uS1
              S ir ■                       0& & -                                Yv&ve
                                                                                                                \3ee^
                      5E<S&                                                                          as
                    a?^""                   vJ oO^^    ; s    a*®, ooC°Sr!
                                                             ®av>~   r 0 S L“"               tvo'L
         ^    ^      n        c e     »     V         " >     ^     e                W **                            t>e
                       3i e r e
                                                                                 up-
         & .•&
             as P
                                                 rU*. -S5^
                                       . ^ 0°C35«® ° S            ^ e_ tur ^
                                                                                     r\6C
                                                                                         eSs a ^     s e pte^

                         •s     c o ^ Ua P r             itV          Sa^
                                                                  Ofl
                                                  wa'j°r ^ "Jo3^e
                                                      t^e    .* y\Q®
              de&lX
                     .c vs>at e f t o o ^ 0 ®
               *e afete& ?c'°
                  cS“9                ,w
                                S a i ^ '
                    '■{& $ ^>




                                                                                                                                      nH      j
                                                                                                                             (_(.      ^    "^1


                                                                                                                                    VJo°’
                                                                                                                            a ?,G
                                                                                                                .   ^i»^’



                                                                  O.t500
                                                       ,»rf •
                                                          S H E F F I E L D   CITY     C O U N C I L                            Page No: 1 (of 10)

                                                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975 (as amended)

                                                              SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
                                                           GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITION 41


                                       Schedule of Requirements for Works/Inspections at Sheffield United Sports Ground

DEFECT               DEFECT LOCATION              DEFECT DESCRIPTION           WORK REQUIRED               REASON FOR WORK             WORK TO BE
NUMBER                                                                                                                                 COMPLETED BY:i-

Bramall
Lane
T e r r a c e and
Grandstand
1.0                 The store adjacent to        The store is to be           Secure the door.            Fire safety.   (FS)         31st Dec, 1989.
                    stair "C".                   secured against
                                                 unauthorised access,

John S t r e e t
Stand
2.0                 The Old Pressroom            The circulation area         Submit a scheme for the     Fire safety.   (FS)
                    circulation area.            adjacent to the Old          extension of the
                                                 Pressroom should be          emergency lighting to the
                                                 covered by emergency         circulation area adjacent
                                                 lighting. The final exit     to the old pressroom or
                                                 door from this area into     provide written
                                                 John Street should be        verification that
                                                 indicated by a sign          emergency lighting is
                                                 immediately above it         provided to B.S. 5266
                                                 bearing the words "Fire      and keep the door
                                                 Exit" with 125 mm white      immediately available for
                                                 lettering on a green         use from the inside
                                                 background. The door         without the use of a key
                                                 must be Immediately          whenever the premises are
                                                 available for use from       occupied.
                                                 the inside without the
                                                 use of a key whenever the
                                                 premises are occupied.
                                                                              S H E F F I E L D                   CITY              C O U N C I L                                               Page No; 2 (of 16,

                                              C o n t i n u a t i o n S c h e d u l e o f R e q u i r e m e n t s f o r W o r k s / I n s p e c t i o n s a t S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d S p o r t s Ground

DEFECT               DEFECT LOCATION                              DEFECT DESCRIPTION                              WORK REQUIRED                                  REASON FOR WORK                                 WORK TO B>E
NUMBER                                                                                                                                                                                                           COMPLETED BY;-

2 .1 .              The main r e f r e s h m e n t a r e a      Area u s e d f o r s t o r a g e .               Remove a l l t h e s t o r a g e               F ire s a f e t y .   (FS)                  3 1 st Dec,    1989.
                    und er t h e John S t r e e t                                                                from t h i s a r e a i n c l u d i n g
                    Stand.                                                                                       a l l redundant tim ber
                                                                                                                 structures.             In a d d i t i o n ,
                                                                                                                 t h e rooms a r e t o be
                                                                                                                 i n s p e c t e d b e f o r e any
                                                                                                                 s p e c i f i e d a c t i v i t y takes
                                                                                                                 p la c e to ensure that they
                                                                                                                 a r e u n o c c u p i e d and t h e
                                                                                                                 doors are su b seq u en tly
                                                                                                                 locked b efore sp e c ta to r s
                                                                                                                 are ad m itted.

The S o u t h
S ta n d and
O ffices
3 .0                The h o s e r e e l s s i t e d on          The h o s e r e e l s a r e                      Remove t h e h o s e r e e l s .               F ire s a f e t y .   (FS)                  3 1 s t Dec,   1989.
                    th e Concourse.                             redundant.

3 .1 .              F i n a l e x i t d o o r s from            F in a l e x i t doors r e q u ir e              F it a p rop riety escape                      F ire safety /G en era l
                    main s t a i r s s e r v i n g p r e s s    p ro p riety escape lo ck .                      l o c k on f i n a l e x i t d o o r s .       safety.   (FS)
                    box and s t a i r c a s e .                 I t e m s s t o r e d on                         I n s p e c t s t a i r c a s e and
                                                                sta irca se.                                     remove a l l s t o r e d i t e m s .

The P l a y e r s
Lounge and
Stew ards
Room -
S o u th S ta n d
4 .0                The d o o r s and c e i l i n g s i n       Both t h e c e i l i n g s and t h e I A s c e r t a i n w h e t h e r o r n o t                F ire s a f e t y .   (FS)
                    t h e P l a y e r s Lounge and              d o o r s r e q u i r e t o be o f      I the c e i l i n g s are
                    S t e w a r d s Room - s i t u a t e d      on e hour f i r e r e s i s t a n c e . | c o n s t r u c t e d t o a one hour
                    on t h e C o n c o u r s e o f t h e                                                I f i r e r e s i s t a n t standard
                    South Stan d.                                                                            I e ith e r     p ro v id e
                                                                                                             I   a p p rop riate c e r t i f i c a t e s
                                                                                                             I   co n firm in g the f i r e
                                                                                                             I   r e s i s t a n t standard o r ■
                                                                                                             I   u n d e r t a k e w o rks t o b r i n g
                                                                             S H E F F I E L D                 CIT Y            C O P N C I L                                                Page No: 3 (of 10)

                                             C o n t i n u a t i o n S c h e d u l e o f R e q u ir e m e n ts f o r W o r k s / I n s p e c t i o n s a t S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d S p o r t s Ground

                        DEFECT LOCATION                          DEFECT DESCRIPTION                            WORK REQUIRED                                 REASON FOR WORK                                  WORK TO BE
                                                                                                                                                                                                              COMPLETED BY:-


4 . 0 . ( c o n t 1)                                                                                         them to t h a t s t a n d a r d and
                                                                                                             p r o v id e c e r t i f i c a t i o n .
                                                                                                             The d o o r s must be made
                                                                                                             s e l f c l o s i n g i n t o 25 mm
                                                                                                             r e b a t e and have a minimum
                                                                                                             one hour f i r e r e s i s t a n c e
                                                                                                             and have " f i r e door -
                                                                                                             k eep s h u t " n o t i c e s f i x e d
                                                                                                             on b o th s i d e s a t ey e
                                                                                                             lev el.

                       The panic bar o p e r a t e d           T h i s door does not have                    Put a s i g n on the door                     F ire s a fe ty .        (FS)                  3 1 s t D e c, 1989.
                       door from the P l a y e r s             an a p p r o p r i a t e s ig n on            r e a d i n g "push bar to
                       Lounge.                                 it.                                           open ". "Where s i g n s or
                                                                                                             n o t i c e s a r e r e f e r r e d to
                                                                                                             in t h i s d e f e c t o r the
                                                                                                             p r e v i o u s on e, they must
                                                                                                             be in acc o rdan ce with
                                                                                                             BS5499 o r BS5378 as
                                                                                                             ap p ro p riate".

                       The v e n t i l a t i o n duct from     The degree o f f i r e                        A s c e r t a i n the d eg ree of              F ire s a fe ty .       (FS)
                       th e c e i l i n g o f the              r e s i s t a n c e to the                    f i r e r e s i s t a n c e to the
                       P l a y e r s Lounge.                   v e n t i l a t i o n duct from the           v e n t i l a t i o n duct
                                                               c e i l i n g of the P l a y e r s            e i t h e r p r o v id e
                                                               Lounge must be o f a                          appropriate
                                                               minimum of one h our.                         certificates
                                                                                                             c o n f irm in g the F i r e
                                                                                                             R e s i s t a n t S ta n d a r d or
                                                                                                             i f i t i s l e s s th an one
                                                                                                             h o u r , improve i t to reac h
                                                                                                             the one hour s t a n d a r d and
                                                                                                             c e r tif y appropriately.

                       A ll doors a f f o r d i n g means       A l l t h e s e d o o r s must be             Work r e q u i r e d e i t h e r              Fire s a fe ty .        (FS)                  3 1 s t D e c, 1989.
                       o f escape from t h i s a r e a .        unlocked w h i l s t p erson s                en s u r e t h a t a l l th e s e
                                                                a r e u s i n g them, o r i f                 doors a r e unlocked w h i l s t
                                                                s e c u r i t y i s a proble m a              p e r s o n s a r e in th e
                             /.* >-   »• i .   •/ i ^ -.5 ’■ . 1   '' u                                                                                                    '■■' *>"•; .••'.•;v«‘. ■. - t   . . .,/V .i •" , •.‘jiri i,   .-•»!»’ r* 'v .           'i t w             >.         I t rj; . -




                                                                                                          S H E F F I E L D                  C I T Y          C 0 U N H L                                                                                         Page No: 4 ( o f         10)

                                                                          C o n t i n u a t i o n S c h e d u l e o f R e q u i r e m e n t s f o r W o r k s / I n s p e c t i o n s a t S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d S p o r t s Ground

      DEFECT                          DEFECT LOCATION                                     I DEFECT DESCRIPTION                              WORK REQUIRED                                                    REASON FOR WORK                                                 WORK TO BE
      NUMBER                                                                              I                                                                                                                                                                                  COMPLETED BY:~
                                                                                          I
      4 . 3 . ( c o a t 1)                                                                I p a n i c bar o r p a n i c l a t c h          p r e m is e s , or f i t panic                                                                                                  3 1 st Dec,      1989.
                                                                                          I m echanism s h o u l d be                      bars or panic l a t c h e s .
                                                                                          I fitte d .
                                                                                          I
 ■: 4 . 4 .                      Players lounge.                                          I The e x i s t i n g em erg e n c y             Submit a schem e f o r t h e                                    F ire s a f e t y .                             (FS)             3 1 s t Dec,     1989.
                                                                                          I l i g h t i n g system w ith in                e x t e n s io n o f the o f the
 ■i     ■*                                                                                I th e stand needs ex ten d in g                 e m erg e n c y l i g h t i n g s y s t e m
                                                                                          I to co v e r the P la y e r s                   to co v e r the P la y e r s
                                                                                          I lounge.                                        lou n g e.

      The B ra m a ll
      Lane S ta n d                                                   I
      5 .0                      The r e f r e s h m e n t a r e a on  I Two new l a r g e g a s o v e n s                                  Remove t h e g a s o v e n s and                                F ire s a f e t y .                             (FS)             3 1 s t Dec,     1989.
                                th e Concourse o f the                I and wooden c o u n t e r s h ave                                   t h e wooden c o u n t e r s .
                                B ra m a ll Lane s t a n d .          I r e c e n t l y b een i n s t a l l e d
                                                                      I in t h is area.             It
                                                                      I a p p e a r e d t h a t no
                                                                      I a u t h o r i t y i n c l u d i n g the
                                                                      I l o c a l g a s supply
                                                                      I a u t h o r i t y w e re c o n s u l t e d
                                                                      I p r io r to the i n s t a l l a t i o n
                                                                      I
      5.1                      The C o n c o u r s e .                I T h e r e a r e two wooden                                         Remove t h e s e two wooden                                     F ire s a f e t y .                             (FS)
      ■k                                                              I s t o r e s s i t u a t e d on t h e                               stru ctu res.
                                                                      I C o n c o u r s e t h a t do n o t
                                                                      I p r o v i d e one hour f i r e
                                                                      I re sista n c e.
                                                                      I •
 5 Spion Kop                                                          I
:j 6.0                         The e x i t s t a i r w a y            I An e x i t s i g n o f 200 mm                                      P rovid e the e x i t s ig n .                                  F ire s a f e t y .                             (FS)
•I     ..                      s i t u a t e d i n t h e John         I h i g h w h i t e l e t t e r s on a
                               S t r e e t c o r n e r o f t h e Kop. I g r e e n b ack g rou nd i s
                                                                      I r e q u ir e d above t h i s e x i t
                                                                                          I stairway.

                                                                                          j
                                                                                                          c i-r -y .                         • t.   .   i   S   J   i     '.-i r:,




                                                                     S H E F F I E L D           CITY                  C O U N C I L                                         Page No: 5 (of 10)

                                        Continuation Schedule of Requirements for Works/Inspections at Sheffield United Sports Ground

DEFECT         DEFECT LOCATION                             DEFECT DESCRIPTION                    WORK REQUIRED                          REASON FOR WORK                               WORK TO BE
NUMBER                                                                                                                                                                                COMPLETED BY:-

Bramall
Lane Stand
7.0          The Mezzanine floor level                    The woodwool slabs over              Introduce additional roof               General safety.                  (BS)         31st Dec, 1989.
             refreshments stores.                         the refreshment store are            members to adequately                                                    (FS)
 *                                                        deflecting in both                   support the self weight
                                                          directions towards the               and maintenance loads.
                                                          centre, due to inadequate            Provide one hour fire
                                                          supporting structure and             resistance to the store.
                                                          the store needs to be
                                                          provided with one hour
                                                          fire resistance.

7.1          The upper level of the                       Holes through the floor.             The holes should be made                General safety.                  (BS)         31st Dec, 1989.
             stand.                                                                            up or have gauzes
                                                                                               inserted if required for
                                                                                               the rain water drainage.

7.2          The external aluminium                       The sheeting has suffered            Repair or replace the                   General safety.                  (BS)         31st Dec, 1989.
             sheeting to the Bramall                      fatigue adjacent to seats            aluminium sheeting.
             Lane elevation.                              21-22, 36-40 and 62-64 on
                                                          row W of the upper level.

7.3          The upper level of the                       Owing to its very steep              Provide a system of                     General safety.                  (BS)         31st Dec, 1989.
             stand.                                       pitch a system of                    barriers and handrailing
                                                          barriers and radial                  as detailed in a scheme
                                                          handrailing should be                to be submitted to the
                                                          introduced in this part              Council.
                                                          of the stand.

Bramall
Lane
Terracing
8.0          The double gates from the                    The gates were found to              Remove t h e g r a s s r o l l          General safety.                  (BS)         7 d ays o f r e c e i p t
             t e r r a c i n g a d j a c e n t t o th e   be l o c k e d and o l d g r a s s   and o f f c u t m a t e r i a l s .                                                   o f notice.
             South Stand car park.                        rollers etc were adjacent
                                                          to them.
                                                                              S H E F F I E L D                  CITY             CO U N C I L                                                  Page No: 6 (of 10)

                                              C o n t i n u a t i o n S c h e d u l e o f R e q u i r e m e n t s f o r W o r k s / I n s p e c t i o n s a t S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d S p o r t s Ground

DEFECT               DEFECT LOCATION                              DEFECT DESCRIPTION                       1 WORK REQUIRED                                     REASON FOR WORK                                   WORK TO BE
NUMBER                                                                                                       1                                                                                                   COMPLETED BY:
                                                                                                            11
John S t r e e t                                                                                             1
S tand                                                                                                       1
9 .0               The v e n t i l a t i o n d u c t            T h e re i s no w i r e g r i l l       to 1 Provide a g r i l l .                            General s a f e t y .        (B S )            3 1 s t D e c , 1989
                   op en in g in th e w a ll o f                th e v e n t i l a t i o n d u c t.        I
                   th e o ld P la y e r s T unnel.                                                          1
                                                                                                           iI
9.1                The r o o f c o v e r i n g s o f t h e  A number o f r o o f l e a k a g e s I R e p a i r r o o f c o v e r i n g s .                    General s a f e t y .        (B S )                II   II        II
                   stan d .                                 w e re n o t e d .                              | I n s p e c t th e tim ber
                                                                                                            1 s t r u c t u r e in the v a c i n i t y
                                                                                                            1 o f t h e r o o f l e a k a g e s and
                                                                                                            1 any r o t t e d t i m b e r i s t o
                                                                                                            1 be removed and r e p l a c e d .
                                                                                                           11
9 .2               John S t r e e t S tan d                 A redundant s t e e l s t r a p              i Remove t h e h a n g e r .                         General s a f e t y .        (B S )            3 1 s t Dec,   1989
                                                            h a n g e r o v e r s e a t 163 row 1
                                                            0.                                             1
                                                                                                          11
                                                                                                           1
9 .3               The i n s i d e f a c e o f t h e        T h e r e a r e no l a r g e No              1 P r o v i d e l a r g e No Smoking                General s a f e t y .         (B S )            3 1 s t Dec,   1989
                   r o o f e x tr e m ity a lon g the       Smoking s i g n s i n t h i s                1 sig n s.
                   l e n g t h o f th e tim b ered          area.                                         1
                   stan d .                                                                              1
                                                                                                         11
9 .4               H a n d r a ils to the                   The h a n d r a i l s a r e n o t           1 Secure the h a n d r a ils .                       General s a f e t y .         (B S )            W i t h i n 14 d ay s
                   sta ir w a y s in v o m ito r ie s 7 p rop erly se c u r e d .                        1                                                                                                   of receip t of
                   and 8 .                                                                                1                                                                                                  N otice.
                                                                                                        I1
9 .5               The Snack Bar a r e a u n d er           The p r e s e n c e o f g a s f i r e d 1 Remove t h e g a s s u p p l y                         F ire /g e n e ra l s a fe ty .        (B S )       M    II        M
                   the sta n d .                            a p p l i a n c e s i n r e g u l a r u s e 1 from t h e s t a n d .
                                                            in a tim bered s ta n d .                   1
                                                          i                                             i
The                                                       1                                             1
Shoreham                                                  1                                             1
S treet                                                   1                                             1
Ent r a n e e                                             1                                             1
Area                                                      1                                             1
10.0               The e n d s o f t i m b e r r o o f    I T h e r e w e re l o o s e and              | R eplace th e a f f e c t e d                      G eneral s a f e t y .        (B S )                M    M         II
                   b o ard in g o v e r t u r n s t i l e I r o t t e n r o o f boards o v er           1 b o a r d i n g and r e c o v e r w i t h                                                                         »
                   69.                                    | tu r n s tile 69.                           | s u i t a b l e w eather t i g h t
                                                          1                                             1 sh eetin g .
                                                    S H E F F I E L D    CITY      C O U N C I L                          Page No;    7 (of 10) *

                                Continuation Schedule of Requirements for Works/Inspections at Sheffield United Sports Ground

DEFECT        DEFECT LOCATION              DEFECT DESCRIPTION            WORK REQUIRED               REASON FOR WORK           1 WORK TO BE
NUMBER                                                                                                                         1 COMPLETED BY:-
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                               1
10.1         The fencing between the      The fencing was found not     (a) Where required          General safety.    (BS)    I (a)31st Dec, 89
             main exit gate and           to be stable.                 stabilise the fencing.                                 1
             turnstile 69.                                              (b) Provide barriers                                   1 (b)30th Jun, 90
                                                                        along the lines                                        1
                                                                        of the fence so as to                                  1
                                                                        keep spectators from this                              1
                                                                        obstruction as detailed                                1
                                                                        in a scheme to be
                                                                        submitted to the Council.                              f
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                               1
Bramall                                                                                                                        1
Lane Stand                                                                                                                     1
- Seated                                                                                                                       1
area                                                                                                                           1
11.0         The top left hand corner     At the side of the wall       Provide the lead with       General safety.    (HCS)   1 31st Dec, 1989.
             of the stand.                of this part of the           suitable trunking.                                     1
                                          stand, there is an                                                                   1
                                          unprotected electrical                                                               1
                                          lead.                                                                                1
Bramall                                                                                                                        1
Lane                                                                                                                           1
Terracing                                                                                                                      1
12.0         The whole of the concrete    Much of the concrete          Survey the whole of the     General safety.    (HCS)   1 II    II   H
             terracing.                   terracing is cracked,         terracing, itemise all                                 1
                                          broken and worn and in        the defects and repair or                              1
                                          delapidated condition         renew the concrete where                               1
                                          with grass growing            required and remove the                                1
                                          through in places.            vegetation as                                          1
                                                                        appropriate.                                           1
                                                                                                                               |
                                                                                                                               1
12.1         The exit stairs.             Vegetation is apparent on     Remove the vegetation.      General safety.    (HCS)   1 II     H    II
                                          or close to the exit                                                                 1
                                          stairs.                                                                              1
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                  S H E F F I E L D                  CITY             C O U N C I L                                                 Page No: 8 (of 10)

                                                  C o n t i n u a t i o n S c h e d u l e o f R e q u i r e m e n t s f o r W o r k s / I n s p e c t i o n s a t S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d S p o r t s Ground

    DEFECT          1 DEFECT LOCATION                                 DEFECT DESCRIPTION                             WORK REQUIRED                                 REASON FOR WORK                                   WORK TO BE
    NUMBER                                                                                                                                                                                                           COMPLETED BY:-

    The S p i o n
    Kop
    13.0            1 The ramp a c c e s t o t h e                  The b oundary f e n c e t o t h e              R e p a i r t h e b oundary                    General s a f e t y .        (HCS)          1 3 1 s t Dec,   1989.
                    1 Kop.                                          ramp i s b r o k e n .                         f e n c i n g ..


    13.1            1 The f o o t o f t h e l i g h t i n g         In t h i s l o c a t i o n t h e r e           Remove t h e d e b r i s and                  General s a f e t y .         (HCS           1 3 1 st Dec,    1989.
                    I p ylon a d ja c e n t to th e                 i s e a s y a c c e s s b o th t o             s u p p l y d e t a i l s a s t o how
                    I ramp.                                         t h e p y l o n i t s e l f and t o            i t i s proposed to p revent
                                                                    d e b r i s w h ic h c o u l d be              easy a c c e s s to th e p ylon .
                                                                    used a s m i s s i l e s .

    13.2            1 The t e r r a c i n g i t s e l f .           The t e r r a c i n g i t s e l f h a s        Survey th e t e r r a c i n g .               General s a f e t y .         (HCS)          | 3 1 s t Dec,   1 9 89.
                                                                    in p la c e s , t r ip hazards                 Remove an y t r i p h a z a r d s .
                                                                    ( c a u s e d f o r e x a m p l e by           Repair the t e r r a c in g as
                                                                    c o n c r e t e b lo c k s , m etal            a p p r o p r ia te.
                                                                    stu m p s e t c ) .     The
                                                                    te rra cin g ste p s are
                                                                    damaged i n p l a c e s and
                                                                    th e r e i s a poor q u a l i t y
                                                                    of i n - f i l l .

j 13.3              1 Where t h e t e r r a c i n g m e e t s       There i s a t r i p hazard a t                 H igh ligh t t h is t r ip                    G e n e r a l S a f e t y (HCS)              j 3 1 st Dec,    1989 .
                    I t h e ramp from t h e                         t h e p o i n t w h ere t h e                  hazard u s in g s u i t a b l e
i    *
                    1 Shoreham S t r e e t e n t r a n c e .        t e r r a c i n g m e e t s t h e ramp         co lo u re d p a in t o f a
                                                                    from t h e Shoreham S t r e e t                durable n a tu re.
%                                                                   en trance.
L
 | The John
4  Street
i entrance
   forecourt
    14 .o           1 The e n t r a n c e f o r e c o u r t .      T h e r e was an a c c u m u l a t i o n     Remove a l l d e b r i s .                       General s a f e t y .         (HCS)          1      it   ii    n
                                                                   o f d e b r i s w h ic h p o t e n t i a l
                                                                   c o u l d be u s e d a s a
                                                                   m i s s i l e and w eapo n s i n           !
                                                                   th is area.
                                                   S H E F F I E L D     C I T Y   C O U N C I L                            Page No: 9 (of 10)

                                Continuation Schedule of Requirements for Works/Inspections at Sheffield United Sports Ground

DEFECT     1 DEFECT LOCATION             1 DEFECT DESCRIPTION            WORK REQUIRED            1 REASON    FOR WORK           1 WORK TO BE
NUMBER     1                             1                                                        1                              1 COMPLETED BY:-
           1                             1
                                         1                                                        1
                                                                                                  1                              1
                                                                                                                                 1
14.1       1 The perimeter fence in      1 The fence was torn.          Repair the fence          1 General   safety.    (HCS)   1 31st Dec, 1989.
           1 the forecourt area.         1                                                        1                              1
           1
           1                             |
                                         1                                                        I                              j
                                                                                                  1                              1
The John   1                             1                                                        1                              1
Street                                   1                                                        1                              1
Stand      1                             1                                                        1                              1
15.0       1 The John Street             I Defective woodwork over      Complete a survey of this 1 General   safety.    (HCS)   | II    H    II
 4r        1 elevation.                  I glazing.                     area and carry out        1                              1
           1                             1                              remedial work to prevent 1                               1
           1                             1                              further hazards arising. 1                               1
           1                                                                                      1
                                                                                                  l                              |
                                                                                                                                 1
15.1       1 The rear access corridor    1 The floor has been           The floor must be         1 General   safety.    (HCS)   1 II   H        II
           1 of the John Street Stand.   1 inappropriately repaired     repaired so as to result 1                               1
           1                             1 and trip hazards are         in an even surface        1                              1
           1                             1 apparent.                    without trip hazards.     1                              1
                                         1                                                        1                              1
           1                             1                                                        1
15.2       1 The Top Landing.            1 The floor in places was      Remove any trip hazards. 1 General    safety.    (HCS)   1 31st Dec, 1989.
           1                             1 not smooth and even, thus                                                             1
           1                             1 giving rise to trip                                     1                             1
           1                             1 hazards.                                                1                             1
           1                             |
                                         1                                                         I                             |
                                                                                                   1                             1
15.3       1 The Upper seated area       1 The floor covering in the     Survey the whole of these 1 General safety.     (HCS)   1 II    H    II
           1 and intermediate seated     1 gangways is crooked and       areas and carry out                                     1
           1 area of the John Street     1 raised in places and          appropriate repairs so as 1                             1
           1 Stand.                      1 there are a number of         to remove trip and fall   1                             1
           1                             1 defective nosings.            hazards.                  1                             1
           1                             I
                                         1                                                                                       |
                                                                                                   1                             1
15.4       1 The rear of the concrete    1 There is some redundant       The redundant wiring is   1 General safety.     (HCS)   1 31st Dec, 1989.
           1 seating area.               1 and loose wiring and a        to be removed and         i                             1
           1                             1 disused junction box.         trunking provided for the i                             1
           1                             1                               loose wiring. The         i                             1
           1                             1                               junction box is also to   i                             1
           1                             1                               be removed if it is       i                             1
           1                             1                               disused.                  i                             1
           1                                                                                       i                             1
           1                             1                             1                           i                             1
           1                             1                             1                           i                             1
                                                                                    S H E F F I E L D                 CITY              C O U N C I L                                              Page No; 10 (of 10)

                                                     C o n t i n u a t i o n S c h e d u l e o f R equ irem en t! s f o r W o r k s / I n s p e c t i o n s a t S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d S p o r t s Ground

       DEFECT              DEFECT LOCATION                              DEFECT DESCRIPTION                           WORK REQUIRED                                 REASON FOR WORK                                 WORK TO BE
       NUMBER                                                                                                                                                                                                      COMPLETED BY:-

       15.5               In t h e t e r r a c e d a r e a .           There a re d e f e c t i v e                 R e p a i r t h e f l o o r s and            General s a f e t y .        (HCS)           3 1 s t Dec,   1989.
                                                                       f l o o r s i n p l a c e s and a l s o      n o sin g s as n e ce ssa r y .
                                                                       brok en n o s i n g s .

       The S p o r t s
       Ground
       16.0               The S p o r t s Ground.                      T ests of:                                   T est a l l system s to                      F ire s a f e t y .     (FS)
                                                                       ( 1 ) Emergency l i g h t i n g              a p p rop riate B r it is h
                                                                             system .                               Standard or I .E . E .
                                                                       ( 2 ) F i r e Warning S y s t e m .          R e g u l a t i o n s . (C u r r e n t
                                                                       (3 ) F ire fig h tin g                       E d i t i o n ) and p r o v i d e
                                                                             e q u ip m ent.                        c e r tific a te s.
                                                                       ( 4 ) General e l e c t r i c a l
                                                                             system s.

      ! P erim eter
     :: F en ce
      : 1 7.0             P erim eter fe n c e g a te s ,              E mergency e x i t n o t i c e s             S ecu re em ergency e x i t                  F ire s a f e t y .     (FS)
                                                                       secured at varyin g                          n o t i c e s above th e g a te
                                                                       h e i g h t s above th e ground,             a p e r t u r e w h er e p o s s i b l e ,
                                                                                                                    oth erw ise secure
                                                                                                                    im m ed iately a d ja c e n t to
                                                                                                                    the a p e r tu r e .

.i 1 7 . 1                P e r i m e t e r and r a d i a l            P a in tin g of gate                         P a i n t a 300mm w i d e band               F ire s a f e t y .    (FS)                  3 1 s t Dec,   1989,
                          fence g a te s.                              surround.                                    a ro u n d t h e g a t e o p e n i n g .
                                                                                                                    The p a i n t c o l o u r must be
                                                                                                                    t h e same c o l o u r a s t h e
                                                                                                                    g a t e and a d i f f e r e n t
                                                                                                                    c o l o u r from t h e r e s t o f
                                                                                                                    the f e n c e .




M
il
■% SUDAAB/JL
:-i A. 2 1 . 11 . 8 9 .
       Telephone: (0742) 734793
              Fax: (0 742)7 3 4 7 5 2
            Telex: 54243




   Your reference:


   Our reference:       SC/JM                                                  c   I   T     Y
                                                                               C O U N C I L
             Date:      6 November 1989

                                                                               COMMUNICATIONS UNIT
                                        I       ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL
                                        I          DEPT. SHEFFIELD             Publicity Department
                                                   HCAOOft   1 MWTANT   1      Chief Publicity O ffk tr
                                            A       OST.     1  WAO     1LS    Shirley Lanstone sa msa mipr
                                            —                                  Town Hall

                                            B        0 7. NOV 89
                                                              •
                                                                         PAA   Sheffield
                                                                               S1 2HH

                                            T     O.S.M- |   UB
                                                                         CL
                                            GS



                        Dear

                        SURVEY OF FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS

                        Please find enclosed a copy of a report which summarises the ideas
                        and priorities of members of the Football Supporters' Association
                        following a survey of their conference on 24 June 1989 -

                        The survey method used is called Priority Search.  It is currently
                        in use in a wide range of services across the City Council and
                        is also available commercially.  A brief explanation of the system
                        appears on the last page of the report.  Further information can
                        be obtained from the Communications Unit in the Town Hall.

                        This particular survey was carried out on behalf of the Football
                        Supporters' Association.  The FSA were, therefore, the 'client'.
                        The work was carried out for no charge.

                        The Leader, Councillor Clive Betts, expressed his support for
                        the City Council giving such a contribution to the supporters
                        following the Hillsborough tragedy.

                        As a consequence of this relationship,_ the survey data and results
                        are the property of the client - the FSA.   It was, therefore,
                        up to them when the report was to be released and how it should
                        be used.  They chose to release it formally in a press release
                        through the City Council's Press Office on Monday 30 October.
                        It is now available to any interested party.   In fact the FSA
                        are anxious that we give it as wide a circulation as possible
                        and use any publicity it may attract to further the service we
                        can offer using this survey method in other walks of life.

                         The report itself has been submitted to Lord Justice Taylor as
                         part of the FSA's submission to Part Two of the Hillsborough Inquiry.




This matter is being
      dealt w ith by:    sandy Campbell
         Telephone:      734024
2

6 November 1989




I trust this explains the background to this work.  If anyone
is at all interested in learning more about this project or the
method in general please don't hesitate to get in touch.




                                             Yours sincerely




                                            SA N D Y C A M PB ELL
                                            C O M M U N IC A T IO N S U N IT
hootpaii tans demana more respeci irom ponce




         THE STAR. Tuerdav. October 31. I9S9
                                                                By Neil Fieldhouse
                                                     FOOTBALL supporters this afternoon
                                                     called on the police to treat soccer fans
                                                     with respect m a blueprint they have
                                                     published for the future of the game, fol­
                                                     lowing the Hillsborough tragedy.
                                                       They admit the game has been heading

    Now, a Soccer                                    towards a crisis but say their charter provides
                                                     some answers to football's problems
                                                        Sheffield Council sur­ rich seam of responsible
                                                     veyed           Football
    Fans’ Charter
                                                                                  supporters does exist in the
                                                     Supporters’ Associations     game at every dub. They are
                                                     representing      league     prepared to share responsi­
    FOOTBALL is still in crisis. Violence among
                                                     dubs across the country      bility and devote time and
    2 minority of fans continues to cause deep
                                                     just two months after the    energy to improving the
                                                     tragedy at the Sheffield     game.
    roncorn. Clubs are sceptical about the ident­    Wednesday ground.               “They want, however, to
    ity card scheme which is being forced               The results will now be: be recognised as partici­
    through by the Government                        used by faas nationwide to pants in the experience of
       And in the background there is still the      try to map out the future football and expected to be
    horror of Hillsborough, with all its memories    development o f football.    treated at the very least with
    and implications.                                   Their main demands the respect deserving of
                                                     centre on the need for sup­ customers in other walks of
       For th ese reasons a new su rvey,             porters to be treated with life."
    announced today by Sheffield City Council in     respect. .                      It recognises the “ugly”
    conjunction with the Football Supporters’                                     side of the game and urges
                                                        They want the dubs and dubs
    Association is of outstanding importance.        footballing authorities to stonger to seek help fey forging
                                                     involve (hem in decision' communities.     bonds       with
       It presents the voice of responsible fans
    on what needs to be done to improve football     making, improve facilities,
    tor the supporters. For far too long fans have   take a tougher stand against South Yorkshire FSA
                                                     racism and bring in stricter spokesman Geoff Thomas
    been taken tor granted or treated as an           safety standards.       The said: “This report is the
    unfortunate necessity at matches.                                             voice of the rational fan. the
                                                                                  majority of fans, speaking
       The survey, made at the annual confer­        THE STAB SAYS E l and if everybody works
    ence this year of the Football Supporters'                                    together to make it a blue-
    Association, deals with 30 points, ranging       Government’s compulsory pnnt for change then I don't
    from refereeing to racism, and fencing to        membership scheme is firm' think we are too far down
    facilities.                                      ly rejected.                 the line to recover.
                                                        They also suggest that
       One especially significant recommen­          police are trained to be beInseeking
                                                                                        Sheffield the FSA wilt
    dation. given high priority, is. that police     friendly and to treat sup­ Wednesday,a meeting         with
                                                                                                  United, the
    should be trained nationwide to respect          porters      as     "normal police and council   leaders
    supporters.                                      citizens.” Away Tans should
       It may be that fans themselves are the        bepoliced by their own local    Copies of the report will
                                                     officers.                    also be circulated to all
    hast people to solve the problems that have         The survey concludes: “A supporters’ associations.
    put the game's future into doubL Their views
    deserve the most serious study.
                                                                        ?::s%W
                                                                             S?>s*>x*!*$£>
                                                                        K *»K j#:««< w :


         ; " ,/• * ■
         tmmmm
                              mmmz                                     iW&&8£&£              M ta H
              WmWm              MMmmmM


                                                                                                                                         COUNCIL
mm
              mmm
                                                                                                                                         feasts**
                         f h # tH <»av a n d n n c                                                                                       C    I
                                                                                                                                         COUNCIL
                                                                                                                                                       T       Y



                                                                                                                                         IgWfjjSJJI

                                                                                                                                         C     I T Y
                                                                                                                                         C   o ' U tT C I L




i m '&
     i&:§&                                                                                                  %m               Sxwm*x«<*
                                                                                        ....^SWSiWiSS                                    COUMCIl.
                                                                                                                     liiils s p ip

                                                                                                            IIM ^ IS Illllllllllfc       3§g*j
                                                                                                                                             L—I
                                                                                                                                         COUHCIL


      mm




                                                                                                                                         SfesSSsiriS
                                   mmmm                                                                 mmsssm                           counci l



                                                                                                                                         C     I       T       Y
                                                                                                                                         counci l


la ilM M iS
                                                                                                                                         C I T Y
 m m rn m m m m                                                                                                                          c o u n c i l
                                   J p S p

                                   •"1111
                                   5X:X%;:::;X::§


                                   HAS
                &&&w;
                   •«v

                                                        .;.;.;.;.v$J                                                                     counci l
                ^^888W                              i§;S§|||
£&>£x&:>:*:
sSsW®::®: llllll                   .... iSssSSss*®                                                                                       E w gna
 pwMf             Sx<;>:::::*:::                                                                                                         Sliirrc*..-^f
 K it g iii
sa»                                                                                                                                      c         i       r       y
                                                                                                                                         counci l
         S&BH



w®“                        o f 2 3 3 triem bers o f t h e FSA                                                                                filjjflW
                                                                                                                                             «m £
                                                                                                                                         C         I       T       \
                                                                                                                                         counci l



                          A n n u a l C o n feren ce, h eld
                                                        s ld
                                                                                                                                         counci l
                                                                                 ie ld


                                                                                                                                         c i f~
                                                    :                                                   ❖xxs’-fewrviks                   c o u n~c i i
 Survey into the views of members of the Football Supporters' Association who attended
 their annual conference, 24 June 1989. Summary analysis of the prioritised responses
                                   to the question:


  WHAT NEEDS TO HAPPEN TO IMPROVE FOOTBALL FOR THE
                    SUPPORTERS?
The most striking aspect of this survey is the extraordinary degree of unanimity. The FSA conference
couid be regarded as a fairly homogeneous group. Nevertheless a very wide cross section of society
was represented (see Appendix 1): people of different and no earned income; home supporters and
away fans; people who watch the game with friends, with children or on their own; people who sit as
well as those who stand; different age groups; members of supporters dubs and season ticket holders;
and men and women. No matter what category of people we examine, their perception as to the
priority solutions for improving football for the supporters Is virtually identical.

The first diagram below shows all the thirty items used in the questionnaire prioritised in order, 1 to 30,




      13   m n    f         .         „        __T       ,


      __                        , ^       _
                                                                                                      H
mmm




                                                                                                          vssm




                                                                          mK
                                                 mmm £^f£2*»S
                                              m tm m m       3SE&SS«»?•                              :sssissmsst
                                                                                                      *S
fSSmmti
mmmmMr
The results in detail:
The following diagrams show the top ten prioritised items of each of the different categories
of supporters; the length of the bar in each case indicating the degree of priority. The general
consensus top ten is shown in the left hand column of diagram 1, below.




                                                                  consensus          males       females
 1
              Beefed supporter reps ataDdedsion lewis
        Train poice naionwide to respect he supporters
 Remove
 I WllVVv fences
          IW1R n v nrneduia
                         H wsoectafctf
                              v W U M V view    {movement
                                         * iy n w 4ll¥l'flinwW

                       Treat footoall fans as fie customer
                               Cltte to act against racism

                          Keep standng anas in tiegrouid          ■
     1 /j.M        llA uJjJJa/M A M U IM U h l  iy k IM U M UlJ
       KMproooaiaroiaaDterconcessionsiQrneunwagea                 ■
               1Foobdlshaiddamorefor
                 W l n P n M W W H M v l w IwV fwcomiraritv
                                                    W IU INIRlI   I
          Better faciities to encourage women to m athes          I
          Beteridieapef catering faciieshhegrouid



                                                                                                             earning      earning      earning
                                                                                                            less than    £10,000-       over
                                                                                    students     earning   £10,000 p.a. £18,000 p.a.
           Beefed supporter reps at £ decision levels
      Trail pokenaknwide to respect Dmsupporters
 R epve fences impedhg spectabxs^ view &movement
                   Treat M a i fans as tie customer
                          C ltis to act againstradsm I
                 No comptisary memberstip scheme
                   Keep stancfog areas it fie ground
           t
           R/M
             ««-
               ptOODa-ttlM
                     ld -.j-
                           tm___
                           O     .i.i               t___      i


                  Foolal should do n o n for to oxnmunitjf
            Better faalies to encourage women to matches
           Buiid new staduns esp. Intemaf stadum in Nodi
                         Give pools money bade to Footafl
   .       B etfertcheapercaieriengkifesiitiegoiiid

                                                                          season    members of
                                                                           ticket   supporters
                                                                          holders     clubs
            Beefed supporter reps at aDdecision levels
      Train poice nafenwide to respect tie supporters
  Renwve fences iropsdwg spectators^view & mov^moot
                      Treat footaB fans as tie customer
                              dubstoactaganstradstn                   I
                  No compulsory membership schemes                    ■
                      Keep standing areas n tie g n u d               I
   Keep foof>al ^oidable/concesstons for tie unwaged                  I
             R»ballshoiiddomorefort»community                         I
        Belter fadifies to encourage women to matches                 I
        Better & cheaper catering fadiies ti tie groixi
                                                                Those who attend home matches           Those who attend away matches
                                                                                                          percentage of matches attended
                                                             under 50%     50 - 75%      ow75%       under 25%       25-50%        over 50%
          SsctBdsupponerrepsataldadsjonlemls
  ' Tr^n pdica naticnwide to raspect the supportars
Remove fences impeding spectator's via* 4 movement
                     Treat football fans as tie customer
                             Clubs b a d against racism
                 No compulsory membership schemes
                     Kaep standng areas in the ground
 Keep footbai affardahlafccncessions for tie uiwaged
           Fooibal should do more for lha ccmmun^
      Better fariities to encourage women to matches
      Better &cheaper catering fadities h tie ground




                                                              How people travel to home matches       How people travel to away matches
                                                                                          official      public        Pnvate        official
                                                             transport                                transport     transport
          Bected supporter reps at ail decision levels
    Tran police naknwide to respect the supports
Remove fences impedng spectator's view 4 movement
                  Treatiootbal fans as the customer
                     ' Clubstoaciagainstradsm
               Mocompulsory member^ip schemes


             Football should do more for the community


                      GivepodsmoneybadDfootbal


                                                                                       people who
       6
                                                           peop^who
                                                           at matches
                                                                         people who
                                                                         at matches
                                                                                       go on tneir
                                                                                         ownto
                                                                                        matches
                                                                                                     4              matches
          Beefed supporter reps at ai decision levels
     Train poke natonMdeto respect tie supporters
Remow fences impedng spectamview4mowment
                  Treat footbal tans as tie customer
                          Clubsto act against ra s a
                No cMiprisorymembersiip schemes
                   Keepstandng areas in t» ground
 Keep fboibai afadafcWconcessions for tie unwaged
           Foots! should do mon for Dm community
      Better facUestoencouage women to matches
      Bettar4cheaper catering faciies in tie ground
                   Givepodsmcneybaekto tootai

                                                             aged        aged between aged between aged between      aged
                                                            under 20        20 - 25      25 - 30      30 - 40       over 40

           Beefed supporter reps at ai deciskn lewis
      Train pokenaionwideto respect tie supporters
  Remove fences impedng spectator view 4 mcwment
                    Treat footed fans as tie customer
                            Clubs to act against racan
                 No compulsoiy membership schemes
                     Keep standng areas in tieground
     Keep footbal affcrdable/concessions fcr unwaged
            Footbai should do more for tie commtfity I
       Belter faciies to enoourage women ^matches ~
           Rwiew rules to encourage afiaddng to ta l
                   Incentvee B encourage eaiiy arivat
       Belter 4 cheaper catering fadi'es in tie ground
The following is a broad brush description of the general themes that emerge from these
results - how they hang together into a consensus outlook on the way forward for football.
Without apology, this report is a subjective account of the views of football supporters.
 It is not intended to be impartial. It does not take into account the views of the
dubs* management the police, the players or the stewards. Such an overall view would
only be possible if similar surveys were conducted with these groups. In such an eventuality
an overall picture could be painted taking into account the subjective views of all parties.
The absence of such data does not. however, invalidate this search. The viewpoint of the
customer matters in its own right and deserves to be listened to without qualification.


1.    Responsibility
      There is undoubtedly a high level of preparedness amongst
      supporters to take responsibility for sorting out the problems of football.
      Football supporters are more than just customers. They
      follow the game with a passion often incomprehensible
      to those on the outside. Football is an important part of many people's
      lives with deep roots in English culture. Consequently there is
      no lack of commitment to the game; no shortage of volunteers.

      Specifically supporters have demonstrated in this survey:

             a preparedness to shoulder some of the responsibility
             for the behaviour of others, which demonstrates a high level of
             positive collective identification with their fellow supporters;

             a preparedness to give up their own time, energy and
             intelligence to working with each other to finding solutions;

             a commitment to basic moral principals of fairness and
             accountability.

      In other words there is a recognition that while supporters have their
      problems of bad behaviour when they get together, these could be successfully
      tackled, largely by or with the participation and guidance of democratically
      accountable supporters in the game. The same basic principles of fairness
      that lie behind the rules of conduct of those on the pitch, should be used to
      steward the conduct of those off it.


2.    Respect
      Supporters expect to be treated better. Throughout the country there is a
      growing realisation that the customer has a right to better service and treatment.
      Their collective characteristics are there to be understood and catered for by
      the body providing the service.

      Football supporters do pay to get in. They provide three times the amount of
      finance into the game than all the sponsorship money put together. Not only
      that but they are participative customers who give of themselves (and would do
      more if they were only asked) to improve the product in the interests and
      enjoyment of everyone.
     They pay for. and expect to be treated with more respect.

     Specifically they want:

     a]       a different relationship w ith th e police. Out of all the various
              suggestions for coping with the problems of ground control, this was
              the one which highlighted the gulf in respect between the customer
              and those currently charged with their stewarding - the police. The
              gulf is too large to be bridged by statements of goodwill or policy
              declarations about impartiality. Treating rival supporters impartially
              can still result in both sets of fans being assumed collectively to be a
              problem. What the supporters want instead is a serious injection of
              police personnel training with the emphasis on serving, protecting
              and respecting the supporter as a valued, participative customer, the
              length and breadth of the countiy;

     b|       a different relationship w ith the clubs. Running in parallel to their
              hopes for change in their relationship with the police, supporters seek a
              more participative sort of partnership with their own clubs. Running as a
              theme throughout many of the prioritised items is the demand to be
              respected, involved and generally catered for in a respectful manner by
              those with power in the game - the clubs;

              *     democratically accountable supporters should be represented at
                    every decision making level in the game and should share
                    responsibility and hence power, for managing the game;

              *     the supporters* 'stage' in which they play their part in the creation
                    of a football spectacle - the terracing and stands - need to be as
                    the supporters want them to be:-

                     i)    without any fencing which is likely to impede their view
                           and movement;

                     ii)   the terraces, where historically the core of a team's
                           passionate and melodic support emanates, should remain;

              *     the general experience of being in a football ground should be
                    pleasurable; specifically clubs need to direct their investment to
                    improve the facilities throughout the ground in terms of catering,
                    refreshments, toilets and other services. Such measures by
                    themselves would reduce the unattractiveness of football grounds
                    to many women with the consequences of diluting the overtly
                    macho culture of football with all its ugly spin offs;

              *      supporters' needs are important when decisions are being made
          ,          about investment and pricing. Their main concern is to keep the
                     game affordable to existing supporters. This may reflect fears of
                     football being priced out of their price range to suit an imagined
                     new and more affluent market.


3.   C hanging th e C ulture

     Supporters want to see a change in the atmosphere at football matches but they
     don't want to lose the emotion and passion of a partisan crowd at its best.
     They want to change the 'culture', but not too muchl

     Specifically what needs to change is the white and male exclusiveness of football
     crowds. The proportion of black players on the pitch is in no way matched by
     black supporters in the crowd. The supporters surveyed (86% of whom were
     white men) are quite dear as to why this is: the level of racism emanating from
     a section of the white crowd which is tolerated by other supporters and club alike.
     Supporters want to see firm official action, which carries the authority of the club
     behind it, to be seen to be taken against racist supporters. Furthermore, as described
     above, supporters are prepared to play their part in tackling the problem.

     As also referrred to above, clubs need to act to improve facilities and viewing
     arrangements in the grounds in order to recruit a broader spectrum of support.
     While the game may always remain a primarily male passion, it is nevertheless a
     family passion as well. Clubs need to demonstrate, in terms of the physical condition
     of the ground, that everyone in the family is welcome and will be catered for as a matter
     of course.

     By acting against racists in the crowd and improving facilities to encourage more
     women to the game, the culture of the match will inevitably change. There is,
     however, a clear view amongst supporters that in the effort to change the crowd
     atmosphere the collective experience of the standing supporters should not be lost.

     It is obviously the strongly held belief of supporters that if we are to retain the
     spirit of the crowd, terracing must remain. The problems of safety and violence will
     only be resolved by a change in the relationship between supporters, the clubs and
     police - a partnership of mutual respect where each sees the other as indispensable
     contributors to the spectacle of the game - not by forcing everyone to sit down!

     Linked very much to the issues of retaining what is best about football crowd
     culture and encouraging clubs to develop partnerships with their supporters is
     the need to improve links with the local community. Supporters see this as a practical
     way of dubs demonstrating their commitment to local people - the community which
     provides them with their (usually) life long followers. Many clubs have already seen
     the importance of such links. The message from this survey is that community links
     are not an optional extra. They should form a central commitment to the work
     programme and investment plans of every club, every year.


4.   Other Themes
     While not ranking quite so high as the above themes of responsibility, respectand
     culture, some further general concerns emerge.
     Supporters are looking for some of the vast sums of money around in football to
     be directed back into the game with tangible benefits to the supporters. Specifically
     they suggest new stadiums, and especially an alternative to Wembley in the North of
     England.

     Supporters also display a keen sense of fairness. They want to see a reformed
     commonsense system of democracy and discipline. Specifically they suggest attention is
     given to the standard of refereeing, the policing of away fans and the
     democratic management of the game nationally.


5.   The Differences Explained
     As emphasised above the striking factor about this survey is the extraordinarily high degree of
     consensus. There were, however, some slight differences of emphasis which only enrich the
     overall conclusions. These differences give us a richer picture of the needs of supporters.
     At no point do they demonstrate a split of opinion. They can be summarised as follows:

           a)     women place a slightly higher emphasis on the need for improved
                  facilities in the ground, including better and cheaper catering facilities;
     b)      those under 20 years oppose membership schemes very strongly, are
             attracted by the idea of encouraging earlier arrival at grounds and want
             to see improvements to the entertaining quality of the game itself in terms
             of attacking football;

     c)      the over 40s place considerable.emphasis on the need for better and
             cheaper facilities in the ground and want to see standing areas retained.
             This links in with the view of those who attend matches with children
             (see (i) below). There seems to be a connection between the retention of
             standing areas as a means of keeping football affordable;

     d)      unwaged supporters want to see more investment in the game, namely
             the building of new stadiums and increasing the money available to
             football by bringing the pools money back into the game;

     e)      students are again another group who place extra emphasis on the need
             for better and cheaper catering facilities;

     f)      those who walk to home games, probably because they live nearly, want
              to see the clubs do more for the local community and place higher
              emphasis on tackling racism;

     g)      away supporters who travel by public transport and official transport are
             stronger in their opposition to compulsory membership schemes;

     h)      those who attend less than 50% of their teams' home match place very
              high emphasis on improved facilities to encourage more women to the
              game;

     i)      those who attend matches with children have particularly strong views on
              improved facilities both to encourage more women and to improve the
              standard of catering. They are also the group who place the greatest
              emphasis on retaining standing areas (see also (c) above).




                                                                             meamm


                                                                                           W iM m




terracing.
                A PPENDIX

     233 members of the FSA were surveyed.
             The different categories
       and the number which fall into each
               are indicated below:


                  200 are men
                 33 are women


                 15 are unwaged
                  19 are students
                 193               are earning
          88 earn less than £10,000 pa
    89 earn between £10,000 and £18,000 pa
             16 earn over £18,000 pa


          110 are season ticket holders
       95 are members of supporters clubs

     38 attend less than 50% of Home matches
24 attend between 50% and 75% of Home matches
       166 attend over 75% of Home matches
     71 attend less than 25% of Away matches
47 attend between 25% and 50% of Away matches
       100 attend over 50% of Away matches
   96 travel to Home matches by public transport
  122 travel to Home matches by private transport
              46 walk to Home matches
   73 travel to Away matches by public transport
  139 travel to Away matches by private transport
   55 travel to Away matches by official transport


                   55 usually sit
                 168 usually stand


          44 watch matches on their own
          194 watch matches with friends
          15 watch matches with children


            13 are under 20 years old
       77 are between 20 and 25 years old
       63 are between 25 and 30 years old
       61 are between 30 and 40 years old
             19 are over 40 years old
                                        A bout this survey

This survey has been conducted by Sheffield City Council's Communications Unit using
a relatively new survey method called Priority Search

Priority Search is essentially a survey method which deals in finding solutions to a problem.
The first stage in the process is to turn the problem into a question - in this case;

      What needs to happen to improve football for the supporters?
A sample group of a least a dozen of the people to be surveyed are then gathered together.
Over a period of 2 - 3 hours everyone in the group is helped to contribute solutions or
responses to the main question. Special care is taken to ensure everyone's voice gets heard.
There is no attempt to reach a consensus within the group. On the contrary, a diversity of
opinion is encouraged.

These solutions form the items to be included in the questionnaire. The questionnaire
itself is different from the usual more familiar format. It invites the person filling it in to weight
her/his preference for each solution when paired off with other solutions in turn. In practice,
this method is easy to follow and quick to complete. It has been used successfully with a wide
cross-section of society.

In essence. Priority Search gives people the power to identify what their needs really
are and to sort them out into a prioritised list of their own making as illustrated in the diagrams
in this report.




                                       For further information contact:

                                          The Communications Unit
                                                Town Hall
                                                 Sheffield
                                                 SI 2HH

                                          Telephone (0742) 734024




                                           C       I       T       Y
                                           C   O       U   N   C   I L




                              Priority Search is a trademark of Priority Search Ltd
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP

               Meeting held In the Town Hall, Sheffield, Committee Room No. 1
                        on Thursday, 9th November, 1989 at 2.00 p.m.

         Attendance:     Messrs. Grimshaw and|          |- (CFS)
                        .Messrs. Hodgson and        - (HCS           ^i>,.
                         Messrs. Sheriff and Butler - (Building Surveyor*?)
                         Mr. |        |- (Symas)
                         Messrs. Broomhead, Marsh, Donnelly, Beal and Beeden
                           - (SYP)
                         Messrs. Ward, Derricott and Bownes - (HALD)

    1.   THE ADVISORY GROUP NOTES HELD ON 19TH OCTOBER

          Mr. Beal mentioned that the revised policing arrangements at
          Sheffield Wednesday had been employed and would continue to be so
          for low capacity football matches.

         DECISION:-     Accept the notes.

    2.   SIMPLIFICATION OF THE ADVISORY GROUP NOTES

          In order to make the notes of the meetings more useful the Chairman
          indicated that in future they would be much abbreviated but that if
          any person wanted a particular item noting that would happen.

          DECISION:- It was agreed that simplified notes should be prepared on
          a trial basis.

    3.    THE FUTURE ATTENDANCE OF CERTIFICATE HOLDERS AND/OR THEIR
          REPRESENTATIVES AT MEETINGS OF THE ADVISORY GROUP

          This issue was discussed at some length and the Chairman agreed to
          consider this question further.

          DECISION:- This matter be considered further.

    4.    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY - THE SOUTHSTAND - THE FIRE SERVICE LETTER       OF
           24TH OCTOBER, 1989

          DECISION:- The letter to be referred to the General Purposes Panel
          at its meeting on 27th November.

    5.    POLICING OF SPORTS GROUNDS

          It was noted that a meeting had been arranged for members of the
          General Purposes Panel and Senior Police Officers on 20th November.

          DECISION:- To note that the meeting is to take place. At this point
          Mr. Beal ran through the proposed policing arrangements for the
          Sheffield Wednesday v. Sheffield United on 21st November and the
          Liverpool which would shortly follow it. It was anticipated by the
          Police that the provisions at Sheffield Wednesday for away
          spectators would leave them with the possibility that some three
          thousand supporters could be left outside the ground and may then be
          tempted to join Sheffield Wednesday Supporters on the Kop. Bearing
          in mind these obvious problems, the Police wish to see the use of
          the north-west terrace at Sheffield Wednesday to accommodate these
          extra supporters. Mr. Broomhead ascertained that no one on the
          Advisory Group disagreed with this course of action.


SSGAAF/1/PGT
CRASH BARRIERS AT SPORTS GROUNDS - BUILDING SURVEYOR'S MEMORANDUM OF   ACTION
24TH OCTOBER

The last two items in the memorandum have been dealt with
(mentioning to Dr. Eastwood about the possibility of stainless steel
barriers and the re-appraisal of the use of circular rather than
flat rails in barriers).  The question of whether a letter should be
sent to Prof. Smith was left to the Head of Administration and Legal
Department.                                                            HALD

DECISION:- To note the memorandum and the action taken.

SHEFFIELD UNITED - THE LPG STORAGE COMPOUND

The advice of the Director of Health and Consumer Services and the
Fire Authority in relation to this proposal was discussed and
accepted.

DECISION:- That the application be submitted to the next meeting of
the General Purposes Panel for determination subject to the comments
of the Director of Health and Consumer Services and the Fire
Service.                                                               HALD

ACCESS FOR AMBULANCES BETWEEN THE NORTH STAND AND THE SPION KOP- AT
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY

The Group considered the correspondence on this matter.

DECISION:- The issue be referred to the General Purposes Panel at
its next meeting and that the view of the South Yorkshre
Metropolitan Ambulance Service be supported.                           HALD

MATCH DAY STAFF AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY

DECISION:- The Advisory Group noted the list of match day staff.

STEWARDING AT SHEFFIELD UNITED AND SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY

It was noted that the schedules to the General Safety Certificates
of both sports grounds may need amending in relation to stewarding.
The Building Surveyor, the Director of Health and Consumer Services
and SYMAS had all commented on this situation and the Fire Service
and the Police indicated that they would do so shortly.

DECISION:- The matter be reconsidered when all comments have been
received.

OWLERTON SPORTS GROUND

A draft General Safety Certificate has been circulated on 31st
October and the Ambulance Service had commented upon it.

DECISION:- To reconsider the Safety Certificate when the various
comments had been incorporated into it as far as possible.

OWLERTON SPORTS GROUND - GENERAL WORKS

It was noted that two sets of proposals had been made in relation to
the main stand terrace by Eastwood and Partners.  The works referred
to in the proposals was being carried out at the moment so as to
expedite the re-opening of the Sports Ground. Comments have been
                                                 - 3 -

                                                                                  ACTION
           received from the Building Surveyor, the Director of Health and
           Consumer Services and the Fire Service in relation to these
           proposals.

           DECISION:- See item 13.

    13.    OWLERTON SPORTS GROUND - ELECTRICAL WORKS

           It was noted that Eastwood and Partners have submitted plans in
           relation to electrical renovations on 9th and 20th October. The
           Fire Service had made comments direct to Eastwoods and there were no
           objections to the proposals going ahead.

           DECISION:- Items 12 and 13 to be referred in principle to the
           General Purposes Panel.

    14.    OWLERTON SPORTS GROUND - HARE CONTROLLER

           It was noted that Eastwoods had submitted plans in relation to the
           escape for the hare controller. Comments have been received from
           the Director of Health and Consumer Services, the Building Surveyor
           and the Fire Service.

           DECISION:- Application be deferred so that the officers comments
           can be further considered. The works need not necessarily be done
           prior to opening of the Sports Ground but it is desirable that they
           proceed as soon as possible.

    15.    OWLERTON SPORTS GROUND - VIDEO CAMERA PLATFORM

           It was noted that Messrs. Eastwoods had submitted plans for a video
           camera platform on 12th September. There were no objections to the
           proposal but the Building Surveyor's memorandum of 6th November
           made various comments about it.

           DECISION:- The Building Surveyor's comments were passed on to
           Eastwood and Partners.                                                 HALD

    16•    OWERLTON SPORTS GROUND - BUILDING SURVEYORS MEMORANDUM OF 24TH
           OCTOBER

           This memorandum outlines a number of points in relation to Owlerton.

           DECISION:- The memorandum be noted.

    17.    SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY - PROPOSED VENTILATION ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE
           NORTH STAND HOSPITALITY SUITE

           Both the Fire Service and the Director of Health and Consumer
           Services are satisfied with the proposed arrangements.

           DECISION:- To note the situation.

    18.    THE PROPOSED SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS FORUM

           The Group noted that a letter had been despatched to Sheffield
           Wednesday and to United and Owlerton in relation to the proposed new
           forum.

     19.   PLANNING APPLICATION (89/2493P) FOR THE PROPOSED USE OF LAND AT
           SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOR A CAR PARK
           DECISION:- This action be noted.


SSGAAF/3/PGT
                                           - 4 .-

                                                                             ACTION

      The Building Surveyor indicated that he would look at the              BUIILDINC
      application.                                                           SURVEYOR

      DECISION:-    Note the application the question of the petrol/oil
      interceptor was again raised and it was noted that the matter was
      still outstanding.                                                     HALD

20.   THE BOUNDARY WALLS AT SHEFFIELD UNITED

      DECISION:- Provided that the Building Surveyor could obtain the
      necessary calculations from Sheffield United the application could     BUIILDINC
      go to the General Purposes Panel on 27th November without further -    SURVEYOR/
      recourse to the Group.                                                 HALD

21.   COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE VARIOUS PARTIES ON THE ADVISORY GROUP
      RELATING TO POLICY ISSUES

      DECISION:- That the policy issues in relation to Safety of Sports
      Grounds be discussed at a future meeting of the Advisory Group.

22.   FIRST AID AND MEDICAL PROVISIONS

      The Director of Health and Consumer Services memorandum of 26th
      October was briefly discussed.

      DECISION:- Refer the memorandum to the General Purposes Panel on       HALD
      27th November.

23.   THE TWO IN RELATION TO PROPOSED MEANS OF ESCAPE FROM THE SHEFFIELD
      UNITED KOP WERE DISCUSSED

      The first proposal (which involves one staircase) was regarded as
      reasonably satisfactory but the Building Surveyor wanted more time
      to study the two proposals.

      DECISION:- Subject to the Building Surveyor's comments the first       BUIILDINC
      application be submitted to the General Purposes Panel on 27th         SURVEYOR/
      November.                                                              HALD

24.   THE POLICE RAISED A NUMBER OF QUESTIONS AT SHEFFIELD UNITED

      (a) There was a problem in the counting computer serving the John
      Street Stand which the Club had agreed to rectify;

      (b) The Police required a better control box arrangement at
      Sheffield United;

      (c) The closed circuit television system at Sheffield United does
      not cover all parts of the exterior of the ground;

      (d)   A ring phone system had been installed at the Sports Ground;

      (e) The Club has extended its public addess system and a test would
      be arranged for it.

      (NOTE:  Mr. Broomhead indicated that the matters raised by the
      Police were dealt with in a document which he had handed to Mr. Ward
      at the beginning of the meeting).
                                                                                       ACTION
      25.       VISIT OF DON VALLEY ATHLETIC STADIUM AND OWLERTON STADIUM

                Mr. Brown mentioned that the General Purposes Panel would visit Don
                Valley Athletic Stadium on 21st November and Owler on 28th November.
                He also mentioned that a report would be submitted to the General
                Purposes Panel on 27th November detailing works required to be
                completed by them.




s s c a a f / s/prrr
                                                                2-7. u-S*?.




                                   REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADHIN1STRATIOM AHP LEGAL DEPARTMENT                                      '
                                                 TO THE GENERAL PURPOSES FAMEL ;

                                                                    EMERGENC? ITEM                            •

                                           SA.?ST7 OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 (AS AMENDED)

                           C a p a c i t i e s o f T e r r a c e A re as a t C e r t i f i c a t e d T o o t b a l l Grounds and in
                 p a r t i c u l a r t h e North West Upper T e r r a c e , S h e t i                     sdnesday F o o t b a l l Ground


                         .In tro d u ctio n             ... „ <.    .
                             .jv;.?■->                                  - - ■                       ”    .*                            ■ i'.-’- 'v i'tV
-‘-P. i         MT-lil. On tfod o ea d ay, 22nd ftewember., 1 98 9 a t                                                   ^Yorkshire
            V            : P o l i c e , O f f i c e r s E ta s th e A d m in is t r a t io n n d % e'ga'lLlD^jutitaeat, the : • ..
                  r : -J-7B«P*trts»ent: of ‘X*bjI ami M a n n in g and t h e Sotttb’:^ « ite li£ x « r ^ P ir e S e r v ic e ’'
     '-•i':.r::T ■ ':-'?^T*c£ended a t Hammerton Road T o l i c e                                                   ■front th e
‘ '■                                    v id e o o f t h e f o o t b * lX m atch t h a t t a i Cafara                B i .la o o r a c ^ r
       <- -         5 * "Sport* Stadium th e t i j i c b e f a ie ,.                                         agjs.^, -

   ./            1 ~ 2 "She P o l i c e h ig h l ig h t e d th e .problem t h a t ta d b een -Jts^ eta ea ced by »
            •' • • : ; number o f .s p e c ta to r s i n che 19orth W est Upper Terracae-^ftf *tb* Ground wod :>■;&
                       "4he - a c tio n th ey fe*d ta k e n t o a l l e v i a t e t h e p r o b l e m * • •. •

                 1 .3     I t » a s s u g g e ste d t h a t in th e a b sen ce o f f u r t h e r d a t a , a r e v is e d
                           c a p a c i t y o f I,SOT be j jla c e d i n t h i s a r e a and t h a t th e Genera 1 S a fe ty
                          i C a r t i r i c a t e in r e s p e c t o f S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a ll Club be amended
                           t o r e f l e c t t h i s . I t w as p o in te d o a t by t h e P o l i c e t h a t i t h e Club had no
                           o b j e c t i o n to t h i s aad th e p r o p o sa l was co n firm ed by .Mr^-Mackrell on.'
                          fee lm tf o f th e Clxtb o n Thursday., 2 3 rd November, 1989.'^^%-; - '• T                                            *
                                                                                          .   .   .                   y-;   ■          '     '
                 1 .4     'The G e n e ra l S a fe ty C e r t i f i c a t e was amended w ith ch e-a p p r o v a l o f che
                          'Chairman o f th e General P u rp o ses P an el on F r id a y , 2 4 th November, 19 89.
                          T a t t a c h a copy o f th e amendment.                                  . .■

                 2.       H a i i d l q g Suryeyor’ s Memorandum o f 23rd November, 1989

                 2 .1     Wr. 'B u tle r informed sgr C h ie f L ic e n s in g O f f i c e r ( S p o r t s G roun ds), Mr.
                          T J e r r i c o t t , in a tele p h o n e c o n v e r s a t io n a t a p p r o x im a tely 1 0 .3 0 a.m . on
                        . 2 3 r d Novem ber, th a t Mr. S tran ge o f M e s s r s . Eastwood & P a r t n e r s ,
                          C o n s u lt in g E n g in e e r s, had spoken to Mr. S h e r r i f f , P r in c ip a l S tr u c tu r a l
                          "E ngineer, D epartm ent o f Land and P la n n in g , and su g g e s te d th a t the plan
                           on w h ich c a p a c i t i e s had b een c a l c u l a t e d f o r th e North West Upper
                           T ex x a ce o f Hie West T e r r a c e was i n c o r r e c t .

                 2 .2     I r . " B u tle r c o n firm e d t h i s i n a memorandum to me d a t e d 23rd November,
                           1 9 8 9 f and r e c e i v e d b y my C h ie f L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r a t 1 1 .3 0 a.m . on 24th
                          "E ovensber, 1 3 W . 1 w o u ld draw j o u r a t t e n t i o n to p a r a g r a p h 8 o f the
                           oaomiin.

                 2.3      “The c a p a c i t y o f 2,'300 was i n c o r p o r a t e d i n t o th e S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e -
                           a f t e r "I r e c e i v e d a memorandum from Che B u i l d i n g S u rv e y o r d a t e d 11th
                           A u g u s t , 1989 ( copy a t t a c h e d ) . T h is amendment was a u t h o r i s e d by the
                           P a n e l a t i t s ta ae tin g on 17 th A ugust , 1989.
                                                                               2-




                     3.                   .       >od & P a r t n e r s

                     3.1     My A s s i s t a n t S o l i c i t o r , M rs. Woodhead, t e l e p h o n e d ' M e ssrs - Eastwood &
                             P a r t n e r s on F r i d a y a f t e r n o o n , 2 4 th Novem ber, 1989 a t a p p r o x i m a t e l y
                             1 ,0 0 p .m . and spoke w i t h a Mr. S t r a n g e .                         . .

                     3.2     Mr. S t r a n g e p o i n t e d o u t t h a t a r e v i s e d p l a n was b e i n g drawn up b a s e d on
                             c a l c u l a t i o n s t h a t had b e e n made t h a t d a y .          He in f o r m e d a y A s s i s t a n t
                             S o l i c i t o r t h a t th e i n i t i a l c a l c u l a t i o n s f o r t h e ■***« ,pmt. t h e c a p a c i t y
                             a t 1 , 5 9 4 . T h is f i g u r e h a s n o t y e t t e e n c c o f I m e d fcy M * * s r s . Z aacvood i

                                                                                -                                                  *U'C "*
           fE//-f::T
                   :'-v.3,3 /My A s s i s t a n t S o l i c i t o r - q u e r i e d w h e th e r o r •                            'i#pion* f;?p;
                               Kop T e r r a c e a r e a w e r e c o r r e c t . Mr* S t r a n g e d > a £ ia e d J ^ h a C ,tbe jp l* a s
                            ' - d e p o s i te d w i th t h e C o u n c il f o r - t t e . 5 p i o a                           ke •««
 ■r€               - V; r e ,           up t o dat e and c o r r e c t * , —             ^
-?i£5
                                         . . . .. J .'%i. f-f/v;                       M'                                5^,. , ..t--.          ,
 V2*               *3 .4 I h a v e w r i t t e n t o M e s s r s . E e e twood * P a r t n e r *                         wt A s s i s t a n t ■
 f-ll   Tl;fe’/I:
                   ; 5,:.     S o l i c i t o r 's te le p h o n e c o n v e rs a tio ii                                                 ■to t h e .
          :/»*; -t        \''.P * n e l m e e tin g oa 2 7 tb H o v en b e r (c o p y l e t t e r i t t i d x d }
-%a> ;/ Br d v u
                    4.      ■ Item s f o r C o n s id e ra tio n                                      ”    * '      Hr          ■ "'

                    4.1      To confirm the actions o f the Chaixnaa im gogj iaic.fi-on «ith the Head o f
                             Administration and Legal Department la aatSiorisi^g the amendment to the
                             G e n e ra l S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e i n r e s p e c t o f S h e f f i e l d Uedafcsctay F o o t b a l l
                             Club r e d u c i n g th e c a p a c i t y f o r t h e S a r tfa W e s t Z e r s a c e U p per fro ® 2 ,3 0 0
                             to 1 ,500»                                -                 .                                                    ■

                    4 .2      To c o n s i d e r w h a t f a r t h e r action, I f Tray., i * ag.eg.ei.in *ie*r o f t h e
                              f o r th c o m in g m a tch on W ednesday, 29 t h H ovesaber, .1SS9-

                    4.3      To c o n s i d e r a s k i n g th e Club t o su b m it a f a i l s e t o f p l a n * i n r e s p e c t o f
                             th e Ground f o r the p u r p o s e s o f r e a a * e s s io g ca'p aci'tiee-

                     5.      Documents A t t a c h e d

                     5 .1     The amended S c h e d u l e o f C a p a c i t i e s in c o r p o x a te d i n t o t h e G e n e ra l S a f e t y
                              C e r t i f i c a t e f o r S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t f a l l Cltifa.

                     5.2      Hie B u i l d i n g S u r v e y o r ' s memoranda d a t e d 1 1 t h A u gu st, 1989 an d 2 3rd
                              November, 1 9 8 9 .

                     5.3      Sy l e t t e r t o M e s s r s , E astwood & P a r t n e r s d a t e d 2 4 th 'November, i9&9.

                     6.       Recommendations

                     6.1      The P a n e l i s recommended t o : -                  _ ..

                              (a)     c o n f i r m t h e a c t i o n t a k e n "by t h e TTnalnaan i n c o n ju n c tio n w i t h t h e
                                      Bead o f Adtai n i s t r a t i o a and "Legal I n r e d u c i n g t h e c a p a c i t y f o r the
                                      N orth West T e r r a c e Upper o f S h e f f i e l d W ed ne sd ay / F o o t b a l 1 Club to
                                      1,500;                                   .                ;
                            (b)    a s k che A d v is o r y Group to p r e p a r e a sec o f p l a n s r e g u l a t i o n s which
                                   ca n be u se d by the Club to draw up a sec o f p l a n s co e n a b l e
                                   c a p a c i t i e s to be r e a s s e s s e d a t the S p o r t s G ro un d.




                                                                                                               M* »ei>ster
         .   -r- t.                                                                            s$M*md ‘'m&iAAm.iniatrmcion
                                     g / 1 -i ,r;                                                                     :f»r£»ent /■m :/:-
                           Hail                                      r-.
                      SHEFFIELD
     . !---F •?..          . . .
     .
             ;*       Ho    ber, 1989


Hi




                      SGIAAD/ JJJ
                                                     SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

                                            SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 197 5

                              NOTICE OF AMENDMENT OF GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE
                                        ISSUED ON 21 ST DECEMBER 1979  .


          1.      TAKE NOTICE THAT THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE ISSUED TO SHEF FIELD WEDNESDAY
                  FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED IN RESPECT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM,
                  PENISTONE ROAD, SHEFFIELD BY SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COOSCIL OS 21 ST
                ’.DECEMBER 1979 (AS AMENDED ON IIT H , 1 8 m AUGUST,; 1989;*HD i 5 M ,

        ss. -
          2
                -SEPTEMBER, 1989) IS HESEBY FURTHER AMEMTX         -

                 The amendment i s as s p e c i f i e d i n A p p e n d ix I . ,

 */•*     3.     M I S AMENDMENT IS ISSUED I T THE SHEFFIELD CI T T COOHOT.. IB RESPECT OF
                 TOE PREMISES DESCRIBED ABOVE BEING A SPORT GROUND DESIGNATES BY ORDER
■S m             UNDER SECTION 1 OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUHDS ACT'1975 AS A SKIRTS
                 GROUND REQUIRING A SAFETY CERTIFICATE.         .                  .    ,

                 The term s and c o n d i t i o n s h e r e b y im p o sed a r e Chase -Which S h e f f i e l d
                 C i t y C o u n c il c o n s i d e r n e c e s s a r y o r e x p e d i e n t Co s e c u r e r e a s o n a b l e
                 s a f e t y a t the S p o r t s Ground when i t i s i n u s e f o r a n a c t i v i t y i n
                 r e s p e c t o f which t h i s C e r t i f i c a t e i s i s s u e d .


                  Hie amendment s h a l l come i n t o o p e r a t i o n on t h e 2 4 th day o f S ovem ber,
                  1989.                                                       , -


                 D ate d th e 2 4 ch day o f N ovember, 1 9 89 .



                                                                    S ig n e d

                                                                                 H r . H. M. W e b s t e r ,
                                                                                 Head o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and
                                                                                 L e g a l D e p a r t m e n t on b e h a l f
                                                                                 o f and d u ly a u t h o r i s e d by the
                                                                                 S h e f f i e l d C i t y C ouncil



                  TO:- S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F o o t b a l l Club L i m i t e d




          HB8 A A I / J J J
                                                  a p p e s s ix i   -   a >:e ::d :i£ :;t



      The S a ie ty C e r t i f i c a t e is s u e d by Che S o uth Y o rk s h ire County C o u n c il on 2 1 s t
      December 1979 and amended on 1 1 th , 1 8 th A ugust and 1 5 th S ep tem b er 1989 s h a l l be
      f u r t h e r amended to r e a d a s f e l l o w s i —

      S c h e d u le 3

     The num ber o f s p e c t a t o r s a d m itt e d t o th e S p o r t s Ground and t o • t h e v a r io u s a r e a s
     o f th e s p e c t a t o r a c c o m o d a t i o n w i t h i n th e S p o r t s Ground s h a l l n o t e x c e e d th e
-K   f o llo w in g f ig u r e s :                                                                                  i.ZSak

         i o n Sop                                                               16,8 0 0
                                      . i,

     - S o u th S ta n d U p p er                                                  5 ,5 6 7

      S o u th S ta n d X n w rr                                                   3,310

      W est S ta n d                                                               4 ,4 6 5

      S o r t h W est T e r r a c e T J p p e r                                    1 ,5 0 0

      Sarcfa S ta n d                                                              9 ,7 0 0


      T o t a l Crowd C a p a c ity                                              41 ,3 4 2




 -5,




      JO/63/DB139
   J53719
                                             CITY OF S H E F F IE L D — M E M D H A H D U M

From        The B u i l d i n g P u r v e y o r ,                            70      A c tin g Head o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n ana
            D e p a r ■ o r i e n t o f L a n d and    P lanning                     L e g a l H e p a r ta e r n :

Date         11th 'A u g u s t, 13S3                                          F or th a   a tte n tio n              c f       M r. D .   Bownas
Rsf.         8S3/AB/J3
Tel Ext     4162 - Mr. S u t l e r                                           Ref.



                                                   S h e f f i e l d W e d nesday F »C „ PL2
                                                    E s tim a te d T e r r a c e C a p a c ity

             I refer to the telephone call between Mr. "Sownes and" agr Principal District
            S u rv e y o r, fir. B u t l e r , -earlier this a f t e r n o o n .               ;
                                                                        :                               4a
            The approximate ■holding capacities-produced for ti*: standing terrace -
            areas do not take account of any turnstile ingress liariltat±-m6«.or
            those of egress or emergency egress limitations since.ifc-2ts:5iy- «isre£anding ■
            that the Fire Authority will consider all these *rtters         ,/tfaat they
            have the primary function of estimation sT terrace gm pm ssdg^     --
                                                                                                                                fr'''
            ,These figures t h e r e f o r e need to be carefully ch eck ed w xlii tir o s e produced
             by the fire 'Authority to ensure that account is ta k e n                  need for__
             any further limitations for the purposes of the proposed-c*rlx£i-caGse
             amendmsst-                                         .

            My c a l c u l a t i o n s b a sed s n the "green jguideM -ssodifaed by the “T » l o r In q u iry
            recommendations _give t s e fsXlcwsusgs--

             1,    Spion Kop                                            18,2130                    ■        - ....    .    '    .

             2,    North West T e r r a c e XVopsrJ                      2«,300           "■           ■’
             3, North West            Co   m e t      JXaafer -             €30            Hfen 7) ' ... .7v

             In.accordance w ith oar crosultations, f i g u r e s "have n o t 'been p ro d u ced far
             Pens one to six of th e West "Terrace,

             1 would a p p r e c i a t e th e -sigrrt o f t h e T ir e A u th o r ity f i g u r e s b e f o r e th e
             C e r t i f i c a t e i s am ended.
                                     CI TY OF S H E F F I E L D — M E M O R A N D U M

from
            The Building Surveyor,                              To     Head of Administration and legal
            Department of torn and Planning                            Department

Date
            23rd November, 1389                                         For the attention of Mr. j. ipr
            BSD/ABu/KTB/R1OADK
Ref.
            4162 - Mr. A. Butler
Tal. Ext.                                                       Ref.




            Safety of Sports teomis          --
                      W ednesday FbotfcaU €2Mo M C                                         .’''I
                                                                                                                       ■?_
                                                                                                     af               m t
            SutegiMt to a xaeeting at B m m e rtx m m o o i Pali43e''Stati^'^i22nd Sbveoiw-
            to'CiisOTSS v a rio u s Mttars arising
                       and Sheffield D o ite d .an, 21st X b o eB b eC iZ lZ tm B m tb i& Ja m isa t o
                     tb e reaomnanded h o ld in g capacity;Scar t h is T o a q E t h c grrmna...-

            You m i l r e c a ll o a t th e present capacxtgr fig u r e s                                     .thin

®8W         tours*, cn l i s t August, 1S89, aod tharefeee o n ly ajapar
            .caxried « t in that' restrictive tiae.,•.

            A site visit earlier today r e r e a M the extent'af~1±ie *
            partially blinded by the screen between the North Wasfe                                  w» ,
            North Stand.                                      .. .-,■;                             . ’ .

            Accordingly that area has bean cndttad & a a the «^oss m ami'Mf e

                       -^'                 ~           -
            Ite holding capacity of the ranaining arms has teas x*r«ileala,,   feaa ;
            modified in accordance with the Taylor xeconmanaati^®»-'.iyDrajig -a xestfifc^K.
            figure of 1,700.             ■      --           .           ' ;.:

            Eastw ood an d P a r tn e r s d ra w in g n m ia ^ 1EL0/64E l a s heeo m s l 'E o r 1± e l a j o e t
            of this area. In a telephone corwersaticn between 'Mr "Stranoe of "&sts»Qofl
            and ‘Partners and nty Principal Structural Engineer, late.taiis'afternoon, at
            was intiaHted that this drawing may not be accurate, ani ttat'the .gross
            available space m y be slightly ssaller than is siKMn cn -£te irawMj_

            Until tbe area has been resurveyed and revised drawings receded, I wooI3
            recctnneoa. that the holding capacity for the Ogper Soriffa fet'ferace "be-a
            maximm of 1,500.                                           ■   51 :

                                                                                             ■■-     -
                                                                                            r •. - .     ..




                                                                                             y‘.l
                                                                                                                     -
                                                  SE/JAS/JAB/11621
          . '                         '           24th        r, 1989


                    " fc » « r*» Z m tweed § l u t z u n ,

                             ^ 3 U id x « f * »                                                        ,
...                         X     l     a         g   f   l   d   d   4    '     ^       i     t


3-"-%—-         t7, ~                                                 «■ —fe-v . %-%•»~ £•__ _L :-*•
                ^ ’y y e r - t h e - e t f a t l e o e f - M r » 3- g t t m p
                  ; » ^ ^ i a $ i 5 ! a » « % ( | S w i ; -js -.rz iV -*■- "* \^ '~ -_i-a'T**r -'sr~'*'
                '.; -{Dear -H r* ^Strange, ,.3 ? ^ s ;irl? -r >,                                                                     k*r-9»t’
      3
                        T he Sheffield Wednesday F o o t b a l l C lub — C a p a c ity

                        1 refer'to y o u r t e l e p h o n e c o n v e r s a t i o n w i t h Mr*. 'Hoodheed x m •the 2 4 th Noveabec,.
                        1 9 8 9 . - 1 coafim t h a c r tf a e C h m lz o f the Cewsral Pac9oe«*‘flaNl 1 m - a u t h o r i s e d -
                        t h e e t h e s a f e t y certificate be am ended t o -r e f l e c t ’t h e --tmccrpm it •tfce-:c»p*eitf--«€:
                        t h e n o r t h -w e st; t e r r a c e ? e h o u ld b e r e d u c e d t o £ 1 ,5 0 0 l a v ie w ^ o t -*5»e crow d .coattail-
                        d i f f i c u l t i e s t h e r e w et* a t t h e B a tc h o n tb e 2 1 a t TSovewber. T L m a d ersta n d t h a t •
                        t h i s a c c o r d s w i t h th e new c a l c u l a t i o n s you h a r e made ' t i t l e             ■ I -look forward
                        to h e a r i n g fro m you w i t h th e r e v i s e d p l a n you h av e p r e p a r e d                z M s ■portion o£ -
                        th e s ta d lu a .

                        As you a r e a v a r e f r o e t h e c o n v e r s a t i o n w ith M rs. V o o d h ea d , ,tS*e Soildlng S u rv e y o r
                        h a s a d v i s e d me t h a t t h e p la n u p o n w h ich t h e o r i g i n a l c a l c a l a d n * wee b a s e d v s s
                        incorrect.- I n v ie w o f t h e f a c t t h a t f r e s h c a l c u l a t i o n s h a v e l e e n a a d e i n
                        r e s p e c t o f ^th e n o r th w e e t c o r n e r , t h i s a p p e a rs to r e s o lv e th e - ju m b le s i n t h a t .
                        r e s p e c t . H ow ever, 1 eat c o n c e r n e d a b o u t th e p la n s and e a lc n la c X o n s f o r th e
                        r e a a l n d e r o f t h e g r o u n d . W ith r e f e r e n c e to t h e Kop a r e a , 1 u n d e r s t a n d t h a t y o u
                        a r e c o n f i d e n t t h a t t h e s e p la n s a r e correct. I w ould b e grateful I f you would
                        confirm t h i s *

                        I mm p le a s e d t o n o te t & a t y o u w i l l be a t t e n d i n g t h e G e n e r a l f t n j o s e s P a n e l
                        J le e c in g a t 2 .3 0 p .m . on Monday, t h e 2 7 th November, s i n c e I am c u r e n e n b e r s w i l l
                        r e q u ir e c l a r i f i c s t i s n o f a l a r g e n u n b e r of m a tte r* a t t h a t o e e c la g *

                        Y ours s i n c e r e l y ,




                        Heaa. at ^epartiett




                        SH20/FW2411
                                                                                                           734004 - H r s . ‘S o»dh»*d
       S H E F F I E L D   C I T   Y   C 0 U N C I L

    PLANNING AND TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

              Meeting held 20th April, 1989


PRESENT: Councillors Skinner (Chair), Mrs. Askham, T. A. Bower,
         Buckley, Butler, Colk, Mrs. Fleming, George, Hartley,
         Ms. Harvey, Howson, Johnson, Mrs. Knight, Lambert, Memmott,
         Moscrop, Ramsbottom,' MsJ Robinson and Saunders.




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
          The Chair, on behalf of the Committee, thanked those
officers who had been involved in various operations following the
disaster which occurred at the Hillsborough Football Ground on 15th
April, 1989, and members and officers stood in silence for a few
moments as a token of respect to those who lost their lives or were
injured in the incident.

DIRECTOR OF LAND AND PLANNING
          The members of the Committee expressed their
congratulations to Mr. R. Jones on his appointment as Director of
Land and Planning.

SOUTH-WEST SUB-COMMITTEE
RESOLVED: That the following minutes, except so far as they relate
to matters delegated to the South-West S-ib-Commit tee, be approved.
(Copy minutes of the meetings of the South-West Sub-Committee held
on 13th March and 3rd April, 1989.)

SOUTH-EAST SUB-COMMITTEE
RESOLVED: That the following minutes, except so far as they relate
to matters delegated to the South-East Sub-Committees be approved.
(Copy minutes of the meetings of the South-East Sub-Committee held
on 15th March and 6th April, 1989.)

NORTH SUB-COMMITTEE
RESOLVED: That the following minutes, except so far as they relate
to matters delegated to the North Sub-Committee, be approved.
(Copy minutes of the meetings of the North Sub-Committee held on
21st March and 11th April, 1989.)

PUBLIC TRANSPORT SUB-COMMITTEE
RESOLVED.: That the following minutes be approved: -
(Copy minutes of the meeting of the Public Transport Sub-Committee
held on 14th March, 1989.)

EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES SUB-COMMITTEE
RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved
(Copy minutes of the meeting of the Equal Opportunities
Sub-Committee held on 22nd March, 1989.)
3EFCR? TO:’            INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS & PROMOTIONS PANEL        •
                                   7             ■                           V'.ii
          .................................................................. ill
                                                                            m
DAZZz
                       25 OCTOBER T989
                                                                             - 4
                                                                                >■
                                                                                 ?■

SUBJECT:                                                                           I-
                       THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: PUBLICITY DEPARTMENT’S
                       RESPONSE                                               :v


ORIGIN:
                       CHIEF PUBLICITY OFFICER


REFERENCE:


                                                                                   ■■
BACKGROUND INFORMATION:




        j   Full details of what constitutes Confidential/Exempt
        I           Information are available on request
                      THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                   PUBLICITY DEPARTMENT’S RESPONSE




IMMEDIATE RESPONSE: THE FIRST 36 HOURS

1.1   The disaster* occurred around 3.00 pm on Saturday -15th April 1989 ar.d
      the first: telephone calls from the media were received by the
      Principal Press Officer at home about 45 minutes later.    He consulted
      the Leader and Chief Executive and put out an official press
      statement via the Press Association .just after 4.00.   Ey 6.30 pm, the
      Chief Publicity Officer and Principal Press Officer had set: up a base
      in the Town Hall, using the Lora Mayor's and Chief Publicity
      Officer's office (which are joined) and four telephones, which wer*
      in consrant use until aftfer midnight.  Radio   and television
      journalists were in pursuit of interviews, plans nfTythe stadium and
      information on safety certificates.             - • 3.-     ...?r

1.2   During the evening it was agreed that the Lord Mayor,' then Councillor
      Phyllis Smith, would set up an Appeal Fund the following day, in
      Sheffield Town Hall.  Arrangements were made for representatives orf
      Sheffield, Liverpool, Nottingham and Nottinghamshire to "be in-
      Sheffield at noon on the Sunday.  Wreaths and floral.^arrangements
      were ordered through the Recreation Department and arrived on Sunday
      morning.

1.3 ' The Chief Publicity Officer's office became the focus for media
      enquiries, arrangements for the Appeal and for general enquiries not
      connected with the Police or Medico Legal Centre.    This meant tiagfc.
      their telephone lines could be kept free for relatives and other-
      enquiries, as all other-- queries were referred to Publicity.   "ISat
      first donation to the Appeal, a beermug of cash collected-by
      Nottingham Forest supporters, was,brought into the office on Sunfe^f
      morning.

1.4. A press conference was called to cover the launch of the Appeal- A
     small civic party, without the media, then went: to Hillsborough
     football ground to deliver wreaths during the afternoon ana then feo
     visit the injured in the Northern General and Hallamshire Hospitals-
     The Chief Publicity Officer and Principal Press Officer continued' t®
     run a limited service until well into the Sunday evening, in an
     effort to respond to the continuing flood of media enquiries. They
     also acted as clearing house for all kinds 'of information, offers of
     help in accommodating relatives etc and ensuring such information was
     passed to radio and television stations.


THE FIRST TWO WEEKS

2.1   On Monday 17th April a small group of officers '.vent to Liverpool to
      sort out the organisation of the Appeal Fund, as Liverpool F.C-.were
      setting up another Fund and we wished to ensure there was rso
      confusion.  This was satisfactorily resolved and a Sheffield trustee,
      Norman Aasetts 0BE, was nominated.

      The Publicity Department subsequently dealt with all aspects of the
      Appeal from the Sheffield end, including a city-wide collection,
      co-ordination of ^events, distribution and collection of collecting

                                                             cont
       receptacles (buckets ana election boxes were pressed into service as
       well as over 1000 tins), and publicising the Appeal through posters,
       stickers and the media.  About 15 members of staff were involved most:
       of the time together with a number of volunteer helpers who presented
       themselves at the reception desk and offered to do anything
       necessary.  A daily lunchtime meeting was instituted with four
       officers : the Chief Publicity Officer, the Principal-Press Officer,
       a Press Officer and an International Officer, tn enable us to keep
       track of what was happening.  These four officers were, fully
       committed on post-Hillsborough work for these two weeks.'

2.2    The Press Office continued to answer enquiries from the media and
       also began to put out statements ana releases of its.own.       In the
       first two weeks, the Press Team dealt with a tremendous volume of
       enquiries from newspapers, radio and television, no1^pn3^y in this
       country but also Europe,'the' United States ana-Aus1»|^a^^dealing
       with all aspects of the Council's involvement,"a s * - c a r r y i n g
       out a large number of interviews t h e m s e l v e s , . a h a recorded,
       on the setting up and running, of the Appeal ftmd.            ' /

2.3    A huge quantity of mail flooded in to the Appeal..M^easral '-and the
       Lord Mayor's office in particular-    (V/e hsui arranged:^for the Lora
       Mayor's address to be published o n Prestel since thejfay;of the
       disaster).   This was opened, sorted and donations--'^cbrtied. All the
       mail had to be read. Donations were paid in'by City'Treasury, whose
       casncounting machines were invaluable.    Staff in City.Treasury
       provided an extremely efficient and cheerful.service in the face of
       tremendous pressure, and we are most grateful to them for their help.

2 .4   A Book of Remembrance was acquired and opened.     "With .volunteer
       labour and Publicity 'Department staff, it was available for signing
       all day in the- foyer of -the Town'Hail, including Saturday 22nd. ana
       29th April. ' Arrangements were made for celebrities, football teams.-
       and various eminent visitors to sign the book and for this to be
       covered by the press.   This 'helped to provide an antidote to the
       scurrilous and distasteful stories then appearing in some sections of •
       the media.

2.5    The Chief Publicity Officer and the Principal Press Officer attended
       a number of daily briefing meetings where the efforts of various
       different departments were reported on and co-ordinated.  This
       assisted with the co-ordination of information and our ability to
       find the right spokesperson at the right time.

2.6    During this period the City was hosting a high level civic delegation
       from our twin town of Anshan, including Anshan’s new Mayor.  Although
       their programme had to be altered because of the disaster, it was not
       curtailed.  The visitors from Anshan signed the 3ook of Remembrance
       and attended the service held in Sheffield Cathedral on 23rd April.


2.7    The normal working of the "Department continued as far as possible,
       with all staff playing their part in spite of constant interruptions
       from camera crews (on a daily basis), volunteers, donors, telephone
       and personal enquiries and VIPs who appeared without warning to see
       how the Appeal was progressing.   Tn the main, staff gave of their
       time voluntarily, putting in considerable extra hours at evenings and
       weekends, and rarely taking lunch breaks.




                                                               cont
         2.3         In addition to arranging for a civic party to attend the service in
                     Sheffield 'athearai, arrangements /.ere = lsc ~.ada to accommodate the
                     Deputy Mayor of cochum, who flew in and wishsc to attend the service
                     in Liverpool Cathedral.  He brought a substantial, donation to the
                     Appeal.



3.       APPEAL CO-ORDINATION
                                 *.
         3.1         Within two weeks of the disaster it was clear that the Department had
                     somehow to try to get back to normal working.     Staff were tired,
                     stressed and eir.crianaiiy affected by the work they had been doing.
                     Approval was sought and obtained for the appointment of an Appeal
                     Co^-orainator and Roy Dixon was appointed to the post on 24th May
                     1989, for a period o f ’.3 months.

         3.2         This appointment took the pressure off the three s t ^ff.in the
                     Department who had been working constantly on the aftermath of the
                     Disas-fcer. The Co-ordinatcr dealt with all the correspondence, made
                     appropriate acknowledgements, provided details to the Leader on other
                     contributing local authorities and to the Trust Fund Manager on
             ,,      donations of over £1,000 and .passed to West Midlands "police letters
                     from those who said they were at Hillsborough at the time of the
                     disaster and therefore may have been witnesses.    ',

         3-3          The 'Co-ordinator then took on the task of co-ordinating all current
                      and fuisxre .activities in relation to the Appeal and. receiving
                     presentations of donations in'-various parts of the country.      The
                      anneal stood at £4 million when he arrived and just under £10 million
                      wien he left at the end of August.    He also looked after the Book of
                      Remembrance ana arranged for 'its presentation to Liverpool FC on 19th
                    • August, ’p.vergool's first match of'the 89/90 season,- by which time it
                      contained 20,000 names.

         3-4         Co-ordination with the Trustees was through the Chief Publicity
                     Officer, who attended their meeting in Sheffield, accompanied them to
                     Hillsborough Football ground and later to a meeting with the Lord
                     IS^yor and those who had helped with the Appeal.   The media were,
                     exceptionally, invited to this event in the Lord Mayor's Parlour, and
                     it j>roved valuable both as a morale booster for staff and an
                     opportunity for the Trustees to say on television what they were
                     doing with the money raised.    The Chief Publicity Officer has
                     .continued to act throughout as unofficial PR and media adviser to the
                     Trustees-

         3.S         On the termination of the Co-ordinator's contract, at the end of
                     August, various separate bank accounts were wound up and consolidated
                     into the main fund account and final contacts were made with the
          .         /Trust Fund Manager and the Liverpool City Council Appeals office and
                     shop.'
     '                    '           ■

         . , ’: V    •"



4.       PUBLIC INQUIRY

         4.1         The Department's involvement with the Taylor Inquiry was small in
                     relation to its involvement elsewhere.  It consisted of these
                     elements.
         4.2         The Design Studio produced a large number of signs, notices, name
                     plates and identification at very short notice.

                                                                            cor.t
     -.2   The Conference and Tourism "anager worked With “he Horrs Cffics
           representatives and Assistant Chief Personnel Cfficer Safety, neaitr.
           and Welfare) on the arrangements for a venue for the Public Inquiry,
           which was finally set up in the Town Hail.

     4.4   The Press Office made ail the arrangements with the media and the
           Central Office of Information for all press facilities during the
           Inquiry.  DUring the course of the Inquiry., the Press Office provided
           an ongoing facility to the media and continued to coordinate the
           Council's response to the media.

     4.5   On the publication of the interin Report of the Taylor Inquiry, the
           Press Office again co-ordinated m edia relations at the Sheffield er.d
           cn behalf of CCI and also issued the necessary press releases and
           statements on behalf if the local airchcriss..

                                                                      wmr
     AFTERMATH            .....                            '   '^

     5.1   The Department has identified a number of areas i n •iluch improvements
           could be made to procedures to ensure that ^conununicataon is better,
           quicker and more effective.   While it.:is not.possIBXe-to be in a
           state of preparedness for a disaster such as Hillsborough there are a
           number of practical steps to be taken, sucii as better use of
           telephone answering machines and mobile phones and a ’duty officer'
           system for press engairies.  A review of these procedures is
           underway.          ...

     5.2   In conjunction with this,, the Chief Publicity Officer, the Director      -
           of Libraries and the;Acting Head of Adain Sc Legal, have briefly
           discussed the information and cojnmunicacion aspects o f our planning
           for peacetime-emergencies, ana*believe there is a further need for
           discussion •at a 'corporate level on how we^ approach this.

     5.3   There are  a number a T lessons to £e learned   on how to deal with the
           public response to such atragedy, and      theChief Publicity  Officer is
           preparing material on this which should be useful if it should be
           needed in the future." Other Issues are raised such as the
           suitability of local authority involvement in fundraising for an
           Appeal if, in t h e final analysis, the -authority may be found at
           fault.               ■'< ■ -


     CONCLUSION            •-     '

     6.1   Apart from dealing with the Trustees,,and-with the small trickle of
           donations still coming in, the Publicity "Department1s response to the
           Hillgborougn Disaster Is now concluded^
                                  ■   ■ _ ,   "        .

     RECOMMENDATIONS.        ^                    :■

     7.1   To note the arrangements made by the Publicity Department in the
           aftermath of the Hillsborough Disaster;.

     7.2   To initiate corporate level discussion on the information and
           communication aspects of our Plan for Peacetime Emergencies.




Shirley Lanstone                                                    9 October 1989
Chief Publicity Officer                                             B :SLJE64
                          HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL


1.   The total raised at 25th September 1989 is £10.5 million.                          The following
     table shows the date at which each million was reached :

           £ million                                Dare (1989)

              1   -                                 24th April
              2                                    28th April
              3                                      2nd May
              4                                    11-th May                                                .
              5                                    23rd May
              6                                      7th June-'                                        ''
              7                                     27th          June -
              8                                     30th          June
             -9                                     27th          July
             10                                     21st          September
                                                                       ", .V .-              .     ■
                                                    . . v ...... -- -   ,            v      - :■
                                                                            ? ; •• V’"..;

2.   Over £0.5 million has been paid-out.   Payments are confidential^' However.,
      the trustees can say that funeral expenses for all but one or laws of tfae
      deceased have been met, and initial payments were made to ail i2ae next taf
     kin of the deceased and to the seriously Injured by the end ofTfe|r_
      Subsequently , payments have been made to those less seriously injured
     where there has been financial hardship and further Interim payments have
     been made, where necessary.


3.   As they were aware of the identity of those killed and seriously injured,
      the trustees have not sought claims from family members. In the case of
      those suffering less serious physical or psychological injury, the
      trustees have had to rely on people claiming. To this end, the Publicity
      Department placed on the trustees1 behalf a number of advertisements in
      the national and appropriate local press, inviting claims. T o date, 650
      such claims have been received and acknowledged.  About % of the 650
      respondents have made a detailed claim and these are currently being
      assessed by a Medical Assessment Panel.


4.    The trustees’ aim is to make a major distribution before the end of 1989.
       This depends in part on the stabilisation of the more serious Injury cases
       and the return of completed applications from those who have registered
       claim. Previous funds established after the Bradford and Zeebrugge
     - disasters reached finality in two years., but'had substantially completed
       their work in about 15 months.


5.    As to the use of "surplus" funds, various ideas have been tentatively
      canvassed, but the trustees believe that this is a matter which can only
      be considered when the major distribution to beneficiaries has.been made
      and there is a clearer idea as to what surplus remains.


Shirley Lanstone
Chief Publicity Officer                             10th October 1989
B :SLCH69
                S H E F F I E L D            C I T Y   C O U N C I L

      MEETING OF THE INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS AND PROMOTIONS PANEL
                                  (POLICY) ■

                                    held 25th October, 1989


         PRESENT:   Councillor Mrs. Barto n (Chair), Betts, Chadwick, Ms.
                    Fiore, Seaton and Mrs. P. Smith.          '
                                                                       ; • -
                                                                          V•
                                                                  ■            "



(1)      MINUTES OF LAST MEETING
                   The Panel received and noted the minutes“of the meetings
         of the Panel held on 31st July and 18th September* ,1989.

(2)      HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: THE PUBLICITY DEPARHffiNT*S RESPONSE
                   The Chief Publicity Officer submitted a report outlining
         the operational measures taken "by her Department: in the immediate
         aftermath of tbe Hillsborough Disaster on 15th April, 1989,
         including the establishment and co-ordination of aa Appeal Fund, the
         attendance of -officers at daily briefings, the organisation of press
         conferences and the involvement of the Department in the
         organisation of the ’Public Tnguiry into the disaster.
         RESOLVED: That {a.) the thanks of this Panel be conveyed to
         appropriate staff in the Publicity Department for work carried out
         by them during the aftermath of the Hillsborough Disaster; and
                   (b)            the Chief Publicity Officer be authorised to initiate
         corporate discossJLoss on the information and communication aspects
         of the City's "Plan for Peacetime Emergencies within the City Council
         and with other organisations involved in the Plan, i.e., the
         emergency services-

(3)      DEBT INFORMATION PROJECT AND HYPOTHERMIA CAMPAIGN
                   The Panel received and noted a report of the Director of
         Libraries and Information Services outlining the work carried out by
         (a) the Council's Debt Information Project which had been
         established to provide advice to people with debt problems and (b)
         the Hypothermia Campaign which had been in operation for several
         years and attempted to alert elderly people to the risks of
         hypothermia and other cold-related illnesses.
                       ■   :•   i   •

(4)      COMMUNITY HAlTOBpflBS
                   The Panel received and noted a report of the
         Communications Co-ordlnator on the steps which had been taken to
         improve the information available in Community Handbooks which had
         been produced to provide information on Council and other services
         for various local communities.

(5)      POLL TAX INFORMATION CARAVAN PROJECT
                   The Communications Co-ordinator submitted a report
         referring to the operation of the City Council's Poll Tax
         Information Caravan which had visited busy shopping centres in the
         City during September and October, 1989 in an attempt to inform the
         public about all aspects of the Poll Tax including Poll Tax
         benefits.
         RESOLVED: That the thanks of this Panel be conveyed to those Council
         employees who provided services in connection with the Poll Tax
         Information Caravan Project..
