ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE


 RESOLVED: That this Sub-Committee is not satisfied with the information provided by the
 applicant to date and, therefore, defers consideration of the application for a maximum period of
 two months, with a request that the applicant (A) supplies, in writing, full details of (1) proposed
 health and safety systems for the operation of the premises, (2) the background, experience and
 intended duties of all persons proposed to be connected with the control and management of the
 premises, (3) how the applicant intends to deal with any problems which may arise particularly
 with reference to drugs, weapons and door and internal security matters and (4) how the applicant
 intends to comply with the licence conditions particularly with regard to the inspection and
 maintenance of the premises etc.;
           (B) enters into detailed discussions with the South Yorkshire Police on door, drugs and
 weaponry control measures, internal security and plans for future liaison with the Police; and
           (C) completes all necessary works required by the appropriate Authorities to the
 satisfaction of those Authorities.

 Hackney Carriage and Private Hire Licensing On-Street Enforcement
           Pursuant to the decision of this Sub-Committee at its meeting held on 22nd August, 1996,
 requesting the City Solicitor and Head of Administration to submit a detailed report containing the
 results of the different measures of enforcement used with respect to Hackney Carriage and Private
 Hire Licensing together with detailed costing and fee implications for the employment of
 dedicated night-time enforcement staff should this Sub-Committee be not satisfied with the results
 obtained by existing enforcement methods, the City Solicitor and Head of Administration
 submitted a report on enforcement activities carried out by his Department, which included
 enforcement exercises carried out in conjunction with the Police in the City Centre both on foot
 and in vehicles and the use of closed circuit television cameras which were now operational in the
 City Centre.
           The report (a) indicated that five prosecutions had been undertaken in 1995 and this had
 increased to 23 in 1996 and that it was likely to increase further in 1997, (b) recommended that a
 temporary post established in 1995/96 for 12 months in the Administration and Legal Department
 to cover the anticipated increased work load in the implementation of the Security Staff
 Registration Scheme, an increase in the number of licences generally and an increase in
 enforcement, should be made permanent and (c) set out the options the Sub-Committee might
 consider for the carrying out of future enforcement activity, namely the use of current levels of on­
 street enforcement within a mix of different types of enforcement, the use of resources solely for
 on-street enforcement or an increase in resources to enable more on-street enforcement.
           Representatives of the Sheffield Taxi Trade Association, the Sheffield Confederation of
 Private Hire Operators and the Sheffield Owner Operators Private Hire Association addressed the
 Sub-Committee. All three of the organisations supported an increase in the level of on-street
 enforcement work and the Sheffield Taxi Trade Association and the Confederation of Private Hire
 Operators supported an increase in the licence fees payable by their members to fund such an
 increase in enforcement, if appropriate.
 RESOLVED: That the public and press, the representatives from the Sheffield Taxi Trade
 Association, the Sheffield Confederation of Private Hire Operators, the Sheffield Owner Operators
 Private Hire Association and Officers of the City Council involved in the preparation of the report
 relating to on-street enforcement be excluded from the meeting before further discussion takes
 place on the matters now raised on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
 transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
 information described in paragraph 14 of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the
 Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to criminal proceedings.
           The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving further information
 on various aspects relating to the proposals contained in the report.

          At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
1043


              ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE


               RESOLVED: That (i) the information contained in the report now submitted, be noted;
                        (ii) the General Purposes Sub-Committee of the Policy Committee be informed of this
               Sub-Committee’s opinion that (A) the existing temporary post of Licensing Officer in the
               Administration and Legal Department as now reported should be made permanent and (B) the
               option and proposals set out in the report now submitted for the employment of additional
               dedicated night-time enforcement staff should be approved; and
                        (iii) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested (A) subject to the
               approval of the General Purposes Sub-Committee of the Policy Committee of additional night-time
               enforcement staff, to take any necessary action to appoint such staff and (B) to facilitate further
               exercises to be undertaken using the closed circuit television system.

               (NOTE: Councillors Ms. Bowden and Mrs. Chadwick left the meeting during the consideration of
               the above item and did not speak or vote thereon.)



               Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held on 23rd January, 1997. Present: Councillors D.
               Jones (Chair), Ms. Bowden, M. C. Brelsford, Mrs. Chadwick, Colk, Hinman, Law, Mrs. Leek,
               Macfarlane, Nazir, Mrs. Newton, Mrs. E. Smith, M. Smith, R. E. Watson and Webster.



       (1)     Apologies for Absence
                       Apologies for absence were received from Councillor Mrs. Walton.

       §(2)    The Guide to Safety o f Sports Grounds - 4th Edition (Draft)
                         The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken,
               in consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, Dr. Eastwood of Messrs.
               Eastwood and Partners and J. Strange of Messrs. Byron Clark Roberts, Architects, in responding to
               the Association of Metropolitan Authorities on the draft of the 4th Edition of the Guide to Safety
               of Sports Grounds (The Green Guide).
               RESOLVED: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
               Administration in responding as now reported to the Association of Metropolitan Authorities on
               the draft of the 4th Edition of the Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds; and
                         (b) the appreciation of this Sub-Committee be conveyed to Dr. Eastwood and Mr. Strange
               for commenting on the draft free of charge.

       §(3)    Safety o f Sports Grounds
               Sheffield Sports Stadium - Owlerton
                         The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken,
               in consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in permitting the opening of
               the Sportsmans Terrace at the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) for use when the Stadium was
               hosting Formula One Stock Car Racing. The report stated that a revised ground capacity of 4,000
               had been set and the new terrace capacity had been established at 1,600. However, further works
               which were planned for the terrace would permit an increase in that capacity.
               RESOLVED: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
               Administration in approving the opening of the Sportsmans Terrace at the Sheffield Sports
               Stadium (Owlerton); and
                         (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to report back to this Sub-
               Committee on the necessary action required to formally amend the prohibition notice now
               discussed and enforced in respect of the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton).
