                                           POLICY COMMITTEE                                           167

submitted a report (a) seeking the approval of this Committee to the proposals contained in the
revised structure for the establishment of two new J.N.C. Scale 3 posts (70% Chief Officer’s Scale)
and (b) giving details of the duties and responsibilities of the two posts which are a Strategic
Planning Manager and a Development Manager heading their respective Units and reporting
directly to the City Treasurer.
r e s o l v e d : That the proposals now submitted for the establishment of two additional J.N.C. Scale 3
posts (70% Chief Officer’s Scale) in the Computer Services Division of the City Treasury be
approved so far as this Committee is concerned and be referred for consideration by the Personnel
Services Sub-Committee.

13 South Yorkshire Joint Authorities
  The Committee received the minutes of a meeting of the South Yorkshire Pensions Authority
held on 6th April, 1989 and meetings of the South Yorkshire Police Authority held on 7th and 21st
April, 1989 and arising therefrom —

            That (a) in connection with item 171 of the minutes of the meeting of the South
re s o lv e d :
Yorkshire Police Authority on 7th April, 1989, the City Council’s representatives who will be
attending the meeting of the A.M. A. Policy Committee to be held on 25th May, 1989 be requested
to inform that meeting that the Council does not support the granting of full A.M. A. membership to
joint authorities, but those representatives be given discretion to support alternatives such as
allowing joint authorities the right of attendance at Association meetings and the right to speak and
vote on issues relating to joint authorities; and

  (b) the City Council fully supports the case being put forward by the South Yorkshire Police
Authority to the Home Office that all the costs incurred by the West Midlands Police in conducting
the police inquiry into the events at Hillsborough on 15th April, 1989 should be borne by the
Government.

14 Hillsborough Tragedy—The City Libraries’ Response
   The Director of Libraries and Information Services submitted a report on the arrangements which
were made by her Department immediately following the tragedy at Hillsborough Football Ground
on 15th April, 1989 for the operation of a ‘Hillsborough Helpline’ service to cope with the many
demands being placed on the Family and Community Services Department for information related
to the tragedy.
re s o lv e d :   That (a) the information contained in the report now submitted be noted;
   (b) the Chief Executive be requested to arrange for a comprehensive report to be submitted to
this Committee (i) detailing the operational action taken by the Council following the Hillsborough
Disaster and the full financial implications thereof and (ii) on the potential for and costs of
extending any existing services/facilities or developing new services and the need for a review of the
Council’s peacetime emergencies plan in the light of the lessons learned and experiences gained
from the disaster; and
  (c) pending the submission of the above-mentioned report, the Chief Executive and the City
Treasurer be authorised, in consultation with the Chair of the Finance Sub-Committee, to approve
any items of expenditure as a result of the actions taken by the Council in connection with the
disaster.

15 Education Programme Committee—Norton College—Contract 5B
  The Chief Education Officer submitted a report and a Project Report Form CP3 giving details of
the proposed rephasings of expenditure in respect of the scheme of the Education Programme
Committee for the carrying out of repairs and remodelling of the former Rowlinson School to
provide teaching and non-teaching accommodation for the new Norton Tertiary College (PPR
Contract 5B).
r e s o l v e d : That approval be given for the purposes of Financial Regulation 11 to the Project Report
Form CP3 now submitted in respect of Contract 5B at Norton College at an estimated total capital
cost of £1,700,000 (£111,193 in 1988/89; £1,235,000 in 1989/90; £335,000 in 1990/91 and £18,807 in
1991/92) to be financed from the Education Capital Programme.
