        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Officers of the International Unit, representatives of the Sheffield Chamber of Commerce and
    the Head of the Department of Russian and Slavonic Studies at Sheffield University, to consider
    a proposed study into the development of trading links with the Soviet Union.
      The Panel expressed their approval of the proposal agreed at the meeting for the Chamber of
    Commerce to fund, with the aid of a grant under the Export Market Research Scheme, a
    one-man study into trading opportunities with the Donbas Area of the Ukraine.
    (5) BOCH UM , W EST GERM A NY— CONFERENCE
       With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 13th July, 1989 (page
    358 of the printed minutes) to approve proposals for the reception of a civic/business delegation
    from Bochum, West Germany, in early 1990, the Principal International Officer submitted a
    report on proposals for the holding in Sheffield in March, 1990 of a joint Sheffield-Bochum
    Conference to be attended by delegates from Bochum, the North Rhine-Westphalia region and
    the Bochum Chamber of Commerce.
      The report indicated that, in addition to the contribution of £5,000.00 already agreed by the
    Panel towards the costs of the programme for the delegation and the contributions of similar
    amounts by both the Employment Programme Committee and the Sheffield Partnership Board,
    applications had been submitted for additional funding from the European Community and
    further reports giving full financial details of the proposals would be submitted in due course.
      Resolved: That approval be given to the proposals contained in the report now submitted for
    the reception of a civic/business delegation from Bochum from 20th-25th March, 1990, and the
    holding in Sheffield of a Sheffield/Bochum Conference with ancillary activities during that period.
    ( 6 ) PITTSBURG H, PENNSYLVANIA
       The Principal International Officer submitted a report reviewing the link between Sheffield and
    its Sister-City of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
       Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted setting out the history and present
    situation of the Sister-City link with Pittsburgh be noted; and
       (b)   approval be given to the proposals contained in the report that (i) any development of the
    link be restricted to specialist areas in which both Cities have a strong interest and (ii) the
    International Unit continue to exercise a co-ordinating and informatory role for the link as well as
    being free to develop appropriate contacts within its own areas of responsibility.
    (7) TELEPHO NE CALLS
      The Principal International Officer submitted a report on proposed arrangements for covering
    business telephone calls made from the homes of Officers of the International Unit.
      Resolved: That the City Council reimburse the Officers of the International Unit with the cost
    of future telephone calls made from their homes in connection with the work of the Unit, as
    outlined in the report now submitted.
    ( 8 ) REQUESTS FO R FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
      Resolved: That a grant of £302.00 be made towards the cost of an educational project entitled
    “Southern Africa: Struggle and Resistance” organised by the Sheffield Anti-Apartheid
    Movement and the Workers’ Educational Association and the necessary associated publicity, as
    set out in the letter now submitted from the Sheffield Anti-Apartheid Movement.

2 General Purposes Panel
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General Purposes Panel,

the following minutes be approved—
      Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 27th November, 1989. Present— Councillors
    Butler (Chair), Hussain, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.
    Also in attendance: Councillor Cromar.
★    ( 1 ) SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
      The Panel considered a number of items relating to the safety of sports grounds. The meeting
    was attended by representatives of the South Yorkshire Police, the South Yorkshire Fire
    Brigade, the Building Surveyor, the Director of Health and Consumer Services, Shefffield
    Wednesday Football Club, Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd., and the Consultant Engineers for the
    proprietors of the sports grounds concerned.
      MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

Crowd Capacities at Sports Grounds
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on action taken to
reduce the permitted crowd capacity of the North West Upper Terrace at the Hillsborough Sports
Ground (Sheffield Wednesday) as a result of the viewing by Officers of the Administration and
Legal Department, the Department of Land and Planning and the South Yorkshire Fire Service
of extracts from a Police video of the football match held there on 21st November, 1989. The
report indicated that the crowd capacity figure for that area in the General Safety Certficate for
the Ground of 2,300 had therefore been reduced to 1,500 with the approvel of the Chair of the
Panel but there remained some doubt as to the correct figure because of possible inaccuracies in
the plans used for the calculations.
  Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration
and Legal Department, in consultation with the Chair, in issuing an amendment to the Certificate
for the Ground indicating a reduced capacity for the North West Upper Terrace of 1,500;
  (b) in view of the possible inaccuracies now mentioned in the plans used for the calculations,
and after hearing from Mr. J. Strange of Eastwood and Partners, Consultant Engineers, a further
reduction to 1,400 in the permitted crowd capacity of the North West Upper Terrace be
implemented; and
  (c) the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group be requested to issue appropriate guidelines
for use by the proprietors of sports grounds in the City in the preparation of crowd-capacity
plans.
        In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act,
(n o t e :
1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, the Chair of the
Committee (Councillor Butler) decided that the above item should be considered as a matter of
urgency, as the matter had arisen after the despatch of the agenda and was of a serious nature.)
Owlerton Sports Stadium
   The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a request from
Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd. for permission to reopen part of Owlerton Sports Stadium for dog
racing, the Stadium having been closed to the public following the decision made by the Panel at
its meeting held on 15th September, 1989 (page 672 of the printed minutes) to issue a Prohibition
Notice under Section 10 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, in respect of the Stadium.
   The report indicated that the part of the Stadium proposed to be re-opened was that
surrounding and including the Panorama Room Complex (the area marked “A ” on the plan
attached to the report) and that the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group had not
recommended the provision of an ambulance at the Stadium in view of the relatively small
numbers expected to attend the events.
  Resolved: That, subj ect to the completion of all necessary works to the satisfaction of the Head
of Administration and Legal Department, authority be given for the issue of (a) a General Safety
Certificate as indicated in the report now submitted and (b) an appropriately amended
Prohibition Notice in respect of the remainder of the stadium.
First A id and Medical Facilities
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on proposals for
complying with Recommendation 40 of Lord Justice Taylor’s interim report on the Hillsborough
disaster, relating to the provision of first aid and medical facilities at sports grounds. Hie report
enclosed two memoranda from the Director of Health and Consumer Services giving detailed
recommendations for such provision.
  Resolved: That (a) the two memoranda of the Director of Health and Consumer Services
attached to the report now submitted be noted;
  (b) the memorandum of the Director of Health and Consumer Services dated 16th November
be referred to the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group for their detailed consideration; and
  (c) the proprietors of Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United) and Hillsborough Sports
Ground (Sheffield Wednesday) be required to provide at their respective grounds the first aid
equipment specified in the memorandum of the Director of Health and Consumer Services of
26th October, 1989, as amended and fully detailed by the report.
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United)
   The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on proposals submitted
by the Consultant Engineers to the Sheffield United Football Club for the carrying out of works
at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground consisting of alterations to boundary walls, the construction
of a new storage compound for liquified petroleum gas, the provision of additional guard rails in
the John Street stand and alterations to the staircases leading from the back of the Spion Kop
terraces.
   The report indicated that the Club hoped to increase the crowd capacity of the Spion Kop
terraces as a result of the latter alterations although no application for an amendment to the
Safety Certificate had yet been received.
     Resolved: That (i) a further report be submitted when revised proposals are available;
  (ii) the proposals referred to in the report relating to the construction of a storage compound
for liquified petroleum gas be approved subject to the agreement of the Director of Health and
Consumer Services and the Chief Fire Officer;
  (iii) the proposal referred to in the report for the provision of additional guard rails in the John
Street stand be approved;
  (iv) subject to compliance with the comments of the Building Surveyor and compliance with
the comments of the Chief Fire Officer contained in his letter of 6th November, 1989,
accompanying the report, the proposed alterations to the staircases leading from the back of the
Spion Kop terrace as shown on the plans now exhibited be approved for completion by 23rd
December, 1989; and
   (v) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to report back in due
course on (A) the proposal of the Sheffield United Football Club Limited to increase the capacity
of the Spion Kop terrace on the completion of the alterations to the exit routes; and (B) the fee to
be charged to the Club for processing an application for the amendment of the General Safety
Certificate for the Ground.
  (b)    the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing a schedule
of works and measures considered to be necessary at Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield
United) following the annual inspection of the Ground carried out in the Summer of 1989.
  Resolved: That the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to serve on
the Sheffield United Football Club PLC a notice under General Safety Certificate Condition 41
requiring the Club to complete by 23rd December, 1989, the works and measures contained in
the Schedule of Requirements at Bramall Lane Sports Ground now submitted, with the
exception of the following items which are to be the subject of further reports to this Panel when
suitable schemes have been submitted on behalf of the Club and considered by the Advisory
Group—
Item No.           Works or Measures Required
7(3)               Hie provision of a system of barriers and hand railing to the upper level of the
                   Bramall Lane Stand
10                 Replacement of defective roof boards over turnstile 69 and making weather
                   proof
10.1              H ie stablising of fencing between the main exit gate and turnstile 69 and the
                  provision of barriers as outlined in the Schedule
13.0              The ramp access to the Kop
13.1              The removal of debris and details of restriction of access to pylon adjoining the
                  ramp giving access to the Spion Kop
13.2              Attention to the Spion Kop terracing as outlined in the Schedule
14.1               Repairs to the perimeter fence in the forecourt area.
Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday)
  (a) the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal of the
Engineering Consultants to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to reinstate the wheelchair
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

ramp which existed between the North Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground and the Spion
Kop terrace, which ramp was removed after the Hillsborough disaster to improve access to the
pitch for ambulances. Attached to the report was a letter from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
Ambulance Service objecting to the proposal on the grounds that if the ramp were reinstated
there would again be restricted access for ambulances at that point. Mr. Mackrell on behalf of
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club indicated an intention to submit new proposals for the
installation of the disabled persons ramp in a different location.
  Resolved: That Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be requested to submit proposals for
consideration by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group at its meeting to be held on 6th
December, 1989.
  (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a letter from the
South Yorkshire County Fire Service on outstanding works required to be carried out at the
South Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground. A copy of the letter was attached to the report.
  Resolved: That the Head of Administration and Legal Department be (i) authorised to amend
Schedule 3 of the Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday) General Safety Certificate
to reduce the maximum capacity of the South Stand upper from 5,567 to 5,120 and of the South
Stand lower from 3,310 to 1,920;
  (ii) authorised to serve a notice upon Sheffield Wednesday Football Club under Additional
Condition 9 requiring (A) an inspection of the South Stand with particular reference to the
comments of the Fire Service in their letter of 24th October, 1989, (B) the submission by
Sheffield Wednesday Football d u b of schemes giving details of work proposed to deal with the
Fire Service comments and (C) Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to specify timescales for the
completion of the works; and
  (iii) requested to report back to this Panel on receipt of the required information.
The Council’s Final Submission to the Hillsborough Inquiry
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing the final
recommendations of the City Council to the Inquiry into the Hillsborough Sports Ground
Disaster.
  The Panel noted the final recommendations now submitted.
Safety o f Sports Grounds Forum
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on proposals for the
implementation of so much of the resolution of the Policy Committee of 26th September, 1989
(page 653 of the printed minutes) as relates to the establishment of a further group, in addition to
the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, to include representatives of the proprietors of
the various sports grounds and recognised supporters’ clubs, to be chaired by an elected member
of the City Council and whose function would be to make representations to the Advisory Group
and through it to the Council on matters of particular concern to the group.
  Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal contained in the report for the
establishment and operation of the Safety of Sports Grounds Forum;
  (b) the Forum be chaired by the Chair of this Panel, Councillor Butler; and
  (c) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to report back to this
Panel in the matter when the various consultation processes for the Forum have been completed.
Survey o f Football Supporters
  The Panel received the results of a Survey of Football Supporters carried out by the
Communications Unit of the Publicity Department on behalf of the Football Supporters’
Association and requested the Communications Co-ordinator to report further on the survey at
their next montly meeting.
Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
  The Panel received and noted a report on the proceedings at a meeting of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Advisory Group held on 9th November, 1989.
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

★ (2) HACKNEY CA RRIA G E FARES
  Revision o f Fares
    With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 30th October, 1989
  (page 810 of the printed minutes) to approve a revised table of hackney carriage fares to be
  implemented as from a date to be arranged, the Head of Administration and Legal Department
  reported on objections which had been received to the revised table of fares. The Panel received
  copies of the letters of objection and the objectors and the Secretary and Vice-Chairman of the
  Sheffield Taxi Trade Association attended the meeting to speak on the objections.
      Having considered the representations of the objectors and the Sheffield Taxi Trade
    Association, the Panel—
      Resolved: That the revised table of hackney carriage fares approved by this Panel at its
    meeting held on 13th October, 1989, be brought into operation as from midnight on the 27th/28th
    November, 1989.
    Annual Review
      The Panel deferred consideration of a proposal that hackney carriage fares be reivewed
    annually on a particular date.
★ (3) CINEMA EXHIBITIONS
  Confirmation o f Action
    Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration and
  Legal Department in consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in authorising the public
  exhibition in Category “Sheffield 12” of the film “My Left Foot” .
    Film Categories
       Resolved: That the request of the Senior Film Officer now submitted for permission to exhibit
    in Category “Sheffield 15” films bearing an “X” Certificate of the former British Board of Film
    Censors, be granted.
    Cruelty to Animals
      The Senior Film Officer reported on a 15 minute film entitled “Le Sexe Enrage” which
    included a scene involving actual cruelty to an animal, the public exhibition of which would
    contravene Section 1 of the Cinematograph Films (Animals) Act, 1937.
       The Panel expressed its support of the Senior Film Officer’s declared refusal to exhibit any
    films the production of which involved actual cruelty to animals.
★ (4) GAM ING ACT 1958— AMUSEMENTS W ITH PRIZES
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on the following
  applications for permits for the provision of amusements with prizes—
    Applicant                Premises



      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that, as the premises concerned
    were accesible to the public, they did not comply with the Council's policy for the granting or
    renewal of applications for permits for the provision of amusements with prizes as set out in the
    resolution of the Panel of the 5th September, 1988 (page 521 of the printed minutes).
      Resolved: That the two applications now submitted be refused in accordance with paragraph
    7(b) of Schedule 9 to the Gaming Act, 1968 as it is the duty of the Council to refuse applications
    which do not comply with the above-mentioned resolution of 5th September, 1988.
★    (5)   NURSES AG EN CIES A C T , 1957— LICENCES
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

★   ( 6 ) SEX ESTABLISHMENT
      H ie Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application to
    renew the sex establishment licence issued to
               stating that no objections to the application had been received and there had been no
    material change in the character of the area surrounding the shop.
      Resolved: That the application now submitted be granted for the period ending 31st October,
    1990.
★ (7) STREET COLLECTIONS
    Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Adminstration and
  Legal Department, in consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in issuing street collection
  permits as follows—
    Applicant            Organisation                 Location                      Date
                         CPSA Hardship Fund           Castle Square                 18.11.89 and
                                                                                    25.11.89
                        Ambulancemen’s                City Centre and               11.11.89
                        Hardship Fund                 Hillsborough
                        Ambulancemen’s                City-wide                     14..11.89 to
                        Hardship Fund                                               31.12.89
                                                                                    or till cessation
                                                                                    of dispute if
                                                                                    earlier

    3 Trading Services Panel
    r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Trading Services Panel,
    the following minutes which incorporate the amendment now made at this meeting, be
    approved—
      Meeting of the Trading Services Panel held 30th November, 1989. Present— Councillors Ms.
    Fiore (Chair), Crowder, Godber, Moore, Moscrop, Mrs. Nelson and White.
    (1 )   CENTRAL SUPPLIES ORGANISATION
    New Business
      The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on new business ventures by the
    Development and Marketing Section of the Central Supplies Organisation including the
    launching at the Design and Technology Education Exhibition held at the National Exhibition
    Centre in Birmingham from 19th-21st October, 1989, of a new educational product—“Tri­
    gears” .
      The Panel congratulated the staff of the Development and Marketing Section on their
    initiatives now reported.
    Supply o f Gas
      With reference to the decision made by the Municipal Enterprise and General Services
    Programme Committee at its meeting held on 3rd August, 1989 (page 361 of the printed
    minutes), the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on revised schedules for
    the supply of gas recently announced by British Gas pic.
       Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
      (b) the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be requested to assess and evaluate, in
    consultation with officers of the Council Departments as appropriate, the new optional terms
    offered for the supply of gas and to report his recommendations back to this Panel as soon as
    possible; and
       (c) the report be submitted to the Technical Services Panel of the Policy Committee for
    information.
    Window Cleaning Contracts
      The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on a proposal for the extension
    of the existing window cleaning contracts in view of the fact that his discussions with officers of
      MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  the Cleansing Services Department, the Education Department and the Property Services
  Division of the Department of Land and Planning on the drawing up of specifications for window
  cleaning contracts were still in progress.
    Resolved: That (a) the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be authorised to extend, in then-
  present form or with necessary adjustments, the Council’s existing contracts for the cleaning of
  windows pending the drawing-up, in consultation with officers of the appropriate Council
  Departments, of final specifications for window cleaning contracts;
    (b) such extensions to the existing contract (i) be for a period of one year, (ii) include
  provisions for the Council to add premises to or delete premises from the lists relating to
  individual contracts and to alter the extent and frequency of cleaning as necessary and subj ect to a
  negotiable price adjustment; and
   (c) the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be requested to continue to liaise with user
  Departments as appropriate and keep this Panel informed of developments in the matter.
  (2) MARKETS
  Action taken under Delegated Powers
    The Panel received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, on action which he
  had taken under delegated powers for the letting of stalls in Exchange Street, The Market Place,
  Crystal Peaks Shopping Centre and Sheaf Market.
  Staffing
     Resolved: That approval be given to (a) the proposal contained in the report of the General
  Manager, Markets, now submitted for the creation in his Department of a post of Secretary/Clerk
  in Scale 3/4; and
    (b) the job description for the post, now submitted and as now amended.
  ( n o t e : The job description was amended by the deletion of paragraph 12 relating to the
  arrangement of visits and meetings.)
  Revenue Budget
    The Panel received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, on the monitoring of
  his Department’s revenue budget for the current financial year.
  (3) CATERING SERVICE
    The Assistant Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the
  proposed replacement of banquet cutlery for use at the City Hall and Thombridge Hall and in the
  general banquet service and the A la Carte Restaurant.
    Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal contained in the report now submitted for
  the replacement, at an estimated net cost of £10,330, of the Council’s banquet cutlery; and
    (b)    authority be given for the placing of the necessary order prior to the confirmation of these
  minutes by the Programme Committee and the City Council, in order to take advantage of the
  price now quoted.
  (4) CENTRAL TRANSPORT SERVICE
    The Transport Manager submitted a report on the monitoring of his Service’s revenue budget
  for the current financial year.
    Resolved: That approval be given to the proposals contained in the report now submitted for
  the Transport Manager (a) to increase charges to customer Departments by 3% on the hourly
  rate together with an increase in the standing charge and (b) to take action to improve the quality
  of financial control within the Service in order to permit more structured management action.
  ( n o t e : Item 4 on the Agenda relating to a report of the Printing Services Manager on the present
  position of Design and Print was withdrawn from consideration.)

4 Positive Action for Women
  The Committee received a report produced by the Head of Administration and Legal
Department in consultation with his Department’s Women’s Group on Positive Action for Women
and considered the following resolution of the meeting of the Women’s Panel of the 10th
November, 1989 (page 813 of the printed minutes)—
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

“That this Panel expresses concern at the lack of corporate resources for the provision of a legal
advice service on equal opportunities issues and that the Policy Committee and the Municipal
Enterprise and General Purposes Programme Committee give further consideration to how such a
service might be provided.
reso lv ed: That (a) the officers responsible for the production of the report now submitted be
congratulated on the excellence of the report;
  (b) the contents of the report and the resolution of the Women’s Panel now reported be noted;
and
   (c) the Personnel Service Sub-Committee be requested to give consideration to the suggestions
raised in the report for corporate discussion.

5 Ombudsman Expenses
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a request from the
Commission for Local Administration in England for the payment of a further sum of £2,894.94 in
addition to the sum of £20,009.56 paid earlier in 1989 as the Council’s contribution to the financing
of the Ombudsman Scheme for the year 1989. The report enclosed a letter from the Commission
explaining that the additional sum requested arose from the fact that the Department of the
Environment had now advised that certain public bodies which had been brought within the Scheme
would not be required to contribute until 1990 when new financial arrangements for the Scheme
were to be introduced.
       : That (a) approval be given to the payment of the additional contribution to the
reso lv ed

Ombudsman Scheme now reported; and
  (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to make appropriate
representations pointing out the difficulties raised for local authorities by such a large increase in
contributions to the cost of the Service.

6 Town Hall and Annexes
Security
  Further to his report to the Committee at its meeting held on 19th September, 1988 (page 525 of
the printed minutes), the Director of Land and Planning submitted a report on progress in the
implementation of security provisions in the Town Hall complex.
  The Committee noted the report.
Planning Permission
r e s o l v e d : That, for the purposes of Regulation 4(1) of the Town and Country Planning General
Regulations, 1972, an application for planning permission be submitted in respect of the proposed
provision of a new reception facility in the Town Hall Extension.

7 Contract Advisory Unit
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the role and objectives
of the Contract Advisory Unit.
        : That (a) the role and objectives of the Contract Advisory Unit be as set out in the report
reso lv ed
now submitted;
  (b) the preliminary targets of the Unit be those listed in the annex to the report; and
  (c) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to submit a further report at
the end of the current financial year reviewing the targets in the light of working experience.

8 Sheffield Council for Racial Equality
  The Director of Land and Planning submitted a report on the financial aspects of the transfer to
new premises at 108 The Moor of the staff of the Sheffield Council for Racial Equality.
reso lv ed : That (a) approval in principle be given to the increase of the Council’s grant to the
Sheffield Council for Racial Equality to cover increased running costs and service charge as outlined
in the report now submitted;
  (b)    the City Treasurer be requested to report back on how such increase of grant is to be financed;
and
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  (c)    the Sheffield Council for Racial Equality be informed that the City Council considers that the
cost of the proposed shelving, carpeting and the provision of new office equipment at the new
premises should be met from the compensation payable by the Department of Land and Planning.

9 Civic Cars
  The City Treasurer submitted a report on the replacement of the Jaguar Saloon in the fleet of civic
cars by a 1988 Daimler Sovereign at an estimated net cost of £16,150.00.
reso lv ed: That (a) approval be given to the action taken by the City Treasurer as now reported in
authorising the replacement of the Jaguar Saloon by a Daimler Sovereign; and
  (b) the Project Report Form CP3 now submitted be approved for submission to the Policy
Committee.

10 Petition
reso lv ed: That the petition now submitted, signed by 47 residents of Westfield and objecting to
noise and vandalism arising from the “disco” at The Mill Public House, Westfield, be referred for
consideration by the General Purposes Panel.

11 Central Supplies Organisation
  The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on the proposed provision of
computer equipment at an estimated annual cost of £500,000.00 to enable the Central Supplies
Organisation to share with the Works Department the capacity of an upgraded facility at the Town
Hall under the direction of the Computer Services Division of the City Treasury.
r e s o l v e d : That (a) approval be given to the proposal contained in the report now submitted for the
installation of computer equipment for use by the Central Supplies Organisation; and
  (b)     in the circumstances now reported, authority be given for this resolution to be acted upon
prior to confirmation by the City Council.

12 Magistrates’ Court
          : That Alison Grace Clark, John Fairhurst and Richard Waller, Articled Clerks in the
r eso lv ed
Administration and Legal Department, be authorised under the provisions of Section 223 of the
Local Government Act, 1972 to represent the City Council in appropriate cases before the Sheffield
Magistrates’ Court.

13                    Financial Services Manager
    Tie Chair reported
                    ia that
                       t                   ^ Financial Services Manager in the City Treasury, was
attending his last meeting of the Committee before taking up a placement as Finance Director of
Sheffield for Health Limited.
  The Committee thanked Mr. Evans for his past services and offered him their best wishes for the
future.

14 Exclusion of the Public and Press
reso lv ed: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on
the remaining item of business to be transacted on the grounds that if the public and press were
present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in paragraph 1 of
Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access
to Information) Act, 1985, relating to particular employees.

15 Administration and Legal Department
   With reference to the decision made by the Committee at its meeting held on 13th March, 1989
(page 1403 of the printed minutes) fixing the grades of the Assistant Heads of the Department, the
Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a further report on the departmental
structure and accommodation relating to the Head and Assistant Heads of the Department and
their secretarial support.
reso lv ed    :   That approval be given to the proposals contained in the report now submitted for—
  (a)    the regrading of the post of Assistant Head of Department (Administration) from JNC3 to
JNC2 with effect from 1st January, 1990 and the consequent regrading of the vacant post of
Assistant head of Department (Legal) from JNC2 to JNC3;
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

(b) the creation of a new post of Secretary to the Assistant Heads of Department on Scale 4; and
(c) the alteration to the management suite of offices outlined in the report.
