        ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                               979

★    (7 ) HACKNEY CARRIAGE FARES
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report stating that an application
    had been received from the Sheffield Taxi Trade Association to increase hackney carriage fares
    by 10% and to make certain changes to the charging policy. Attached to the report was a
    statement giving an indication of projected fares if a 10% increase was introduced, compared to a
    6.2% increase, such figure representing the rise in inflation since the last review of hackney
    carriage fares in October 1990. Mr. Woolhouse and Mr. Harrison of the Sheffield Taxi Trade
    Association addressed the Panel on the merits of their case.
      Resolved: That, subject to no objections being received, approval be given for hackney
    carriage fares to be increased as soon as possible in accordance with the scale of charges given
    below, and that the current practice of making an additional charge for hirings at Bank Holidays
    and between midnight and 6.00 a.m. be deleted and replaced by an additional charge to be levied
    for the Christmas Bank Holiday period only on 24th, 25th, 26th and 31st December, 1991 and 1st
    January, 1992.
    Distance
    For the first 216 yards or part                                                        90p
    For each additional 216 yards or part                                                  lOp
    Extra Charges
    Hirings commencing on 24th, 25th, 26th and 31st December and 1st January               £1
    Hirings commencing between 10.00 p.m. and 6.00 a.m. on any day                         40p
    ( n o t e : The existing charges are 90p for up to 230 yards and lOp for every subsequent 230 yards or
    part. The existing Bank Holiday charge (50p) and midnight to 6.00 a.m. charge (40p) are both
    deleted; no change is proposed in the waiting time charge.
    (8 ) INCREASE IN FEES
      The Panel received a letter dated 30th October, 1991 from the Home Office which stated that
    fees had been increased for the registration of pools promoters, track betting licences, permits for
    amusements-with-prizes and the registration of society lotteries and arising therefrom it was—
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the letter now reported be noted; and
      (b) fees in respect of track betting licences be considered at a future meeting of this Panel and
    be reviewed with effect from 1st April, 1992.
★ (9) NURSES AGENCY LICENSING
    Resolved: That, in the circumstances outlined in the applications now submitted on behalf of
  the applicants by the City Solicitor and Head of Administration, approval be given for the
  following to operate as nurses agencies—
    Applicant                                         Premises
    Allied Medicare Nursing Services Limited          209 Twentywell Lane.
    KM Medical Services, Sheffield                    654A Manchester Road.
    HMS Personnel Services                            2nd Floor, CMA House, 24 Castle Square.
    ( n o t e : At this point in the proceedings Councillor Mrs. Shepherd returned to the meeting and
    Councillor Whitfield joined the meeting.)
    (10) DESIGNATION OF SPORTS GROUNDS AND REGULATION OF SPECTATOR STANDS
      Pursuant to the decision of this Panel of 1st November, 1991, the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration submitted a report on the purpose and effect of designation of sports grounds by
    the Home Office and the regulation of spectator stands.
      The Committee noted the information contained in the report.
★ (11) HILLSBOROUGH SPORTS GROUND-HALF YEARLY INSPECTION
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken in
  consultation with representatives of the Public Safety Unit of the City Council, in authorising
  minor works to be carried out to the South Stand Roof at Hillsborough Sports Stadium, following
  the half-yearly inspection of the premises.
    980    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

        Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
      Administration in authorising the minor works now reported to the South Stand Roof at the
      Hillsborough Sports Stadium; and
        (b) the fact that unless in the interim special circumstances arise, no further inspection of the
      South Stand Roof will be required as it is due to be replaced in the close season 1992, be noted.
    ★ (12) FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY-SEATING WITH A RESTRICTED VIEW
         The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report (a) enclosing a copy of a
      letter which he had sent following discussions with the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds
      Advisory Group, to the Football Licensing Authority in response to their Consultation
      Document No. 1 entitled “Seating with a Restricted View” and (b) inviting any further comments
      which this Panel might wish to make on the Consultation Document now submitted.
        Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
      Administration in sending the response now submitted, which incorporates the recommendations
      of the Council's Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, to the Football Licensing Authority.
    ★ (13) THE FOOTBALL STADIA ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL
        The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on the Football Stadia
      Advisory Design Council (FSADC) a new organisation which had been established in accordance
      with the recommendations contained in the final report of Lord Justice Taylor and which aimed
      to provide information relating to safety at sports grounds. He stated that the Design Council had
      recently produced two documents, both of which had been obtained by the City Council, and he
      had contacted the FSADC to ensure that all future publications were notified to the Chief
      Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds).
          Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
        (b)    the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to inform this Panel of future
      publications by the FSADC.
    ★ (14) SHEFFIELD SPORTS STADIUM (OWLERTON)-LASER CLAY PIGEON SHOOT
         The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on the action he had taken,
      following consultation with the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group and the
      Director of Health and Consumer Services, in authorising the amendment of the General Safety
      Certificate issued in respect of the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) to permit a laser clay
      pigeon shoot which was originally scheduled to take place at the Stadium on the 16th and 17th
      November, 1991 but which would now be held in April, 1992.
        Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
      Administration in authorising the amendment of the General Safety Certificate issued in respect
      of the Sheffield Sports Stadium to permit a laser clay pigeon shoot as described in the report and
      appendices now submitted, to take place at the Stadium.
★ (15) SHEFFIELD SPORTS STADIUM (OWLERTON)—STEWARDING
    Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration, in consultation with the Council's Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in
  amending the General Safety Certificate issued in respect of the Sheffield Sports Stadium
  (Owlerton) to reduce the minimum requirement for Safety Stewards at Greyhound Meetings and
  other specified sporting events, other than speedway, in accordance with Sections 2.3 to 2.5 of the
  report now submitted.


        Meeting of the Licensing Panel held 9th December, 1991. Present— Councillors Butler
      (Chair), Chaplin, Mrs. Midgley, Ms. Sheldrick, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. P. M. Smith and Webster.
★      (1 ) HACKNEY CARRIAGE LICENSING-REVIEW OF LIMITATION POLICY
        Following the decision of this Panel of 5th July, 1991 to continue its practice of limiting the
      number of hackney carriage vehicle licences (page 323 of the printed minutes), the City Solicitor
      and Head of Administration submitted a report stating that since that time, there had been a
      change in circumstances which might warrant a review of that decision. The report outlined four
      areas of concern, namely the illegal plying for hire by private hire vehicles, the condition of
      hackney carriage vehicles, the provision of wheelchair accessible taxi cabs and passenger waiting
        ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                981

    times. Mr. L. Harrison, Secretary of the Taxi Trade Association, addressed the Panel and he (a)
    outlined the problems being encountered by his members with regard to the illegal plying for
    trade by private hire vehicles in the City Centre, (b) stated that a number of hackney carriage
    vehicles had been converted to carry wheelchair passengers, (c) described the enforcement and
    limitation policies adopted by other local authorities and (d) referred to the study previously
    undertaken by Steer Davies and Gleave on behalf of the Sheffield Taxi Trade Association on the
    demand for taxi services in the City.
      At this stage in the proceedings, the Panel—
      Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before a decision is made on
    the proposal now under consideration on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to
    be transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
    information described in paragraph 12 of tide Local Government Act 1972, as amended, relating
    to legal matters and advice.
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
    aspects relating to the limitation of hackney carriages in the City.
      A t this stage in the proceedings the public and press were re-admitted to the meeting.
      Resolved: That (i) no action be taken at the present time on the hackney carriage limitation
    policy; and
      (ii) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to submit a report to a future
    meeting of this Panel on corporate issues relating to the taxi and private hire trade as part of an
    integrated transport policy for the City.
★    (2) VISITS TO DESIGNATED AND REGULATED SPORTS GROUNDS IN THE CITY
      Pursuant to the decision of this Panel of 29th November, 1991, the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration submitted a report on visits by members of the Panel to designated and regulated
    sports grounds in the City during the performance of an event and he stated that whilst
    approaches in this regard had been made to both league football clubs in the City and to the
    Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton), he considered that since the visit to Don Valley Stadium
    would need to take place six months into the future, it would be more appropriate to hold
    discussions with them nearer the event. For reasons of safety, the number of members visiting the
    football stadia at any one time would need to be restricted to two, but in the case of the Sheffield
    Sports Stadium, two visits could be arranged early in the New Year, with half the members of the
    Panel visiting on each occasion.
     At this stage in the proceedings the meeting was adjourned briefly and upon resumption of the
    meeting it was—
       Resolved: That (a) the Chair of this Panel, together with Councillors Mrs. Midgley, Mrs.
    Shepherd, Mrs. E. Smith (or their nominees) and one opposition member be appointed to each
    visit a match at Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football d u b s, respectively, in
    accordance with the arrangements now discussed and to report their findings to this Panel;
      (b) the attendance by members on the visits be recognised as an approved duty for the
    purposes of the payment of appropriate allowances under the Members’ Allowances Scheme;
    and
       (c) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to (i) make the necessary
    arrangements with the respective football clubs for the visits referred to in (a) when requested by
    the members detailed above, (ii) arrange two visits to the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) to
    enable the members of this Panel to inspect the Stadium during a live performance and (iii) take
    appropriate steps to include the visits as approved duties for the purpose of the payment of
    attendance allowance in the scheme for members’ allowances.

4 Environmental Services and Standards Sub-Committee
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Environmental Services and
Standards Sub-Committee, the following minutes be approved—
      Meeting of the Environmental Services and Standards Sub-Committee held 18th December,
    1991. Present— The Lord Mayor (Councillor Mrs. Askham), Councillors Mrs. Midgley (Chair),
    Butler, Mrs. Fleming, Hartley, J. Moore, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. P. M. Smith and Ms. Whitty.
982     ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  (1 ) PROMOTION OF CLEANSING SERVICES
    Pursuant to the decision of this Sub-Committee of 20th November, 1991, the Director of
  Cleansing Services submitted a report on a presentation which it was proposed to be made to
  promote cleansing services amongst Housing staff and tenants.
     Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the programme now submitted for a presentation to be
  made on the services, policies and practices of the Cleansing Services Department to Housing
  Department staff and tenants and that two trial sessions be organised to take place in the current
  financial year; and
    (b) the Director of Cleansing Services be requested to (i) write to the Director of Housing and
  Area Housing Officers, together with the Tenants’ Federation, in order to outline the programme
  now agreed and ascertain the level of interest, giving due regard to achieving a spread of
  bookings across the City to reflect areas of social and operational need and (ii) ensure that any
  provision is made within the resources available and is subject to the demands brought about by
  the introduction of the wheeled bin service.
  (2) WHEELED BIN BAGS
    The Director of Cleansing Services submitted a report on trials which had been undertaken on
  a bin liner for possible use with the wheeled bin. He stated that the bin bag caught in the lifting
  mechanism during emptying procedures and was not suitable for holding the quantity of waste
  which could be disposed of in the wheeled bin.
      Resolved: That (a) the sack now reported be not purchased by the Authority; and
   (b) the Director of Cleansing Services be requested to investigate systems used by other Local
  Authorities and report back to a future meeting of this Sub-Committee.
  (3) ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ACT—EXPENDITURE
     The Sub-Committee received a report submitted by the Director of Cleansing Services
  detailing additional work undertaken by the Contractor with regard to litter bin emptying and
  street cleaning since his report to the Environmental, Health and Consumer Services Programme
  Committee of 17th October, 1991, (page 627 of the printed minutes) and arising therefrom it
  was—
    Resolved: That the Director of Cleansing Services be requested to hold monthly meetings with
  the Chair and Deputy Chair of this Sub-Committee (Councillors Mrs. Midgley and Ms.
  Sheldrick) in order to determine how expenditure on duties resulting from the Environmental
  Protection Act additional to those already agreed should be allocated.
  (4) CIVIC AMENITY SITES—RECYCLING OF CARDBOARD
    The Director of Cleansing Services submitted a report stating that cardboard recycling trials
  were taking place over a five month period at the civic amenity sites of Blackstock Road and
  Beighton during the winter utilising the compaction units located at those sites.
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
     (b) the Director of Cleansing Services be requested to submit a report to a future meeting of
  this Sub-Committee on the progress made on the cardboard recycling trials.
 (5) SITE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCES-ST. MARY’S LANE, ECCLESFIELD
   The Director of Cleansing Services submitted a report proposing that the site of public
 conveniences located at St. Mary’s Lane, Ecclesfield, be declared surplus to requirements, since
 the toilets had been closed and boarded up.
   Resolved: That (a) approval be given for the permanent closure of the public conveniences
 now reported and located at St. Mary’s Lane, Ecclesfield;
   (b) the site be declared surplus to the requirements of the Environmental, Health and
 Consumer Services Programme Committee and be referred for the attention of the Property
 Services Manager for ultimate disposal; and
   (c) the Director of Cleansing Services be requested to submit to the next meeting of this
 Sub-Committee, a map of the existing toilet network in the City.
