Section 20 makes similar provision with regard to persons presenting or
directing the performance of a play involving the use of threatening or abusive
or insulting words and provides the similar defences.  The section does not
apply to rehearsals or a performance given so that a recording may be made of it
or so that it may be broadcast. A mere actor is not to be treated as presenting
a play unless without reasonable excuse he performs otherwise than in accordance
with the director's instructions.

Section 21 applies similar provisions to a person who distributes or shows or
plays a recording of visual images or sounds which are threatening abusive or
insulting.

Section 22 provides that in the case of programmes which are broadcast or
included in a cable programme service which involve threatening abusive or
insulting visual images or sounds the persons providing the broadcasting or
cable service, the producer or director of the programme, and any person by whom
offending words or behaviour are used are all guilty of an offence. The section
does not apply to the broadcasting of programmes by the BBC or the Independent
Broadcasting Authority (these are covered by similar provisions with Cable and
Broadcasting Act 1984). There are specific defences for people who are not
shown to have intended to scir up racial hatred.

Section 23 provides that a person commits an offence who has in his possession
written material or a recording which is racially inflamatory with a view to its
being displayed, published, distributed, or broadcast if he intends racial
hatred to be stirred up or if, having regard to all the circumstances, it is
likely to be stirred up. Where the defendant is not shown to have intended to
stir up racial hatred it is a defence to prove that he was not aware of the
content of the offending material and did not suspect and had no reason to
suspect that it was threatening abusive or insulting.

Section 24 provides that a warrant may be grainted giving powers of entry and
search for racially inflamatory material.

Section 25 provides that a Court by or before which a person is convicted of an
offence under Section 18 relating to the display of written material or an
offence under Section 19 (publishing or distributing written material) or 21
(distributing showing or playing a recording) or Section 23 (the possession of
racially inflamatory material) may order that any material or recording produced
to the Court shall be forfeited.

Part IV Exclusion Orders

This part of the Act deals with misbehaviour in connection with football matches
and permits a Court convicting a person of certain offences to make an order
prohibiting him from attending any association football match prescribed by the
Secretary of State. An order may be made for any period of three months or more
but a person in respect of whom an exclusion order has been in effect for at
least one year may apply to the Court to terminate it. An exclusion order may
be made in addition to any other sentence, including a probation order, or an
absolute or conditional discharge but may only be made if one or more of the
following conditions are satisfied:

(a) that the offence was committed during the period two hours before to one
hour after the match; or
(b) the   offence involved the use or threat of violence by the defendant towards
another   person and was committed while one or each of them was travelling to or
from an   association football match, or involved the use or threat of violence
towards   property and was committed on such a journey or was committed under
Section   5 (harassment alarm or distress or Part 3 (Racial Harassment) or

(c) the offence was   committed under certain sections of the Sporting Events
(Control Of Alcohol   etc.,) Act 1985

A person in respect   of whom an order is   made may be required to have his
photograph taken.

A person who is reasonably suspected of having entered premises in breach of an
exclusion order may be arrested by a Constable without warrant.

There are powers to extend the Part IV to other sporting events.

Part V Miscellaneous and General

This part contains only two provisions of note.

Section 38 (which came into force on 1st January 1987) creates a specific
offence to deal with people who poison or claim to have poisoned goods in
supermarket shelves and the like.   It becomes an offence to contaminate or
interfere with goods with the intention of causing public alarm or anxiety or
injury to members of the public or economic loss or threaten to do or claim to
have done any of those things (except causing injuries members of the public
consuming or using the goods).   It is also an offence to be in possession of
certain items with a view to the commission of one of those offences.   The
maximum penalty on conviction on indictment is imprisonment for a terin not
exceeding ten years 'and/or a fine and on summary conviction to imprisonment for
a term not exceeding six months and/or a fine not exceeding the statutory
maximum.

Section 39 This section was included to meet problems perceived by Police and
landowners after the "Peace Convoy" during last summer. It gives the Police the
power to direct trespassers to leave land if the senior Police Officer present
reasonably believes that two or more persons have entered as trespassers and are
present with the common purpose of residing there and that reasonable steps have
been taken by or on behalf of the occupier of the land to ask them to leave and
that any of those persons have caused damage to property on the land or has used
threatening, abusive, or insulting words or behaviour towards the occupier, his
family or employees or agents or that those persons have brought twelve or more
vehicles onto the land.  If a person, who knows that a direction applying to him
has been given fails to leave as soon as is reasonably practicable, or having
left re-enters as a trespasser within three months, he commits an offence and
is liable on summary conviction to a term of imprisonment not exceeding three
months and/or a fine not exceeding level 4. A Constable in uniform who
reasonably suspects that a person is committing an offence under the section may
arrest him without warrant.
Schedule 1

Amends the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc.) Act 1985 by extending the
prohibition on carrying alcohol on vehicles going to sporting events to
minibuses, by making it an offence to be in possession of fireworks or flares in
a sports ground and by relaxing the rules on the sale of alcohol in private
rooms.




                                          ROGER PENSAM
                                          Head of Administration
                                          and Legal Department




 26th February, 1987




AF
