        ENVIRONMENTAL. HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                            499

    ( n o t e : Councillor Pratt entered the meeting during consideration of Case No. 39/92 and did not
    speak or vote thereon and Councillor Chaplin was present during consideration of Case Nos.
    39/92 and 42/92 only.)
      At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
★    (3) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS AND THEATRE LICENSING
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted reports on applications for the
    renewal/granting of public entertainments licences in respect of six premises in the City.
    People’s Choice, Spital Hill
      Resolved: That (a) the information contained in the report now submitted of a potential
    application for the grant of a Public Entertainments Licence in respect of the People’s Choice,
    Spital Hill, be noted and the action already taken by Officers, as now reported, be endorsed;
       (b) it be indicated that should an application be received in respect of the People’s Choice, no
    licence will be granted until this Sub-Committee is satisfied that the premises are reasonably safe
    and any other relevant observations that may be submitted have been considered; and
      (c) no further action be taken by Officers until a valid application is received.
    Broadway, Staniforth Road
      Resolved: That (a) the receipt of an application for the grant of a Public Entertainments
    Licence in respect of Broadway, Staniforth Road, be acknowledged;
      (b) the information contained in the report now submitted and the observations received to
    date by the inspecting Authorities be noted; and
      (c) this Sub-Committee expresses its serious concern about the operating hours and type of
    event to be carried out at the premises and indicates that it would wish to be satisfied that the
    premises are reasonably safe when determining the application.
    Eckington Hall, Sheffield Road, Mosborough




    Millionaires, Carver Street
      The Sub-Committee heard submissions with regard to Millionaires, Carver Street, from
    Officers of Health and Consumer Services Department and the South Yorkshire County Fire
    Service following a further inspection of the premises on 26th August, 1992, which indicated that,
    apart from minor defects the premises were considered to be satisfactory.
    500      ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

        Resolved: That the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be authorised to renew the
      Public Entertainments Licence in respect of Millionaires for a period of 12 months.
           At this point in the proceedings, Councillor Pratt left the meeting.
      The Roxy, Arundel Gate
         The Sub-Committee heard submissions with regard to The Roxy, Arundel Gate, from Officers
      of Health and Consumer Services Department and the South Yorkshire County Fire Service
      following an inspection of the premises on 12th August, 1992, which indicated that the premises
      were considered to be satisfactory. The Sub-Committee also heard a submission by the
      Applicant’s Solicitor explaining the management situation at The Roxy and the control of the
      premises exercised by the Manager and Assistant Manager on a day to day basis.
        Resolved: That the application now submitted for the renewal of a Public Entertainments
      Licence in respect of The Roxy, Arundel Gate, be granted for a period of 12 months.
      Rockies, Effingham Road
        The Sub-Committee received a letter submitted by the Director of Health and Consumer
      Services with regard to the condition of Rockies, Effingham Road, which was inspected on 12th
      June, 1992, together with supplementary information reported orally with particular reference to
      the need for an effective programme of building and maintenance works in connection with the
      premises. The Sub-Committee then heard submissions by the Applicant and the Owner of the
      premises.
        Resolved: That the public and press, the applicant and Owner of Rockies and Officers of the
      City Council involved in the application be excluded from the meeting before a decision is made
      on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
      were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs
      12 and 13 of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to
      Information) Act 1985, relating to legal matters and advice and proposed actions under any
      enactment by the Authority, respectively.
        The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
      aspects of the application relating to Rockies.
           At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
        Resolved: That the application now submitted for the renewal of a Public Entertainments
      Licence in respect of Rockies, Effingham Road, be granted for a period of six months.
★      (4) AMUSEMENT ARCADE PERMITS
         Resolved: That the applications now submitted in respect of (a) the renewal of an Amusement
      Arcade Permit in respect of premises at 43 Bellhouse Road be granted for three years and (b) the
      rationalisation of Amusement Arcade Permits in respect of premises at 17, 19 and 21 Matilda
      Street be granted for three years, the issue of such permits to be subject to the surrender of any
      existing permits.


         Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 11th September, 1992. Present— Councillors
      Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Dunworth, Pratt, Mrs. Shepherd, Mrs. P. M. Smith and Webster. Also in
      attendance— Councillor Mrs. Fleming.
★         ( 1 ) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
     consultation with the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a
     proposal submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
     Football Club to extend the fire warning system at the Hillsborough Sports Ground by installing
     smoke detecting equipment into the former Stands Public House situated between the South
     Stand and the Spion Kop.
       Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
     Administration in approving the proposals now reported to extend the fire warning system at the
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground by installing smoke detectors within the former Stands
     Bar and to remove combustible items from the area on the lines now discussed.
        ENVIRONMENTAL. HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                            501

    Public Address System—South Stand
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Chair of this Sub-Committee and the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds
    Advisory Group, in approving a proposal to site amplifiers under the Police Control Room at the
    Hillsborough Sports Stadium. The Advisory Group raised no objection to the proposals
    submitted by Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club provided
    that Messrs. Eastwood and Partners liaised with the Council’s Building Surveyor, Officers from
    the Health and Consumer Services Department and the South Yorkshire Fire Service during
    execution of the works to ensure that all technical matters were properly addressed.
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration, in consultation with the Chair of this Sub-Committee, in approving the proposals
    submitted on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to install amplifiers under the Police
    Control Room at the Football Stadium, subject to full compliance with the requirements of the
    Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group now discussed and detailed in the report now
    submitted.
    South Stand Development
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration to approve several proposals received from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners,
    acting on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, concerning issues arising from the
    re-development of the South Stand at Hillsborough Stadium as detailed in the report now
    submitted.
    (2) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    Football Licensing Authority—Issue o f Licences
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report stating that there had been
    recent changes in the Licensing Policy of the Football Licensing Authority in respect of the issue
    of licences for designated sports stadia where professional football was played and the City
    Council had originally been informed that the new National Football Licensing Authority would
    begin to issue licences from the start of the 1992/93 Football Season. However, the City Council
    had subsequently been formally made aware that due to delays this timetable could not be met
    and a new date for the issue of the licences would be given in due course.
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
       (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested (i) in consultation with the
    Chair of this Sub-Committee, to write to the National Football Licensing Authority for
    clarification of the reasons for the licensing policy adopted by the Football Licensing Authority;
    and (ii) submit a further report to this Sub-Committee when clarification has been obtained.
★     (3) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs—Annual Review o f Certificates
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report (a) indicating that in
    accordance with the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 an annual review had
    been undertaken by Officers of his Department of the General Safety Certificates issued in
    respect of Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs, (b) stating that in June,
    1992, a document entitled “Guidance on Safety Certificates” had been received from the
    Football Licensing Authority and although there had been insufficient time to take account of all
    its contents for the 1992 review period much of it had already been incorporated within the
    certificates issued by the City Council and (c) on action he had taken, under delegated authority,
    to issue new amended certificates for both Football Clubs prior to the start of the 1992/93
    Football Season following the review procedure.
      Resolved: That (i) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
       (ii) confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of Administration
    in issuing amended General Safety Certificates to both Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday
    Football Clubs prior to the start of the new Football Season;
      (iii) the Certificate now reported and issued to Sheffield United Football Club be subject to
    further amendment to take account of the minor adjustments now discussed;
    502     ENVIRONMENTAL. HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

         (iv) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to (A) prepare a report on
      current procedures adopted in respect of the Safety of Sports Grounds Legislation for
      consideration by all members of the City Council prior to the commencement of the meeting of
      this Sub-Committee of 16th October, 1992, (B) submit a report to a future meeting of this
      Sub-Committee on the recent incident now discussed which had taken place at the Bramall Lane
      Terrace of the Sheffield United Football Ground, (C) keep this Sub-Committee informed of the
      discussions which will take place at the end of the Football Season regarding stewarding and
      policing at the City’s Football Grounds, (D) inform this Sub-Committee of any response made by
      the Secretary of State for Heritage to the request for clarification by the Member of Parliament
      now reported on Statements of Intent and (E) arrange visits for three members of this
      Sub-Committee (two members from the majority party and one opposition member) to make
      appropriate visits to the City’s Sports Stadia on the lines now discussed; and
        (iv)    attendance by members of (A) the City Council at the discussions on safety procedures to
      be held on 16th October, 1992, and (B) this Sub-Committee at the visits to be arranged to Sports
      Stadia be recognised as an approved duty for the purposes of the payment of travel and
      subsistence allowances.
      (4) HACKNEY CARRIAGE LICENSING-OUTCOME OF LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
        The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on the outcome of an appeal
      to the Crown Court against the City Council’s decision to refuse to grant a new hackney carriage
      vehicle licence in respect of Case No. HC/16/91 on the grounds that there was no significant
      unmet demand. The City Solicitor stated that the Court had upheld the City Council’s decision
      but had criticised some aspects of the Council’s procedure for determining the application.
        The Sub-Committee noted the information contained in the report and that suitable action was
      being taken to meet the criticisms now reported and made by the Court.


       Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 24th September, 1992. Present— Councillors
      Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Saunders, Mrs. E. Smith and Webster.
      (1 ) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
       Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
     place on the following item of business relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing on
     the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
     were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs
     7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local
     Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to the financial or business affairs of
     other persons and legal matters and advice, respectively.
★     (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of three cases
     relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing. All the applicants attended the meeting
     and addressed the Sub-Committee.
          Resolved: That the applications now submitted be determined as follows—
     Case No.         Licence Type                            Decision
     35/92            Hackney Carriage Vehicle Licence        No action be taken to suspend or
                                                              revoke the current licence but a
                                                              warning be issued to the applicant and
                                                              the vehicle in question be tested three
                                                              times over the next 12 months.
     38/92           Private Hire and Hackney Carriage       No action be taken to suspend or
                     Driver’s Licence                        revoke the licence but a warning be
                                                             given to the applicant as regards his
                                                             future conduct.
     40/92           Private Hire and Hackney Carriage       Grant for a period of six months by
                     Driver’s Licence                        reason of previous convictions.
