SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
13    DECEMBER 1991

PRESENT:     Councillor G Gallimore (in the Chair)                   p u M l lies
             Councillors: D A Axe, J M Cromar, R Fisher, D-W-George, R W Gillies,
             R P McCormick, C Swindell, R Whitfield.
             Magistrates: Mrs B R Bullivant, Mr K Goodall, Mr H D Hepworth,
             Mr J Ludlam, Mr J F Staniforth, Mr D E Wilburn.

75      CHAIRMAN
        RESOLVED - That the Authority's wishes for a speedy recovery be extended
        to the Chairman,of the Authority, Sir Jack Layden.
76      POLICE AUTHORITY CERTIFICATE OF COMMENDATION
        The Chairman presented the Police Authority's Certificate of Commendation
        to Mrs Margaret Barnes in recognition of her courageous, determined, and
        public spirited action which had ensured that the perpetrator of a crime
        had been brought to justice.
77      MINUTES
        RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Authority held on
        11 October 1991 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
78      DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
        The Authority noted that a reply was awaited from the Home Office on the
        interpretation of provocation which was applied by the Courts in cases
        domestic violence.
 79     TNTERNATIONAI CONFERENCE ON URBAN SAFETY. DRUGS AND CRIME
        PRFVFNTION. PARIS - 18/20 NOVEMBER 1991
         RESOLVED - That the Chief Constable present a report to the next meeting
         of the Authority on .this Conference.
 80      CHARGES FOR POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES
         The Authority briefly discussed the obligations on organisers of
         sporting events and also the different approaches to pojicing^of football
         and rugby matches. After discussion it was agreed that this was a matter
         for the District Councils as licensing authorities.
 81      MINUTES OF COMMITTEES
         A   Accountability. Complaints and Discipline
              RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Accountability,
              Complaints and Discipline Committee held on 25 October 1991 be
              received.
         B   Finance and General Purposes
              RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Finance and General
              Purposes Committee held on 8 November 1991 be received.
-    2   -




             C    Working Party on Equal Opportunities in the South Yorkshire Police
                  RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Working Party on
                  Equal Opportunities in the South Yorkshire Police held on 13 November
                  1991 be received.
82           CRIME STATISTICS. AUGUST. SEPTEMBER AND OCTOBER 1991 AND
             DIVISIONAL COMMANDERS' COMMENTS
             The Authority considered a general commentary on the crime statistics for
             the Force covering August, September and October 1991. In addition the
             Authority had available comments by the Divisional Commanders on the crime
             situation in their respective Divisions.
             The Chief Constable highlighted:-
             In Doncaster Division a case of public apathy when a resident awakened by
             loud banging and seeing three men acting suspiciously did not associate
             the conduct with a criminal act. The conclusion was that there was a need
             to improve police/public partnership.
             The burglary control programme being introduced in Barnsley Division aimed
             not only at preventing and detecting the offence, but improving the
             service and support given to victims* In addition the systematic looting
             and sometimes setting fire to local housing due for demolition had led to
             an action plan involving the co-ordination of the various public agencies
             including the Police. Results were encouraging.
          In Rotherham Division a number of successful anti drug operations had been
          mounted. A "drugs out of pubs" campaign had been launched in Rotherham
          Town Centre. More than 50 of the town centre licensees had pledged their
          support to the simple message that drug taking and dealing would not be
         •tolerated in their pubs. In the field of schools liaison work pupil
          representatives from 5 comprehensive schools had met to discuss the issues
          of crime and the young. The discussion had been valuable and further
          youth forums were planned. On cycle thefts Halfords, it. association with
          a Rotherham crime prevention officer had introduced a cycle registration
          scheme.
             In the Sheffield Divisions thefts from motor vehicles were being tackled
             with sponsorship from the National and Provincial Building Society to
             target vehicles on city centre car parks with brochures and badges
             carrying the slogan "Be Wise, Don't Get Stung This Christmas". The "cop
             shop" based in Orchard Square shopping complex had run for six weeks and
             the hard work and enthusiasm involved had paid dividends. Burglaries at
             old aged persons' council flats in the Woodhouse area had led to the crime
             and community services department enlisting the aid of a local engineering
             company to design and fit a special letter box shield. The AA Insurance
             Company and the local area housing department had financed the project. A
             section station had been established at Nether Edge Hospital in the hope
             that a visible police presence would help to reduce crime and give
             reassurance to patients and hospital staff. Work had been done with the
             students at Sheffield University and Polytechnic buildings. Each fresher
             had been greeted by South Yorkshire Police at the point of registration, a
             helpful booklet had been provided, and police officers had put on a "road
             show" to give students crime prevention advice.
