        ENVIRONMENTAL. HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                          153

★    (4) AMUSEMENT ARCADE PERMITS
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on applications for
    Amusement Arcade Permits in respect of five premises in the City.

      Resolved: That the applications now submitted in respect of premises at (a)(i) 23 The
    Haymarket, (ii) 2A-4A Middlewood Road, (iii) Unit 12, 34 Flat Street and (iv) Kings Arcade,
    Barnsley Road be granted for a period of three years; and

      (b) 17/21 Matilda Street be deferred to a future meeting of this Sub-Committee to enable a full
    hearing to take place and the applicant be invited to attend such meeting.

    (note:   Councillor Ms. Robinson left the meeting during consideration of the above item.)


     Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 12th June, 1992. Present— Councillors Mrs.
    Midgley (Chair), Ms. Bullement, Dunworth, Pratt, Saunders, Mrs. Shepherd, Mrs. E. Smith,
    Mrs. P. M. Smith and Webster.

★    ( 1 ) SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
    South Stand R oof—Additional Proposals
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group and the South Yorkshire Fire
    Service, in approving two additional proposals submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on
    behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club relating to detailed work to the new South Stand
    Roof which was being constructed at the Club during the 1992 close football season.

      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported and submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and
    Partners, subject to the recommendations made by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group
    now reported.

    (note:   At this point in the proceedings Councillor Saunders left the meeting.)

    Amendments to South Stand Seating Plan
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in (a) approving a proposal
    submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
    amend the new seating arrangements recently approved for the South Stand of the Hillsborough
    Stadium and (b) approving in principle the installation of a camera platform in the rear of the
    South Stand.

      Resolved: That (a) (i) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposals now reported and submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and
    Partners and (ii) final use of the camera platform and the new press box area be subject to the
    further consent of the City Solicitor and Head of Administration; and

      (b)    the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to report back to the next
    meeting of this Sub-Committee with information with regard to the arrangements for the visit of
    members of this Sub-Committee to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Sheffield United
    Football Club and Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton).

    Under Soil Heating—Boiler Room
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group and the South Yorkshire County
    Fire Service, in approving a proposal submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to build a new gas boiler room to serve under soil heating at
    the Hillsborough Stadium and which was to be installed during the 1992 close football season.

      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported and submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and
    Partners, subject to (a) the comments made by the South Yorkshire Fire Service now reported
    and (b) the work being completed by the end of the close football season.
    154     ENVIRONMENTAL. HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

★ (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE DRIVERS LICENSING-VETTING OF APPLICATIONS-REPORT 2
     Further to his report to the former Licensing Panel of 4th October, 1991, on changes to the
  vetting procedure in relation to applicants for Hackney Carriage and Private Hire Drivers
  Licences which were expected to be introduced as a result of the Road Traffic Act 1991 (page 737
  of the printed minutes), the City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report
  outlining (a) the procedure for vetting applications, (b) the additional costs which would be
  incurred by the City Council in administering the procedure and (c) the requirements under the
  legislation for nominated Officers to be designated by the City Council to whom, amongst other
  things, information relating to the applicants would be supplied by the Police.
         Resolved: That (i) approval be given for (A) the new procedure now reported in respect of the
      vetting of hackney carriage and private hire drivers licence applications to be brought into effect
      on 1st July, 1992 and (B) hackney carriage and private hire drivers licence fees to be increased
      from £47 to £52 with effect from 1st July, 1992; and
        (ii) the Senior Solicitor (General Services and Special Projects) and the Chief Licensing Officer
      (General) be designated as nominated Officers under the procedure now reported.
      (note:     At this point in the proceedings Councillor Ms. Bullement left the meeting.)
★     (3) DEMAND FOR HACKNEY CARRIAGES
        The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on the demand for the
      services of hackney carriages in Sheffield and he enclosed a copy of a survey undertaken on
      behalf of the Sheffield Taxi Trade Association by Steer Davis Gleabe on the demand for such
      services.
        Resolved: That this Sub-Committee (a) is satisfied that there is no significant unmet demand
      for the services of Hackney Carriages in the City;
        (b) indicates that subject to the investigation of the City Solicitor and Head of Administration
     detailed in paragraph 4.1.4 of the report now submitted and to any further review of the
     limitation policy in the interim and any other legal requirements, it is unlikely that any
     applications for additional Hackney Carriage Vehicle Licences within the next year will be
     successful; and
       (c) in view of the Race Equality Co-ordinator’s comments the City Solicitor and Head of
     Administration be requested to investigate the apparent under-representation of certain groups
     and report back (i) on the degree of any under representation of any groups and the ways in
     which it could be tackled in consultation with the Director of Employment and Economic
     Development, the Race Equality Unit, the Women’s Unit and the Disability Unit; and (ii)
     generally on the policy of limitation.
★ (4) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE VEHICLE STANDARDS-REPORT 3
     Further to the decision of the former Licensing Panel at its meeting of 3rd April, 1992, the City
  Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report detailing all the possibilities open to the
  Licensing Authority to ensure the highest possible standards for private hire and hackney
  carriage vehicles, including all the statistical information available to the City Council since 1986
  in relation to vehicle testing and safety, both at the time of testing and between tests.
          Resolved: That (a) the information set out in the report now submitted be noted; and
      (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to report back to a future
     meeting of this Sub-Committee with details of the costs of the possibilities open to the Licensing
     Authority to ensure the highest possible standards for private hire and hackney carriage vehicles.
     (n o t e:   A t this point in the proceedings Councillor Mrs. Shepherd left the meeting.)
★ (5)      THE SHEFFIELD SPORTS STADIUM (OWLERTON)
     Motor Show
        Resolved: That in the circumstances now reported and following consultation with the Safety
     of Sports Ground Advisory Group confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor
     and Head of Administration in authorising an amendment to the General Safety Certificate
     issued in respect of the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) in order to permit a m otor sports
     show at the Stadium held on the 3rd and 4th May, 1992.
