      MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                            1395

  (4) RUSKIN H O USE, M EERSBROOK PARK
    The Panel received and noted a statement of final cost of the Director of Land and Planning in
  respect of the carrying out of an extension and alterations to offices at Ruskin House,
  Meersbrook Park.
    A t this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were readmitted to the meeting.
★ (5) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
  Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
    The Panel received and noted the minutes of a meeting of the Safety of Sports Grounds
  Advisory Group held on 22nd January, 1990.
  Final Report o f Lord Justice Taylor
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the publication of
  the Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillborough Stadium Disaster, together with his
  report to the Policy Committee at its meeting held on 27th February, 1990.
    Resolved: That (a) the reports of the Head of Administration and Legal Department now
  submitted be noted; and
    (b) the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs be requested to paint in a
  conspicuous colour to the satisfaction of the City Council and by 31st March, 1990, gangways,
  whether sunken or not, at the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds, respectively.
  Regulations fo r the Production o f Plans o f Sports Grounds
    Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989, (page
  945 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a
  report on proposed regulations for the production of plans of sports grounds which he had
  prepared in consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group.
    Resolved: That (a) the plans regulations contained in Schedule 1 to the report now submitted
  be approved;
     (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to take appropriate steps
  to amend the General Safety Certificates issued in respect of the Hillsborough (Sheffield
  Wednesday) and Bramall Lane (Sheffield United) Sports Grounds and the Sheffield Sports
  Stadium (Owlerton) so as to include conditions giving the Council power to require the respective
  clubs to submit appropriate plans to the Council as and when required;
    (c) on the amendment of the General Safety Certificate, the proprietors of the three sports
  grounds concerned be requested to submit plans to the Council without delay and as prescribed in
  Schedule 2 to the report now submitted; and
    (d) the Director of Design and Building Services be requested to submit to the Head of
  Administration and Legal Department, a set of plans for the Don Valley Athletics Stadium as
  prescribed in Schedule 2 to the report now submitted.
  The Responses o f the South Yorkshire Police to the Interim Report o f Lord Justice Taylor
    Further to the receipt by the Panel at its meeting on 2nd January, 1990, (page 1088 of the
  printed minutes) of the first of two general reports of the Head of Administration and Legal
  Department on the responses of the South Yorkshire Police to the Interim Report of Lord Justice
  Taylor on the Hillsborough Disaster, the Panel received and noted the second of the two reports.
 Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday)—Fire Precautions
   With reference to the decisions made by the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989
 (page 947 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
 reports on proposals of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to improve the fire protection and
 exits and the fire detection system at the South Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground. The
 reports enclosed copies of letter from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers,
 giving details of the proposals and letters from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service
 commenting on the proposals.
   Resolved: That approval be given to the proposals referred to in the reports now submitted for
 the carrying out before the 1990/91 football season of works of improvement to (a) the fire
 protection and exits for the South Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground in accordance with
1396    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  the letter from the Consulting Engineers dated 22nd December, 1989, and Plan No. 12237/36
  referred to therein, subject to the compliance of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club with the
  recommendations of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group detailed in Section 3 of the
  relevant report now submitted; and
    (b) the fire detection system for the South Stand at the Ground in accordance with a letter from
  the Consulting Engineers dated 8th January, 1990, and Plans Nos. 12247/200—Sheets 1 and 2,
  12247/201—Sheets 1 and 2,12247/202 and 12247/203 and subject to the requirements of the South
  Yorkshire County Fire Service as detailed in their letter of 12th January, 1990, and of the
  Building Surveyor as set out in paragraph 3.2 of the relevant report now submitted.
  Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday) —West Stand
     With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 22nd December, 1989
  (page 1086 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
  a report on a proposal of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to widen gangways and remove
  seating in the West Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of
  letters from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers and the South Yorkshire
  County Fire Service and a memorandum from the Building Surveyor.
     Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal detailed in the letter from the Consulting
  Engineers dated 9th January, 1990, and Plans Nos. 12267/1,2 and 3, subject to the compliance of
  the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club with the comments of the Building Surveyor as detailed
  in his memorandum of 16th January, 1990, and the requirements of the South Yorkshire County
  Fire Service as set out in their letter of 30th January, 1990; and
       (b) the crowd capacity of the West Stand at the Ground remain at 3,840 persons.
  Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United)—Facilities fo r the Disabled
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal of the
  Sheffield United Football Club for the provision of additional facilities for the disabled at Bramall
  Lane Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners,
  Consulting Engineers, and the South Yorkshire County Fire Service and a memorandum from
  the Building Surveyor.
    Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the letter from the Consulting
  Engineers dated 12th June, 1989, for completion before the start of the 1990/91 football season,
  subject to compliance by the Sheffield United Football Club with the recommendations of the
  Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group as detailed in Section 3 of the report now submitted.
  Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United) —Family Enclosure
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal of the
  Sheffield United Football Club for the provision of a family enclosure in the South Stand at the
  Bramall Lane Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from Messrs. Eastwood and
  Partners, Consulting Engineers and the South Yorkshire County Fire Service and a memoran­
  dum from the Building Surveyor.
    Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the letter from the Consulting
  Engineers dated 21st July, 1989, for completion before the start of the 1990/91 football season,
  subject to compliance by the Sheffield United Football Club with the recommendations of the
  Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group as detailed in Section 3 of the report now submitted.
 Visits to Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) and Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds
    Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd January, 1990 (page 1089
 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report
 on proposed arrangements for the members of the Panel to visit the Sheffield Sports Stadium
 (Owlerton) during dog-racing events. The Head of Administration and Legal Department also
 reported on the position regarding the payment of members allowances in respect of authorised
 visits to dog-racing events and football matches.
   Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposed arrangements contained in the report
 now submitted; and
   (b) authorised attendances at dog-racing events at the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) and
 football matches at the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds be recognised as
 approved duties for the purposes of the payment of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the
 Local Government Act, 1972.
