             ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                   573

      Resolved: That, (i) having regard to the submissions now made by the Sheffield Confederation
    of Private Hire Companies, the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be authorised to alter
    the City Council's current policy to allow magnetic door signs provided that suitable vehicle
    identification can be incorporated on the signs (A) on private hire vehicles where the words
    “Advance Booking Only” should also be included and (B) on hackney carriages; and
        (ii) Private Hire Vehicles which display signs not in accordance with Council policy are
    . considered unfit for private hire use.
★ (7) PRIVATE HIRE VEHICLE LICENSING
     Following the introduction, on 1st April, 1994, of a new system of private hire licensing which
  linked the licence expiry and test dates and made provision for the renewal of licensing of vehicles
  which were between four and a half and six years old, the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration submitted a report on the operation of the new procedure and stated that one
  aspect which was causing concern was the fact that proprietors of older vehicles had to apply to
  renew vehicle licences every six months and the Confederation of Private Hire Companies had
  complained about this since the licence fee, which was based on cost, was the same irrespective of
  the term of the licence.
       Resolved: That, in the circumstances now reported, authority be given for the City Solicitor
     and Head of Administration (a) to issue, with effect from 1st December, 1994, renewal private
     hire licences in respect of vehicles which are more than five years old, provided that in any case
     the renewed licence expiry date does not fall after the sixth anniversary of the vehicle in question;
     and
        (b) to extend, with effect from 1st April, 1995, the “two tests per annum” system to private
     hire vehicles which are five or more years old and which have not been subject to this system
     previously.
★    ( 8 ) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS—VISITS TO SHEFFIELD UNITED AND SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL
     CLUES
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report stating that in previous
     years, members of this Sub-Committee had visited Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday
     Football Clubs during football matches and when the premises were closed to the public. He
     stated that during football matches, visits had been restricted (for r.easons of safety and security)
     to two members at any one time plus the Chief Licensing Officer.
       Resolved: That (a) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to arrange for
     Members of this Sub-Committee to visit Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football
     Clubs when the premises are closed to the public and also during a football match to gain an
     appreciation of each stadium; and
       (b) attendance by Members at such visits be recognised as an approved duty for the purposes of
     payment of appropriate allowances under the Members’ Allowances Scheme.
★ (9)    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS—SHEFFIELD UNITED AND SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUBS—
     REVIEW OF GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
     consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in authorising the issue of
     amended General Safety Certificates in respect of Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday
     Football Clubs following annual reviews of both Certificates undertaken during the closed
     football season 1994. The report stated that the opportunity was taken to standardise as far as
     possible the Certificates issued in respect of both Clubs and to achieve this, various amendments
     or additional conditions were added with regard to ticketing, special effects at sports stadia,
     safety management and emergency planning. Alterations were also made to stewarding
     provisions at both grounds.
       Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
     Administration in authorising (i) the issue of new General Safety Certificates on the lines now
     reported in respect of Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs during August,
     1994, and (ii) the revocation of Certificates previously issued in respect of both the Hillsborough
     Sports Ground and the Bramall Lane Sports Ground; and
574      ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to take all necessary action
  under the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations.
★ (10)   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS—SHEFFIELD UNITED AND SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUBS-
  RENEWAL OF LICENCES BY FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY
     The Sub-Committee received and noted a report submitted by the City Solicitor and Head of
   Administration stating that the Football Licensing Authority had, in accordance with the
 • provisions of the Football Spectators Act 1989, renewed licences in respect of the Hillsborough
   and Bramall Lane Sports Stadia.
  (11)   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS—SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL C L U B -W EST STAND—FIRE
  DETECTION
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
  consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
  submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, to
  provide fire detection under the West Stand at the Hillsborough Stadium and to stop up gaps
  within the terracing.
   Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration in approving the proposal now reported to provide fire detection underneath the
  West Stand of the Hillsborough Sports Stadium; and
    (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to take appropriate steps to
  ensure that the Club complete the filling in of the gaps now discussed within the terrace.
★ (12) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS-FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY-ANNUAL REVIEW
    The Sub-Committee received and noted a report submitted by the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration of the review undertaken in July, 1994, of the City Council’s Safety of Sports
  Grounds Licensing Function by the Football Licensing Authority Inspectorate.
  (13) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS-DON VALLEY STADIUM—UB40 POP CONCERT
    The Sub-Committee received and noted a report submitted by the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration on the arrangements preceding and following a pop concert held at the Don
  Valley Stadium on 20th August, 1994.
  ( n o t e : (a) Councillor Mrs. White left' the meeting for a short time during consideration of the
  item relating to Rebels Night Club, Dixon Lane and (b) Councillor Jones left the meeting for a
  short time during consideration of the item relating to the Icesports Centre, Queens Road and as
  a consequence, they did not participate in the discussions and decisions relating to those items.)

4 Health Issues Panel
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes be approved—


   Meeting of the Health Issues Panel held 26th September, 1994. Present— Councillors Chaplin,
  Ms. Huddart, Mrs. Midgley, Miss Mitchell and J. A. Moore.
   (1 ) APPOINTMENT OF CHAIR
   Resolved: That in the absence of the Chair of the Panel (Councillor Price), Councillor Mrs.
  Midgley be appointed Chair of this meeting.
  (2) FOOD PO U C Y -T H E WAY FORWARD
     The Director of Environmental Services and Standards submitted a discussion paper on how
  the City Council could best utilise its existing resources to continue to pursue the aims and
  objectives of the Food Policy and play an effective role in influencing the diet of Sheffield people.
  The report stated that the Food Policy was introduced in 1988 and the work of the Food Policy
  Review Group (a multi-disciplinary group of Officers from across the Council) was comple­
  mented by the inter-agency Food Programme Group, but during 1993/94 both the Local
  Authority and the Health Authority lost key workers and faced resource shortages which resulted
  in the City Council and inter-agency activity in this area diminishing.
     Resolved: That the Director of Environmental Services and Standards be requested to arrange
   a meeting between the relevant Members and Officers from the Food Policy Review Group to
   determine the way forward on Food Policy.
