SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB, HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD




    TECHNICAL REPORT ON LEPPINGS LANE END, WEST STAND

                    AND WEST TERRACING

                      TO APRIL, 1989




           BY THE BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION

             DEPARTMEDW OF LAND AND PLANNING

                  SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
CONTENTS

1.   Background

2.   Preparation for Certification

3.   Post-Certification to May, 1981

4.   Radial Barriers (1981)

5.   Additional Turnstiles at Penistone Road End

6.   Alterations and Maintenance (1982 to 1984)

7.   Segregation works at Leppings Lane End

8.   Duration of Sheffield City Council as Licensing Authority

9.   Notes and Conments




 Appendix 1 - Building Surveyor's Staff involvement


 Appendix 2 - Drawings referred to in Technical Report
               SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. HILLSBOROUGH SHEFFIELD


                    TECHNICAL REPORT ON LEPPINGS LANE END
                        WEST STAND AND WEST TERRACING
                                TO APRIL 1989


                     BY THE BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION
                        DEPARTMENT OF LAND & PLANNING
                           SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


1.    BACKGROUND

1.1   In the Book "The Football Grounds of England & Wales by Simon Ingles
      the following extract appears". Owlerton in 1899 was not even in
      Sheffield, but in the unspoilt hills on the other side of the City to
      Olive Grove. The 10 acres Wednesday had bought were meadow land in
      need of at least £5,000 worth of preparation with only £2,000 in the
      bank the club decided to form itself into a limited liability company.

      So began the task of building, "out in the wilds". The stand at Olive
      Grove was re-erected at Owlerton, rubbish was tipped at either end to
      form banking .............

      The article goes on to state that the ground was opened for its first
      game on 2nd September, 1899.

      It was not until 1914 that the area became part of the parliamentary
      constituency of Hillsborough.

1.2   The first records of the department relate to building byelaw
      application for a covered shed on the terracing, between the north
      stand and the west stand, in 1927. Records however show that this
      building was subsequently demolished around 1966.

1.3   In May 1928, a building byelaw application (reference 31214) was made
      by the Sheffield Architects, Chapman and Jenkinson, on behalf of the
      Club for the erection of a new West Stand, including a refreshment
      bar, urinals, groundsman's quarters, and central access tunnel under
      the roofed terraced area. The dimensions of the stand were 200 ft.
      long, approximately 25 ft. high at the rear wall and the roof span
      approximately 60 ft. from front to back. This stand was subequently
      built and was shown on an Aerofilms photograph taken in the 1930s.
      That photograph also shows that crush barriers were provided to the
      west terrace of that time.

1.4   In March 1952, Sheffield Architect Frank Melling submitted building
      bye-law and planning applications to the Council for the development
      of additional sanitary accommodation in four places throughout the
      stadium. One of those sites was within the rear yard area as a
      lean-to from the retaining wall continuing from the wall of the West
      Stand.

1.5   Husband & Co., Consulting Engineers of Sheffield, apparently carried
      out a carpiete survey of the ground in 1954, whilst preparing a scheme
      to submit to the Council for 6 floodlighting pylons. The survey shows
      the full extent of the west terracing, the West Stand, and the
      turnstiles between the two main gates at the Leppings Lane end. It
      does however suggest that the 1952 sanitary accoaiiiodation proposal was
      never implemented.
                                        - 2 -


1.6    As part of the proposals to develop the new North Stand, the drawing
       dated 19th February, 1960 by Husband & Co. introduced segregation
       fencing to the Leppings Lane end, leaving 14 of the 18 turnstiles to
       serve the West Stand and West Terrace.

1.7    In September 1961, Geo. Longden & Son Ltd. of Sheffield submitted «-
       scheme for additional turnstile accomodation at the Stadium. At the
       Leppings Lane end the scheme shows the resiting of gate B to its
       present position, the introduction of gate C and the proposal to build
       the turnstiles between gates B and C.

1.8    The Club again engaged Husband & Co., to submit on their behalf,
       Planning and Building Regulation applications to the Council, for a
       new West Stand in 1965. The scheme involved demolishing the old roof
       structure and building a new insitu reinforced concrete framed
       structure to support tiered seating on precast concrete units, lining
       up with the tiered levels of the North Stand built in 1960/61. Above
       the seating level, steelwork columns support the 75 ft. depth of
       sheeted, steel trussed roof. The 4,450 seat area of the stand is
       accessed by 6 vomitories with short stairways leading to an access
       floor level under the tiered precast concrete units. The floor of the
       access level was cast over the existing ground floor facilities built
       in the 1928 scheme. The new 240 ft. long stand was created about the
       central access tunnel to the standing terrace. The plans do not
       indicate any change of width or gradient to the access tunnel. It is
       confirmed on the plan, that the terracing between the front of the
       stand and the pitch perimeter to remain unaltered.

1.9    The aim of setting the levels of the West Stand to line up with those
       of the North Stand became more apparent when the building and planning
       applications for stage 1 of the terracing of the North-West corner of
       the Stadium was received in May 1966. The plans showed that the West
       Terracing would be extended into the North West corner of the ground
       by using precast concrete tiered units on sleeper walls, whilst the
       terracing to line up with the levels of the new West Stand would be
        in-situ tiered concrete on a concrete encased steel frame. A copy
       letter attached to this application, from Husband & Co. to the Chief
       Constable states, "Your Mr. Grey has rung this office on one or two
       queries regarding the above and we came to an agreement as follows:-

       1.   We do think three exits are sufficient to get a crowd into the
            street and each one will be 6 ft. wide without centre rails.
            This would be adequate on the basis that you have already agreed
            the equivalent arrangement for the West Stand.

       2                  "


1.10   Plans for Stage 2 of the North West Terrace were also submitted and
       approved in May 1966, but the implemental scheme (1A) was constructed
       in accordance with plans submitted and approved in November 1966.
                                         - 3 -

2.    PREPARATION FOR CERTIFICATION

2.1   As a result of the Wheatley report in 1972, the Safety of Sports
      Grounds Act was enacted in 1975. In anticipation of the Hillsborough
      ground being designated for the purposes of that Act, the South
      Yorkshire County Council wrote to the City Council in January 1976
      requesting a nomination of a specific officer to whcm consultations
      may be directed (for the purposes of the role of Building Authority).
       In a February 1976 memorandum from the Head of Administration & Legal
      Dept, to the then Director of Planning and Design, the Building
      Surveyor was naninated as the officer to whom consultations should be
      directed for that purpose.

2.2   Between February 1976 and November 1978 various meetings of the
      Officer Working Party took place primarily to draft notes for guidance
      to applicants applying for a Safety Certificate, and the conditions of
      such a Safety Certificate.

2.3   In August 1978, the ground was designated for the purposes of the Act,
      and consequently an application for a Safety Certificate frcm
      Sheffield Wednesday was dated 8th September, 1978.

2.4   At a meeting of the Officer Working Party and Sheffield Wednesday F.C.
      on the 13th December, 1978, at Hillsborough, discussion of an
      exploratory nature took place. The Club agreed to their consultant
      engineer Dr. W. Eastwood of Eastwood & Partners, preparing detailed
      information and plans of the stadium.

2.5   Drawing No. 1610/2 x C (Dec. 1978) by Eastwood & Partners shows the
      positions where additional barriers were required to be positioned in
      the South West, West and North West terracing, and can be compared
      with drawing no. 1610/26 of a contemporary date which shows the
      barrier layout as existed at that time. Drawing 1610/13 (Jan. 1979)
      complements the previous reference by showing the proposals for the
      construction of and foundation design to the new crush barriers.
      Calculations to support the design were prepared in March 1979.

2.6   The meeting of the Working Party on the 12th February, 1979 discussed
      four matters of interest to this report:-

       1.   The reasonableness of applying the "guide".

       2.   The unknown reasoning for the 1.1 metre width of gangways.

       3.   Exits from the West Stand - the minutes read "Whilst the exits
            were adequate and well spaced and the discharge times were
             acceptable in view of the type of stand, the Fire Service felt
             that the means of escape were not adequate as the only means of
             egress was by way of two staircases. The Wbrking Party AGREED
             that it was essential that another staircase be provided, and one
             on the South West corner was felt to be the most acceptable".

       4.   The West Terrace - the minutes read, "In view of the lack of
             depth of this terrace, the Club's offer to reduce the spectator
             limit to 7,200, and the discharge time of 6.6 minutes, the
             Working Party AGREED that it would be unreasonable to insist that
             gangways or additional exits would be provided.

            However, even if the existing crush barriers were to pass the
            tests, the Working Party AGREED that the barriers would require
            special attention in view of the apparent sharp edges, corrosion,
            etc.".
                                         - 4 -

2.7    A further meeting on the 30th March, 1979 developed the discussions
       regarding the ground, and regarding the above four items:-

       1.   The Home Office had said that the maximum flexibility had to be
            maintained in the case of existing structures and differences in
            such matters of age, size and mode of construction had to be
            taken into account.

       2.   No guidance appears to have been received re. width of gangways.

       3.   It was agreed that l/3rd reduction in capacity would be
            necessary, if a new stairway and means of egress were not
            provided to the West Stand.

       4.   "As well as the condition of the crush barriers, the Building
            Authority drew attention to the poor condition in places of the
            terracing in small areas near to the stand. The cross-fall on
            the steps on the North West corner exit would also require
            attention as it tended to throw people forward. The height of
            the crush barriers mentioned in regard to the spion kop (i.e.
            below the reconmendations of the "Guide") also applied. It was
            AGREED that all these points must be drawn to the Club's
            attention.

2.8    The Working Party met again on the 2nd April, 1979 and regarding the
       West Terrace "IT WAS AGREEED 11 -

       1.   That the Club's proposals for the installation of additional
            barriers and the reduction in capacity to 7,200 spectators
            without the need for additional gangways should be implemented.

       2.   That the question of cross-fall on the North West corner exit,
            the height of some of the existing crush barriers, as well as
            their corrosion and sharp edges in places, be the subject of
            detailed discussion between Dr. Eastwood and the Building
            Surveyor.

2.9    A letter to the Principal Structural Engineer, Building Surveyor's
       Division, dated 21st June, 1979 confirms that new crush barriers were
       being installed. Drawings of the new crush barrier design were
       included with the letter. Details on drawing 1610/14B show the method
       of sleeving to be adopted for joining new and existing tubing. Other
       drawings submitted at the same time indicate the proposed additional
       exits to each end of the West Stand.

2.10 Eastwood & Partners wrote to the Building Surveyor on the 19th
     December, 1979 and confirmed that all the barriers had been tested and
     satisfy the load tests.

2.11   The General Safety Certificate for the ground was issued on the 21st
       December, 1979 by the South Yorkshire County Council.
                                            - 5 -


    3.    POST CERTIFICATION TO MAY 1981

    3.1   Messrs. Eastwood & Partners drawing no. 1610/64 dated January 1980
           shows the numbering of the individual barriers. This was submitted
           with the full report on the barrier testing in the Stadium. Note:-
           only revision B dated 24 June, 1983 now available. The report makes
           the following comments

          Leppings Lane

          In the first series of tests six barriers (Nos. 104, 105, 106, 107,
          110 & 123) had failures of the tube retaining clips. Five barriers
          (Nos. 107, 114, 115, 121 & 130) suffered permanent deformation of the
          horizontal rail.

          All these barriers were repaired.   In addition 13 new clips and five
          rails which were badly corroded were replaced, and any protruding or
          sharp edges removed.

          After construction of the new barriers, they and all the required
          barriers were tested and all withstood the test load satisfactorily.

          North West Corner

          The initial testing of the first few barriers in this corner showed
           that all of them were only capable of taking about half the test load.
          The rails deflected excessively and the holding down bolts were also
I         inadequate.

          Major strengthening in the form of extra posts to shorten the span of
          the rails and to share the load with the existing posts were
          installed. A new type of holding down arrangement was devised.

          When retested all existing barriers plus all the new barriers
          successfuly withstood the specified load.

           The Safety Cage

           When the first series of tests were made on the crush barriers it was
           found that the safety cage along both ends of the ground had defective
           supports. It was found that certain holding down bolts had not been
           fixed when the fence was installed. There was also a need for support
           from the concrete perimeter wall in some places. After appropriate
           remedial work the fence was successfully test loaded in 4 metre
1         sections along both ends of the ground using the normal crushbarrier
           loading of 6 KN/m length.

    3.2    Despite the fact that the Certificate for the Stadium had been issued
           comparatively recently, the County Council wrote to the Building
           Surveyor on the 14th March, 1980 giving warning of the F.A. Cup Semi
           Final between Arsenal and Liverpool on the 12th April. A list of
           outstanding issues was returned on the 21st March, including the
           corrment that the new stair construction at the South West corner of
           the South Stand to be checked for clearance. Suggest sharp edges to
           steel work removed and timber facia provided. Apparently this work
           was not done at the time since the matter is still being raised in
           minutes of Working Party meetings in February and April 1981.

    3.3    Also in the Building Surveyor's comments dated 21 March1980 was the
           comment that exit signs were not clearly displayed.
                                        - 6-


3.4   A letter from the County Council dated 31st March to the Club
      indicated that the Fire Authority had raised the same problem of exit
      signs.

      The comment read:-

      "Contrary to Paragraph 11 of Schedule 2, some exit signs having
      inadequate lettering size have been provided and sited otherwise than
      in accordance with the certificate plans, whilst the exit signs at the
      at the rear of the South Stand are not illuminated by both the normal
      and emergency lighting.

3.5   Eastwood and Partners replied to this by saying he would consult the
      responsible members of his staff when they returned from holiday.
      Letters in this vein were dated 4th April and 8th April, 1980.

3.6   On the 10th April 1980 a meeting of the Officer Working Party was
      held. The relevant extract from the minutes being

      “Exit Signs

      The Club's representatives felt that the exit signs generally had been
      sited where required and were of adequate size and/or illuminated.

      It was agreed that there were a number which could be more
      advantageously sited and/or illuminated, and some which might be more
      effective with larger lettering and/or direction arrows. The County
      Fire Service undertook to liase with Messrs. Eastwood and Partners.

3.7   On the 10th February, 1981 one of the twice yearly inspections to the
      ground took place. The minutes of that meeting show:-

      West Stand

      Seme cracked brickwork at the rear of the stand required pointing and
      then checking to see if the cracks re-opened.

      Apparent distress on the concrete pillar supporting the steps at the
      rear of the stand require urgent attention, and attention ought also
      to be given to cracks in the concrete at the top of both sets of
      stairs.

      The weathering and corrosion in the base plate of the sheeting column
      in the South West corner of the stand required attention, possibly by
      concrete sheathing.

      Finally, the steel supports to the new emergency exit (nearest to the
      South Stand) still require to be rounded off.

      Revised Entrance Facilities

      The Club outlined the consideration being given to the siting of
      caravans outside the Penistone Road and Leppings Lane ends of the
      ground to sell tickets. It was hoped that if this took place,
      increased entry flow of spectators to the ground would result by
      reducing delays at the turnstiles.
                                                - 7 -


        4.    RADIAL BARRIERS (1981)

        4.1   The meeting on the 8th June, 1981 minuted that most of the items
              previously raised by the Building Authority had now received
               attention.

              The minutes also stated "Following experiences at the F.A. Cup
              Semi-Final match, the Club were considering revised arrangements on
              the terracing in front of the (West) Stand. An assurance was given
              that that the Officer Working Party would be consulted when these had
              substance.

        4.2   A letter dated 2nd September, 1981 from Eastwood & Partners, headed
               'Radial Fences at Leppings Lane End' reads as follows

              We have been instructed by the Club to organise the installation of
              two radial fences on the terrace at the Leppings Lane end of the
              ground.

              It is intended that these fences are so positioned that they divide
              this section of the terrace into approximately three equal areas, each
              served by its own entrance.

              By dividing the terrace more control over supporters should result. A
              visiting team with only a few followers will be allocated one section,
              with the other two sections retained by the home supporters.

              Large contingents of visiting spectators could be accomodated in two
              or all three areas as their numbers dictate.

              A 1.15 metre wide gate is proposed at the rear of each fence to give
              access for maintenance and also policing during a game. The gate
               could be left open, but fastened back, to connect the areas during a
              game if adjacent ones are occupied by supporters of the same team.
'             When establishing the height we have considered that the views to the
               corner flags should not be restricted any further than they are at
               present by the perimeter fence. We therefore propose that the top of
1             the fence should be approximately 1680rrm above the terrace.
i   ,

               This may not prevent the odd spectator climbing the fence but should
               eliminate a mass invasion from one area to the other. Fences this
               height appear to work successfully at St. James's Park, the hone of
               Newcastle United.

               We would be pleased if this specific point can be discussed within the
               Working Party and your comments forwarded to us.

               Also to be included in the same contract are sane gates at various
|             locations around the North Stand. Now the gymnasium is open to the
               general public security to other parts of the ground must be
               maintained. It is proposed that gates are provided at the top of the
,             ramps at both ends of the stand with additional gates at ground floor
               level at the Penistone Road end of the stand. A separate gate will be
               placed behind the west ramp to prevent people going round the rear of
               the gymnasium towards Leppings Lane.

               Six copies of our drawing 3563/1 together with two copies of our
               drawings 3563/2 and 3 (for reference only) are enclosed.
!
        4.3    Drawing No. 3563/1 shows details of the radial fences to the West
               Terrace. The construction is shown to be 100 x 50 x 5 mild steel
I '
I
                                        - 8 -


      R.H.S. posts set into a minimum of 700 mm deep concrete foundations,
      and having vertical bars of 25 mm diameter mild steel at lOOnm centres
      between the posts, 70 x 15 mild steel flat bar are used as top and
      bottom rails, set approximately 150 rtrn above the terraced nosings and
      100 mm below the top of the vertical bars. The components are shown
      to be welded together.

4.4   A meeting of the Officer Working Party was called for 11th September,
      1981 to discuss the proposal. The item is minuted as:-

      Radial Barriers on West Terrace

      Whilst there are drawbacks to the division of the terrace into
      approximately three equal areas, each served by its own entrance, the
      Working Party felt that increased control on the Terrace should result
      from the proposals. For instance there could well be problems with
      opposing fans mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or the final
      exit gates; but the police considered that they could cope with any
      problems of this nature.

      The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be installed at the rear
      of the radial barriers was also discussed, as well as the use of the
      existing gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the front of
      the Terrace.

      It was noted that the plans submitted did not indicate the amount of
      headroom which would be available at the rear of the Terrace should
      the radial barriers and gates be installed.

      IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and
      Partners that the Officer Working Party sees no objection to the
      proposals to install two 1680 imt high radial barriers, with 1.15 metre
      wide gates at the rear, on the West Terrace at the Hillsborough
      Stadium, subject to:-

        (i)   the further calculations required by the Building Authority
              being satisfactory;

       (ii)   confirmation that adequate headroom will be available at the
              rear of the Terrace, and

      (iii)   the new gates at the rear of the Terrace also being under
              police control.

4.5   Calculations for the radial barriers were submitted on the 14th
      October to the Building Authority.

4.6   In a letter from Eastwood & Partners to the County Council dated
      14th December, 1981 it was stated that the work of installing the
      radial barriers was substantially complete; that 3 home matches had
      been played since the fences had been erected, and it was understood
      that the police had inspected the work and they were satisfied with
      the new arrangements.

      The letter also introduced the proposal of installing security gates
      at the bottom of the two staircases at the back of the West Stand.

4.7   The County Council replied on the 20th January, 1982 stating:-
                                        - 9 -


      "The matches played at the Stadium since the installation of the
      barriers confirm that they appear to be working well and
      satisfactorily effect the segregation of opposing groups of fans.
      However, the entire section of the Terrace has yet to be given to one
      group of fans.

      The Police inform me that, on installation of the new radial barriers,
      the existing crush barriers have been extended in some places up to
      and completely through the new radial barriers at a height of 4 ft. 6
      ins. or so from the ground. The effect is to make it very easy for
      fans to climb from one pen to another. In other places the existing
      crush barrier rails have been cut off short of the radial barriers in
      a manner which leaves dangerous pieces protruding into some of the
      gangways".

      The letter also raised queries regarding the positioning of the hinges
      on the stairway security gates.

4.8   Eastwood and Partners replied to these cooments by letter on
      26th January. An extract reads "___ where there is a crush barrier
      passing through or close to the radial barrier it will make it easier
      for anyone who so wishes to climb over. Nevertheless we believe it is
      not unreasonable to leave the crush barriers as they are. If all
      barriers were removed back to a distance say 1.2 metres from the fence
      it would mean a 2.4 metre wide gap which is not protected by barriers.
      There would be a consequent loss of calculated spectator capacity
      which is undesirable from the club's point of view. However, from the
      point of view of safety, a strip of that width without a single crush
      barrier would be a major hazard.

      It should be kept in mind that the introduction of these radial
      barriers has effected a very great improvement from the point of view
      of segregation of spectators but to achieve perfection from the point
      of view of segregation brings with it other disadvantages. I believe
      that what we have done is a reasonable compromise between the various
      interests."

4.9   This matter was discussed at the next meeting of the Officer Working
      Party on 4th February, 1982. Its resolution stated:-

      "IT WAS AGREED -

       i) That, on balance, it was preferable from a safety point of view
          to prevent crowd surge by the existing barriers being extended up
          to and/or through the new radial barriers than to completely
          prevent persons being able to climb frcm one pen to another,
          subject to review at the end of the current season.

      ii)   That the unsupported small length of existing crush barrier would
            be cut off.
                                       - 10 -


5.0   ADDITIONAL TURNSTILES AT PENISTONE ROAD END

5.1   On the 25th September, 1981 Sheffield Wednesday F.C. wrote to the
      County Council. "We are experiencing delays and very heavy congestion
      on the Penistone Road Side of the ground, particularly for evening
      matches. This, we feel sure, is due to a shortage of turnstiles. We
      are looking into improving this particular area and, hopefully the
      alterations could be made at the end of the season but to get over the
      immediate problem we could in fact erect six turnstiles with no other
      complication than taking out an exit gate, and this gate would be
      replaced with another when the main alteration was done next summer.

      I have already spoken to Chief Superintendent Herold, and this
      proposal meets with his unqualified agreement.

      Will you look into this matter with the utmost urgency, and I shall be
      pleased to have your deliberations, in order that whatever work needs
      to be done can be started imnediately."

5.2   Further correspondence from the Club of the 30th September said "To
      further explain our predicament, the reason we cannot replace the exit
      gate inmediately is, the area where it will go along with six more
      turnstiles is at the present time a toilet area which will have to be
      moved. The spectators, who would normally use the present gate, could
      in fact use Door 'O' as an exit.

5.3   At the Officer Working Party meeting dated 7th October 1981, it was
      minuted

      "Additional Turnstiles

      The Police representatives pointed out that public order and public
      safety problems were caused on occasions outside the ground (mainly at
      evening matches) by spectators spilling out onto Penistone Road whilst
      trying to gain admission to the ground. These problems had been
      discussed with the Club, and had probably resulted in the request now
      before the Working Party. However, whilst putting the case for
      additional turnstiles, the police representatives stressed that in no
      way did they consider this should be done at the expense of means of
      escape, should the Working Party consider that this would be the
      result of the Club's temporary proposals now under consideration.

      The Fire Service representatives reported that they had carried out a
      site inspection, and pointed out that the existing five exits in
      question were only just adequate in the event of a maximum capacity
      crowd (using Green Guide calculations).

      The Working Party discussed a number of options which might be open to
      the Club, pending the carrying out of the permanent proposals in the
      1982 close season.

      IT WAS AGREED that, whilst the Club's permanent proposals were welcome
      in principle, the temporary proposals for six additional turnstiles on
      the Penistone Road side of the ground (by removing the existing 21 ft.
      exit gate) could not be supported.

      IT WAS ALSO agreed that, in order to be constructive, the following
      options should be brought to the Club's notice

      a)    a reduction of 3,840 in the Spion Kop capacity should the Club
           wish to proceed with the temporary proposals;
                                      - 11 -


      b) the construction of sane form of easily removable turnstiles to
         enable the existing 21 ft. exit gate to continue to be available;

      c) the construction of new turnstiles in the area of the Stadium
         between the end of the South Stand and the Penistone Road,
         possibly for use solely at evening matches where large attendances
         are envisaged should the Club wish to normally retain the
         exclusivism of the South Stand area.

5.4   On the 15th April 1982 the minutes of the Officer Working Party read:-

      Additional Turnstiles and Exit Gate in Penistone Road

      The Club at the meeting on 4th February had expressed their intention
      of proceeding in the forthcoming close season with the demolition of
      some of the existing toilets on the Penistone Road side of the Stadium
      in order to provide additional turnstiles and an exit gate at that
      side of the Stadium.

      It was suggested that it may well be that the Club would carry out the
      work at the same time as the provision of the new first aid and police
      facilities if pressured to do so. Certainly, additional turnstiles
      were desperately needed (especially at evening matches) at the
      Penistone Road side of the Stadium in view of the limited area
      available for queuing and the consequent inherent danger to both
      spectators and road traffic. Additionally, the exit widths from that
      side of the Stadium were just adequate, and an extra exit would
      relieve the situation.

      IT WAS AGREED that Chief Superintendent Herold would let both
      Mr Vaughan and Divisional Officer Ray have details of the police
      recommendations. Following this, Divisional Officer Ray would confirm
      to Mr Vaughan the County Fire Service support of the proposals, and Mr
      Vaughan would include an appropriate paragraph in his letter to the
      Club."

5.5   A letter dated 20th April, 1982 from the County Council was sent to
      the Club. The relevant part of that letter states:-

      "The second matter relates to the concern felt fran a public order and
      safety point of view by spectators (particularly during evening
      fixtures) spilling out on to Penistone Road whilst trying to gain
      admission to the Ground. As you are aware, the Penistone Road at
      that point is both the main A61 Sheffield/Barnsley road and a feeder
      route from the city centre to the Ml Motorway at Tankersley and, as
      such, carries considerable volumes of traffic at all times. There is
      a very real fear that a serious accident will result unless sanething
      can be done to enable spectators queuing to gain access to the Ground
      at that point to enter more rapidly than is possible presently.

      This was, of course, a matter discussed at the Ground Inspection on
      4th February, 1982. It was understood at that time that the Club
      intended to carry out work in the close season to rectify the problem.
      In this connection, it is suggested that the most viable method of
      improving the situation is to re-site an existing toilet block to the
      rear of the Spion Kop to enable an additional minimum of six (but
      preferably twelve) turnstiles to be installed, together with an
      additional exit gate. The exit widths on the Penistone Road side of
      the Ground are, of course, just acceptable and an extra exit would
      relieve the situation.
                                       - 12 -


       The County Council feels justified in requesting most firmly that the
       Club should take action in the forthcoming close season to relieve the
       admission (and to a lesser extent, the egress) problems at the
       Penistone Road side of the Ground, should a decision to do so not have
       already been taken by the Club."

5.6    A further letter from the County Council to the Club on the 28th
       April, 1982 states

       Further to the concluding paragraph of my letter dated 20th April, to
       reitDve any doubt which might exist, the County Council (through the
       Officer Working Party) feels that experience has shown that the
       improvements at the Penistone Road side of the Hillsborough Stadium
       must now be considered to be essential on public order and safety
       grounds. Accordingly, carrying out the improvements will now become a
       requirement of the General Safety Certificate granted to the Club on
       21st December, 1979."

5.7    Plans for the refreshment bar, toilets, turnstiles and new gate
       openings, referenced 82/3012 were approved by the Council on the
       11th August 1982.

5.8    It was reported to the Officer Working Party at the 24th August, 1982
       meeting that the Club had reported to the County Council that the
       proposals had been deferred until the end of the next season due to
       the size of the problem and the possiblity of creating hazards for
       spectators.

5.9    A County Council letter, dated 8th June 1983, to the Club notes that
       the work had comnenced on the redevelopment on the Penistone Road side
       of the ground. It, however, gave notice to the Club that the
       proposals had not been formally agreed to the County Council under the
       terms of the General Safety Certificate.

5.10   A letter from the Building Surveyor to the Architect, dated 15th June,
       1983 accepted alterations to the approved plans as a minor amendment.

5.11   The minutes of the Officer Working Party dated 28th July, 1983 shows
       that the proposals were accepted subject to:-

       "a)   the possible additional new exit gate adjacent to the proposed new
             refreshment facilities being omitted, as indicated on the plans.

       b)    the sliding/folding egress gates being regarded as acceptable only
             on condition that they continue to be permanently manned while
             ever the Stadium is open to the public (outward opening egress
             gates being preferable, as recommended by the Green Guide);

        c)   the upper level of the wall of the new refreshment facility being
             capable of withstanding crowd levels or protected by a barrier to
             the same standard where such pressures are capable of being
             generated;

        d)   generally, the new refreshment facility, new egress gate and new
             turnstiles being capable of withstanding the appropriate crowd
             loading where these are capable of being generated;

        e)   the plastic fall pipes being sited so as to prevent damage by the
             public or metal fall pipes used as an alternative;

        f)   measures being taken to prevent the public gaining access to the
             roof of the new facility as they are not load bearing;
                                         - 13 -


      g)    the possibility of using vandal-proof glazing in the new
            facilities being considered, and

      h)    the perimeter wall generally receiving attention frcm a
            maintenance point of view (pointing etc)."

6.    ALTERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE (1982 AND 1984)

6.1   On the 24th August, 1982 the summer inspection of the stadium was
      carried out, with the following as an extract frcm those minutes:-

      "West Stand

      It was noted that there was light surface corrosion at the foot of the
      steel supporting pillar nearest to the North West Terrace. As there
      was no enclosing wing to the stand, the pillar was open to the
      elements.

      The possibility of spectators climbing onto the roof of the store shed
      to the rear of the stand and adjacent to the boundary wall was
      discussed.

      IT WAS AGREED:-

           i)   that the Club would arrange for the floor of the steel
                supporting pillar to be cleaned and painted and possibly for the
                gusset plate to be covered by a concrete haunch.

       ii)      that the Club would consider whether any useful purpose would be
                served by retaining the store shed adjacent to the boundary
                wall.

      iii)      that the Club would investigate and make good the crack in the
                concrete adjacent to stand entrances 'W' and 'X'.

      North West Terrace

      It was noted that the cracks in the concrete underneath the Terrace
      had been repaired and appeared satisfactory. However, there was
      seepage of water between the North West Terrace and the West Stand in
      heavy rain.

      IT WAS AGREED:- That the Club would make good the bitumastic sealing
      between the terrace end of the West Stand."

6.2   The report of barrier testing from Eastwood and Partners dated
      6th September, 1982 includes the continent "Visual inspection of the
      remaining barriers both on Spion Kop and Leppings Lane Terrace
      revealed some corroded clips and tubes. Although the barriers on
      Leppings Lane are not due for testing until next year and those on
      Spion Kop, on their second cycle of tests, until 1985 and 1986, it was
      decided to replace the defective members this year. This work has now
      been completed."

6.3   The West Stand and North West Terrace were again mentioned in the
      minutes of the Officer Working Party dated 21st February 1983. The
      Club was recommended to replace the bitumen impregnated fibre board
      seal between the North West Terrace and the West Stand. On the West
      Stand itself, steelwork needed to be painted and a new expansion crack
      in the brickwork at the rear corner (nearest the North-West Terrace)
      needed to be monitored to ensure its condition did not worsen.
                                     - 14 -


6.4   On the 3rd February 1983, Neil Macfarlane (Under Secretary of State in
      the Department of the Environment) had issued a circular letter
      regarding his concern at the recent return of crowd violence at sane
      league matches. He advocated crowd segregation and careful and
      detailed planning before matches.

      With these comments in mind, at the Working Party meeting on the 21st
      February, the police expressed the view that at some time in the
      future, they hoped the Club would be able to provide sane form of
      segregation, as well as separate bar and toilet facilities, to
      separate hone and visiting supporters at the rear of the West Stand.

6.5   The crush barriers at the Leppings Lane end of the ground were tested,
      including all barriers on the West Terrace except spans 3 and 4 of
      barrier 136 and some spans of 144, 145, 146, 149 and 154 due to the
      absence of a suitable reaction point or obstruction preventing
      jacking. The report dated 29th June, 1983 states

      "In all but one case the barriers sustained the test load although
      in two cases the clips retaining the horizontal tube deformed, These
      clips were on barrier 136 between spans 6-7 and 8-9. New clips have
      been fitted. On barrier 129 the tube has been welded onto the clip to
      give a more positive facing, but nevertheless the test load was
      resisted.

      The only failure was the centre support of barrier 141. The angle leg
      which was corroded round the top rivets, parted during the first load
      application. The angle has been plated and new bolts inserted to
      complete the connection. This is shewn on our enclosed sketch
      4644/2."

6.6   The 11th August 1983 meeting of the Working Party stated:-

      "IT WAS AGREED:-

        i)   That, if the Club intend to continue to use the former A.R.P.
             building adjacent to the boundary wall, the lintel over the
             door would require attention in particular, as would the general
             maintenance of the building.

       ii)   That the condition of the crack in the non load bearing
             brickwork at the rear of the corner of the Stand (nearest to the
             North-West Terrace) should continue to be monitored.

      iii)   That the Club would give attention during normal maintenace to
             the loose rendering apparent in places."

      At the same meeting the matter of the seal between the Stand and the
      North-West Terrace was again discussed.

6.7   The letter frcm Eastwood and Partners dated 29th August 1983, partly
      reiterated the report of the crush barrier testing, as well as
      summarising other matters regarding the Stadium. The last paragraph
      reads:- "Following these inspections and tests, I certify that in my
      opinion the various structures on the ground are in a satisfactory
      condition and are appropriate for the Stadium to be used to the full
      capacity laid down in the certificate of Ground Safety."

6.8   A further letter frcm Eastwood and Partners to the Club dated
      2nd September 1983 was titled "Remedial work recommended to be done
      during the next maintenance period." The relevant entries are:-
                                          - 15 -


       "North West Corner

       a)   The loose joint filler between the West Stand gable and terrace
            ought to be removed.

       b)   The sheeting at the back of the terracing is beginning to corrode
            and some of the joints have been damaged and prised apart by
            spectators. Sharp edges and lifting corners should be attended
            to.

       c)   Make good a few spalled terrace steps.

       Area behind West Stand

       a)   Perhaps sane thought could be given to the future plans for the
            old brick built store which is in poor repair. If the building is
            to remain then the lintel should be propped or replaced and the
            walls and roof repaired.

       b)   Re-weld the loose coping stones and make good the spalled concrete
            over gates 1-17.

       West Stand

       a)   Make good the cracked and spalled concrete on the slab and step in
            the North side emergency exit.

       b)   Make good the bit of spalled concrete round the base of the front
            stanchion on the south gable.

       c)   Paint the bottom of the gable stanchions.

       d)   Hack off all loose concrete rendering, especially on South gable
            and make good where necessary."

6.9    It was noted, at a meeting on 29th February 1984, "that the former
       A.R.P. building adjacent to the boundary wall was in the process of
       demolition and the site cleared and levelled. This would have the
       additional benefit of improving the access/egress."

6.10   The five year test cycle of crush barriers was completed in June 1984,
       by satisfactorily testing those in the North-West Terrace.

6.11   On the 9th August 1984, during the simmer inspection, note was made of
       damaged angle support brackets to the pitchside security fence in
       front of the West Terrace, which should be repaired or replaced. The
       Working Party was also introduced to the proposals for catering
       facilities at the rear of the West Stand.

6.12   Plans for the proposed catering facilities (reference no. 84/4793)
       were deposited with the Council on 20th November 1984 and approved for
       Building Regulation purposes on the 12th December, 1984.

6.13   Plans of the catering facilities were considered at the 23rd January,
       1985 meeting of the Officer Working Party.
                                            - 16 -


    7.    SEGREGATION WORKS AT LEPPINGS LANE END

    7.1   Minutes of the Officer Working Party (23rd February, 1985) includes
          the conments:-

          The Club recalled the practice followed in consultation with the
          South Yorkshire Police of separating home and visiting supporters at
          the rear of the Stand at certain matches (such as with Liverpool) by
          erecting temporary barriers. This worked well but on all other
          normal occasions it was the policy of the Police to aim for
          exclusive use by visiting supporters of the West Stand and Terrace.
          On those occasions when the number of visiting supporters was small
          and the weather was inclement, it was obviously desirable to allow
          home supporters access to a sheltered area.

          IT WAS AGREED -

            (i)   That the Club would consider at some future date a scheme for
                  permanent barriers at the rear of the Stand, subject to any
                  proposals being submitted for prior approval by Officer
                  Working Party in the usual way.

           (ii) That the cracked brickwork (adjacent to the concrete vertical
                column at the rear of the Stand adjacent to the North West
                Terrace) should continue to be monitored.

          (iii)   That the apparent rusting of the steel columns at the rear of
                  the Stand should receive appropriate treatment by the Club.

2   Eastwood & Partners wrote to the County Council on the 9th April, 1985.

    "Segregation of Visiting Spectators at Leppings Lane End

    The Club is anxious to segregate the visiting team's supporters as they
    enter the ground, and also to enable the police to control their exit at
    the end of a game.

    We have prepared the scheme shown on the attached print of our drawing
    6705/2. This involves the construction of two new banks of turnstiles
    (Nos. 17-21 and 22-29), and various runs of fencing and new gates.

    It would be appreciated if the Working Party could consider this proposal
    at an early date. Mr. Chester has already given a copy of the drawing to
    the police so that they have had some advance notice.

3   The proposals were considered at a meeting of the Officer Working Party,
    dated 18th April 1985. The minutes state:-

    "Consideration of Proposals"

    The Police representatives pointed out that the proposals had been
    prompted in the main by conments they had made to the Club. At one time,
    both the West Stand and Terrace had been regarded as exclusively for the
    use of visiting supporters, but recent patterns of attendances at the
    Stadium made it necessary to allow for some element of use by home
    supporters as well.
                                               - 17 -

        The proposals now outlined by the Club were generally acceptable to the
        Police representatives, subject to:-

 (a)    additional gates being provided between the turnstile no.   16 and the wall
        of the inner access road;

 (b)    the central area of the Terrace (indicated as the neutral area or visiting
        supporters' terrace) being divided in half by a new central radial fence
        running from the tunnel entrance to the pitchside security fence with
        gates erected so as to permit entry to be diverted to either half as
        appropriate (the proposed new secondary radial fence adjacent to the
        existing fence indicated on the plan to be abandoned);

 (c)    the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as home supporters' terrace)
        also to be divided in half by a new central radial fence running from back
        to front with two gates (the existing radial fence dividing the present
        two Terrace areas - neutral area and home supporters - to have a second
        gate installed;

  (d)   the existing pitch perimeter fence to have additional exit gates installed
        - one in the neutral area and one in the horns supporters area.

        The County Fire Service saw no objection in principle to the proposals,
        subject to more detailed investigation of the means of escape aspects, and
        the Building Authority similarly saw no objection, subject to submission
        of detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of Sports Grounds
        Act and Building Regulations.

        3.   Action

        IT WAS AGREED

  (a) That R. Grimshaw should investigate as a matter of urgency the means of
      escape aspects of the proposals and let D. I. Vaughan know the outcome.

  (b) That, subject to satisfactory clearance of these aspects by the County
      Fire Service, the outline proposals submitted by Messrs. Eastwood &
      Partners be agreed as now amended by the suggestions of the South
      Yorkshire Police, also subject, of course, to the submission of the
      necessary detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of Sports
      Grounds Act and Building Regulations.

7.4     The County Council wrote to Eastwood & Partners on the 2nd May, 1985, and
        reiterated the above wording of the police representatives conditional
        acceptance of the scheme, and also added the following comment

        "(e) Certain gates to have the minimum widths (in metres) indicated on the
        attached plan and to them being fully supervised.

7.5     The reply to the County Council from Eastwood & Partners dated 8th May,
        1985 stated

        "In the interim period several of the points which you raised had already
        been incorporated in our latest scheme which has yet to be considered by
        the Club Board. However I would ask that further consideration should be
        given to the request in paragraph (c) of your letter for a second gate to
        be installed in the radial barrier and for the new radial barrier which
        you have asked for to have two gates. If these gates are meant for use in
        emergency it would mean having a steward in attendance on each occasion,
        the expense of which would hardly be justified. It is our view that in
        the event of emergency, spectators can be evacuated quickly enough by the
                                                     - 18 -

                    gates on to the pitch and by the normal exit gates at the rear. We will
                    of course be prepared to discuss the matter with the Fire Officer's staff
                    should you so wish".

                    On the 10th May, 1985, further correspondence from the County Council to
                    Eastwood & Partners read:-

                    "In reply to your letter of 8th May, the extra gates referred to in
                    paragraph (c) of my earlier letter of 2nd May were included primarily at
                    the request of the South Yorkshire Police.

                    Provided that the remainder of the points raised by the Officer Working
                    Party are incorporated in the latest proposals (yet to be considered by
                    the Club), the Police are prepared to concede the request for two gates
                    per radial fence in the right hand area of the Leppings Lane End Terrace
                    (indicated as home supporters' terrace on the plan)".

            7.7     A planning application (ref. 85/2545P) for the re-organisation of fences
                    and turnstiles and alterations to toilet facilities at the rear of the
                    West Stand was submitted to the Council and permission granted
                    (conditionally on the 7th August, 1985.

            7.8     In tandem with the above, a Building Regulation application (ref. 85/2549
                    B) was deposited with the Council for alterations to toilet facilities and
                    new refreshment area. The plans (drg. nos. 6705/10A & 11B) were passed
                    on the 29th August, 1985.

            7.9     Calculations for the new brick wall separating the area to the rear of the
                    West Stand were received by the Building Surveyor on the 29th July, from
                    Eastwood & Partners, in support of the building regulation application.

            7.10    A letter, dated 25th July, 1985 to the County Council, enclosed drawings
        1
                    6705/1, 6, 8A, 10A, 11A, 12, 14A, 17, 18 & 19 relevant to these proposals.

f           7.11    It is apparent frcm the files that the Officer Working Party met on the
                    29th July, 1985 to discuss these details, however the minutes of that
                    meeting and the copy of the letter from the County Council to Eastwood &
i                   Partners dated 30th July appear to be missing from our files.

            7.12    Most of the comments from the County Council in their letter of the 30th
                    July, can be understood by the wording of Eastwood & Partners reply dated
i
                    1st August.

                    "Thank you very much for your letter of 30th July giving the outcome of
                    the Working Party meeting on 29th July. We note the general comment that
    t   '           the calculations have to be approved by the Building Surveyor's
                    Department. We believe that all the calculations which are likely to be
                    required have been sent for checking and comment.
        i
                    With regard to your detailed obvservations our response is as follows:-

;             (a)   We are not sure of the location on the West Terrace of the proposed extra
                    security gate. There is already a gate in the 2 m wide gap formed by the
                    new radial fence for use by the police. This same gate will still be
                    available for the spectators in emergency as there are gates into the 2 m
]I                  gap from the terrace which will be under the control of the police. This
                    point nay perhaps be clarified during the Working Party's visit on 7th
                    August.

■1            (b)   The foundations for this fence are in fact already aligned in the way you
                    suggest.
                                           - 19 -


        (c) and (d)

        We are a little surprised by the suggestion that a single block thickness
        is not sufficient for the cubicle walls. The inside of a toilet cubicle
        is not a very vulnerable area and the walls are braced by the door frame.
        Studding is not at all suitable in terms of strength or durability, and
        would probably invite vandalism.

  (e)   The refreshment area is under the most westerly staircase up to the north
        west corner terrace. There will be an opportunity to inspect on 7th
        August.

  (f) The handrail is to be at a height of 1250 mm (411") above the horizontal
      step, measured at the face of the vertical step.

  (g) The stepping of the face of the wall is achieved by45° chamfers which
      will not form good footholds.

  (h)   Mr. Chester says that the Club will certainly not object to the provision
        of another gate at this point, and the precise location can be discussed
        on 7th August.

  (i)   As with point (a), we are not sure what is intended, and the matter can be
        discussed on 7th August.

  (j) Your comment regarding stewarding will no doubt, be taken care of by Mr.
      Chester.

        It will be much easier for your Working Party to appreciate what is
        intended when they see the works under construction.

7.13    Revisions of drawings (ref. 18A & 19A) were sent by Eastwood & Partners
        to the County Council on the 2nd August. Under separate cover these
        revisions and drawing 11B (new refreshment area under North West Terrace
        were sent to the Building Surveyor.

7.14    On the 7th August the Officer Working Party met at the Stadium for the
        "surnner" inspection. The relevant minutes are:-

        "Leppings Lane End

        The progress of the works to segregate visiting supporters behind and on
        the West Terrace and Stand were inspected with particular reference to the
        points raised at the Officer Working Party's meeting held on 29th July,
        (forwarded to Messrs. Eastwood & Partners by the Chief Executive's letter
        of 30th July) and Messrs. Eastwood & Partners reply of 1st August.

        Messrs. Eastwood & Partners had confirmed that all the calculations which
        were likely to be required had now been sent to the Building Authority for
        checking and comment.

        On the inspection, the Building Authority pointed out what they considered
        to be the poor standard of workmanship in the construction of the new
        dividing wall which was being built behind the Stand. The position of the
        Police Personnel access gate and the stepping of the face of the wall by
        45“chamfers so as not to form footholds were acceptable.

        The foundations of the new handrail by Turnstile 23 had actually been
        aligned so as to maintain the exit width betweeen the outer (river) wall
        and the Turnstile (unlike the indication on the plan submitted).
                                               - 20 -

        As regards the single thickness of the internal walls of the cubicles in
        the new male and female toilet facilities at the rear of the stand,
        Messrs. Eastwood and Partners considered that the inside of a toilet
        cubicle was not a very vulnerable area, and pointed out that the walls
        were braced by both the outer walls and the door frames. The Building
        Authority noted the assurances given by Dr. Eastwood, but expressed
        concern that the dividing walls in the new toilet facilities evidently did
        not have any foundations, apparently having been built straight onto the
        existing concrete slabs. It was noted that there were some 9 inch thick
        brick walls in the Male Toilets, it being considered that any hooliganism
        or vandalism would be more likely to occur that in the Female Toilets.

        The Club pointed out that the new toilet facilities would not be
        completely finished by the first match of the season (on 17th August) but
        that temporary facilities would be available and no building material
        would be left on site.

        The position of the new refreshment area under the most westerly staircase
        up to the North West corner terrace was noted. This again had been built
        straight onto the existing concrete slabs.

        On the Terrace itself, it was noted that there was an existing gate in the
        new 2m wide gap formed by the new radial fence for use by the Police.
        This gate would still be available for the use of spectators in an
        emergency as the gates at the top of the Terrace under the control of the
        Police would enable spectators to be directed down the 2 m wide gap. It
        was also agreed that a new gate would be required from the new South
        Central Terrace Pen.

        As regards the upper seated stand area, Messrs. Eastwood and Partners had
        sent by letter dated 2nd August plans of the new fences and barriers in
        both the Stand and at the Access level.

        IT WAS AGREED:-

  (a)   that the condition of the internal walls in the new male and female toilet
        facilities at the rear of the Stand should be monitored;

  (b)   that the existing gate in the pitch perimeter fence should either be
        extended or have steps to provide easier access from the new 2 m wide gap
        formed by the new radial fence;

  (c)   that a new gate in the pitch perimeter fence should be provided from the
        new South Central Terrace Pen;

  (d)   that the advertising hoardings at the front of the upper seated stand area
        should be securely fixed to the concrete wall;

  (e)   that the spalling of the concrete of the wall at the front of the upper
        seated stand area should receive attention as a matter of maintenance;

  (f)   that the corrosion of the steel columns at the rear of the Stand should
        receive attention on a maintenance basis.

7.15    A letter from Eastwood & Partners, dated 12th August, 1985, commented on
        the 3rd paragraph of the above text, and made technical argument as to why
        the brickwork vertical joints should not be fully filled with mortar. The
        County Council answered this letter on the 22nd August with an equally
        technical answer, the working of which had been drafted by the Building
        Surveyor's Division. A further letter from Eastwood & Partners on the
        same subject was written on the 27th August ending with the paragraph:-
                                             - 21 -


       "I reiterate that the construction standards are normal. The wall has
       been designed for most onerous conditions and using the very pessimistic
       permissible stresses contained in the Code, which are more akin to walls
       badly constructed and subject to 100 years of atmospheric pollution. With
       this background, the criticisms which are being made are irritating to say
       the least".

       The relevant points having been documented, it was determined that no
       useful purpose would be served by any further correspondence.

7.16   The minutes of the Officer Working Party m e e t i n g dated 13th November, 1985
       stated:-

       "Crowd Flow at the Leppings Lane End of the Stadium

       The Police reported on the continuing problems caused by the merging of
       spectators from all parts of the Stadium at the Leppings Lane End.

       It was difficult to see how this could be overcome, as the physical
       restraints to achieve this could conceivably be more of a danger than
       allowing the present position to continue".

7.17   In the letter from Eastwood & Partners dated 29th November, 1985 the
       following extract is relevant

       "Crowd Flow at the Leppings Lane End of the Stadium

       The Club is aware of the difficulties which the Police have to contend
       with at the Leppings Lane End and has of course been very pleased to help
       the problem by the major works which were undertaken during the last close
       season. We find it very difficult to envisage anything more which could
       be done at reasonable expense".

       Fire Brigade Access to the Front of all Stands

       As part of the works on the Kop, we are completely remodelling the area
       around the existing tunnel. The headroom is being increased to 2.4 metres
       and the width of the tunnel is being increased also. A considerable
       amount of earth shifting will have to take place and this presents an
       opportunity to widen the gangway so as to enable say a fire engine to pass
       between the North Stand and the retaining wall of the Kop. If the Fire
       Service think this is of value, I should be pleased to know the width they
       would like so that we can see whether it can be provided at reasonable
       cost and without sacrificing too many standing spaces".

7.18   From the last meeting of the Officer Working Party before the demise of
       the County Council, held on the 22nd January 1986, the following minute
       appears:-

       "West Terrace and Stand

       The Police representatives confirmed that the revised segregation
       arrangements to the rear of the Stand worked well on by far the majority
       of occasions.

       Dr. Eastwood pointed out that the segregation rail in the upper seated
       area of the stand could be moved within certain limits if the Police
       considered that this could achieve a useful purpose".
                                        - 22 -


      IT WAS AGREED

(a)   that the additional advertisement hoardings at the front of the upper
      seated stand area (nearest to the North West Terrace) should also be
      securely fixed to concrete wall,

(b)   that further areas of spalling concrete at the front of the upper seated
      stand area should receive attention as matters of maintenance.
                                       - 23 -

8.    DURATION OF SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL AS LICENSING AUTHORITY

8.1 At the annual inspection of the ground on the 7th August, 1986, all members
    of the officer working party were represented. After an initial
    discussion, all preceeded to travel around the ground initially staying
    mainly together in a group. The Club was represented by its consultant
    engineers. It was assumed that comments raised would be minuted by the
    Licensing Authority representative and as such no individual notes were
    taken by the Building Surveyor's representatives. From memory, one item
    which was raised by the Police representative, was the difficulties they
    were experiencing at the Terrace End of the central tunnel particularly in
    Pen 3. Although a similar layout of barriers existed in both Pens 3 and 4
    it was said that experience had shown that the barrier in Pen 3 was causing
    difficulties with crowd movement. The request to remove that section of
    the barrier was discussed by Police, Fire Authority and the Building
    Surveyor's representative and it was determined that: since it would aid
    crowd control and alleviate backing up into the tunnel; that the means of
    escape were excellent from that position; and it was understood that the
    area around the tunnel exit would be kept clear by police officers on the
    terracing, the barrier should be removed.

      The area to be kept clear was subsequently painted with yellow hatch
      markings.

      No other relevant significant issues can be recalled from memory which were
      found or discussed at that inspection, by this Division's representation.

8.2   The letter dated 21st October, 1986 from Eastwood & Partners to the
      Licensing Authority consenting on the Spion Kop development, includes the
      paragraph:-

      "The continuation of the top crush barrier adjacent to grid line 14 is
      not considered appropriate. It will be realised that there has to be
      a balance, with the need to permit free movement sometimes being more
      important than slavishly following the recommendation of continuous
      barriers at fixed spacing (for example, the police request during last
      sunmer that we should remove parts of barriers at the Leppings Lane end)".

      It is not known if this is a reference to the barrier at the tunnel exit,
      or if it refers to others at the South End of the Terrace which were
      removed without reference to the Building Surveyor's Division.

8.3   From the 21st August, 1986 to the meeting of the General Purposes Panel
      of the Council on 7th September, 1987 considerable inter-Departmental
      correspondence was generated regarding the future administration of the
      Council's Certificating Function for the purposes of the Safety of Sports
      Grounds Act. The main point of contention was the role to be taken by the
      Department of Health and Consumer Services in the administrative function.

8.4   A lengthy report from the Fire Authority, dated 18th February, 1987 makes
      the following 3 cotrments regarding the West Stand.

      (1)   Means of Escape in Case of Fire

            A.   Timber framed and clad units located under this stand have been
                 there for some considerable tine. No records exist of:-

                 (i) acceptance of these units or
                 (ii) that they have been treated with fire retardent point or
                      solutions.
                                       - 24 -


          B.   It is understood that the gates in the pitch perimeter fencing
               form part of the emergency exits. The gates for reasons of
               security, fasten with barrel bolts secured to the gate both top
               and bottom and open in a sideways direction. It is doubtful that
               if it were necessary to evacuate the stand onto the pitch in an
               emergency that the gates would open if pressure were generated by
               a crcwd. No record can be found in respect of discussion on gate
               fastenings. It is recommended that a satisfactory security device
               easily openable from the pitch side should be found and fitted to
               all perimeter gates.

      (2) Emergency Lighting - South, North and West Stands

          In letter dated 12th November, 1980 from Eastwood & Partners, it was
          suggested that following test certificates dated 11th August, 1980, a
          period of 5 years should elapse before re-testing for South Stand and
          2 years for North and West Stands. As of today no record appears to
          exist as to whether these areas have been re-tested or that the test
          certificates together with maintenance records have ever been
          re-presented. The emergency lighting system should therefore be
          re-tested for the whole of the ground and test certificates produced.

           In addition the whole of the system should conform to BS 5266.

      (3) Fire Alarm

          Existing call points to be relocated to accessible positions outside
          of franchise areas and be increased to cover the upper areas of the
          stand.

8.5   For interest, in a letter from the Licensing Authority to the Club, dated
      22nd April, 1987, the following paragraph appears:-

      "The Police have indicated that as at 6th January, 1987 they are quite
      satisfied with the Stadium and have indicated that the degree of
      co-operation which they receive is very satisfactory."

8.6   In preliminary correspondence regarding the facilities for the disabled in
      the North Stand, with a ramp leading down between the North Stand and the
      Spion Kop, the Fire Authority on the 11th March, 1987, cooment that a
      timber platform to be built over the front 3 rows of seats to be
      constructed that no debris etc. can fall and accumulate underneath, and
      that the width of the ramp to be in accordance with BS 5810. Access for
      fire appliances is not mentioned.

8.7   A request for a report on the condition of the Stadium by the Licensing
      Authority was answered by The Building Surveyor on the 24th June, 1987.

      "You will appreciate that to carry out a complete survey of all parts of
      this complex is a long and time consuming job which should not be
      approached in anything other than a thorough manner. I have therefore yet
      to find available diary time for my officers to spend on the site.

      A report will be sent to you after a complete inspection has been
      undertaken."

8.8   After an annual visit to the ground on the 6th August, 1987 a detailed set
      of observations was sent to the Licensing Authority. Regarding the West
      Stand the comments read:-
                                                   - 25 -

               "2.1    Signs over the front parapet wall at the upper level are to be
                       permanently secured in the following positions

                       (a) between seats 1 and 14
                       (b) between seats 20 and 28
                       (c) between seats 136 and 150.

                       Binding wire ties are not considered to be satisfactory for this
                       purpose. Additionally the sign brackets adjacent to seats 62 and 72
                       are to be correctly bent (or otherwise suitably chocked) and secured.

                2.2 Rain water drainage holes through the upper level slab should have a
                    gauze inserted so as to inhibit the dropping of missiles onto the
                    crowd below.

                2.3    It is felt that discussion should take place regarding the
                       suitability of the gate fastening device at the base of the emergency
                       exit stairway on the south end of this stand. The fastening consists
                       of a patent lockable barrel bolt which cannot easily be unfastened in
                       the direction of travel, and is impossible to be fastened from the
                       other side."

        8.9    Regarding gate release devices (primarily for the pitch perimeter fence
               gates), Eastwood & Partners wrote to the Licensing Authority on the 19th
               August, 1987 enclosing sketches of a proposed mechanism. Alterations to
               the type of spring used were discussed by phone. A prototype of the
               fastening was seen fixed to a pitch perimeter gate on the Spion Kop side of
               the ground on 25th February, 1988. Tests showed the device to work well.
               All pitch perimeter gates were subsequently fitted with similar devices.

        8.10   A meeting of the now renamed Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group was
    '          held on the 17th September, 1987. Four items from the minutes are relevant
               to this report

               "4. S.W.F.C. - Building Surveyors carcnents of 13th August

                       All the points mentioned should be brought to the attention of the
                       Club, except where they conflict with points raised by other
!                     Authorities. Particular reference should be made to paragraph 2.3
                       relating to the emergency exit stairway in the West Stand.
i
                      Reference should also be made to the permanent securing of signs over
                      the front parapet wall on the West Stand.

                5. S.W.F.C. - Fire Service
I.
                       It is understood that none of the items mentioned in the letter of
    I                 18th February, 1987 have yet been completed by the Club, but the Tire
    1                 Service will check and inform Head of Administration and Legal
                       Department of this.
I
i’              6.    Gate Release Devices - Eastwood's Letter of 19th August

                      The Fire Service are sending a letter dated 15th September advising
                      that it may be appropriate for a sample device to be constructed and
                      fixed to one pitch perimeter gate and then tested in situ to see
                      whether it could perform its function adequately. This method of
                      approach was generally agreed. It was also mentioned that perhaps the
                      device could be used in a modified form to replace the existing
                      unsatisfactory locking arrangements on the existing sliding exit
                      doors.
                                        - 26 -


        8.   Green Guide - General Management Responsibilities

             It was recommended that a letter should be sent to the Club pointing
             out the above responsibilities."

8.11   G. Mackrell (S.W.F.C. Club Secretary) wrote to the Licensing Authority on
       the 23rd October, 1987, stating:-

       "with regard to the appointment of a Safety Officer, my duties encompass
       those of the Safety Officer and I would be grateful if you could amend your
       records to note that I am responsible for all matters of safety within the
       ground."

8.12   In a letter dated 4th December, 1987 the comments of the Licensing
       Authority regarding the site inspection on the 6th August were issued to
       the Club.

8.13   In a memorandum dated 2nd February, 1988 to the Licensing Authority, the
       Building Surveyor stated:-

       "Stewarding at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

       I am advised by a member of my staff, who has attended recent games, that
       there has been a lack of effective stewarding on the Kop, resulting in the
       crowd occupying the radial gangways as additional standing areas,
       throughout the games.

       Although it is appreciated that these games were important cup-ties and,
       therefore, attracted increased crowd capacities, stewarding must be of a
       quality and of such numbers as to maintain these gangways free from
       congestion during performances.

       It is also understood that the turnstile capacity on the Penistone Road
       frontage was insufficient, and that many of the spectators were still
       entering the ground up to 15 minutes after the kick-off.

       The combination of late arrival and ineffective stewarding could lead to
       dangerous occurences.

       It is considered that the Club should be made aware of these matters and be
       required to confirm that stewarding will be made available to keep these
       areas clear.

       This is possibly a matter that should be raised at the next meeting of the
       Working Party, so that Police and Fire Authority comments may also be
       sought."

8.14   The minutes of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, dated 23rd
       March, 1988 (regarding the item 8.13 above) states:-

       "S.W.F.C. - Building Surveyor's Memorandum of 2.2.88

       The Building Surveyor's representative outlined the memorandum and the
       circumstances which gave rise to it. Superintendent Stuart indicated that
       the gangway problem had been discussed with Sheffield Wednesday who were
       going to take measures with their stewards in an attempt to resolve it. As
       far as the turnstile question was concerned, a pattern has developed of
       people arriving same 15 minutes before the start of the game hoping to gain
       admission. This trend may be due to the banning of alcohol at sports
I
                                           - 27 -


           grounds which could lead to people going elsewhere for refreshment prior to
           the football match. As the available turnstiles operated quite effectively
           for the majority of the time, and that the late arrival problem could
           perhaps only be dealt with by education of spectators."

    8.15 A copy of the letter dated 2nd August, 1988 from Eastwood & Partners to the
         Club, was sent direct to Building Surveyor's Division. This letter headed
         Barrier Testing 1988 reads

           "Over the four days 14, 15, 18 & 19 July, 1988, the fourth part of our five
           yearly cycle of barrier testing was carried out.

           The Barriers tested were numbers 121 to 124, 124A, 125 to 128, 128A. 129 to
           136, 136A, 137 to 153 and 187 all of which are on the lower area of terrace
           at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. The location of the barriers
           tested is shown on our drawing 1610/64E, a print of which is enclosed.

           The load testing was carried out in accordance with the procedure set out
           in Appendix C of the 'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds'. In all but one
           case the barriers tested, successfully withstood the applied load. A clip
           over the rail of barrier 124 broke before reaching the full test load.

           Visual inspection of all the barriers on the ground revealed that some of
           the ends of the rails are corroded although those tested on the Spion Kop
           last year and also those tasted on the Leppings Lane Terrace this year all
           safely supported the test load.

           The rail on barrier 133 is badly corroded and should be replaced now.
           There was also a lot of movement of the rail on barrier 144, when tested,
           and we also reconmend that the rail is also replaced. As agreed we have
           arranged for the clip on barrier 124 to be replaced together with rails on
           barriers 133 and 144, before the start of the coming season.

           Enclosed are single copies of our record sheets showing the results of the
           barrier tests."

           The record sheets were emitted from this correspondence, but were
           subsequently received, together with a certificate of calibration dated
           8th July, from Sheffield Testing Works Ltd., in respect of the barrier
           testing equipment.

    8.16   A copy of a fax. was received from Sheffield Wednesday, together with
           details from Telescaff Services Ltd. of a proposed behind the goal camera
           platform to be located at high level in the West Stand for the semi-final
           game on the 15th April, 1989. The details appeared to be satisfactory.

    8.17   On Monday the 17th April, an accurate survey was made of the Leppings Lane
           end of the ground. The drawing is titled Sheffield Wednesday F.C. - West
           Stand - Existing Plan 15.4.89.

    8.18   An inspection of the ground on the 10th May, 1989 prompted the following
           relevant comments to be sent to the Licensing Authority:-

           "4.0 West Stand and Terracing

            4.1 The upper level of the West Stand and the central areas of the West
                Terracing were not inspected on this occasion.
                                         - 28 -


       4.2   Pitch side advertisement boards to North end of terracing need
             securing.

       4.3   External wall sheeting to northern entrance stairway to stand needs
             replacement.

       4.4 As raised in my comments of the 13th August, 1987 I am still unhappy
           that no modification has been made to the gate fastening device at
           the base of the emergency exit stairway on the South end of the
           Stand. The fastening consists of a patent lockable barrel bolt which
           cannot easily be unfastened in the direction of travel, and is
           impossible to be unfastened from the other side. A similar device to
           those used on the pitch perimeter fence gates could be installed.
           You will no doubt also have the views of the Fire Service on this
           matter.

       4.5   Consideration should be given to installing an additional barrier
             between barriers 146 and 147 at the south end of the West Terracing.

       4.6   Similar to the Spion Kop, barrier rails were noted to have suffered
             rust through under support clips. A complete survey and necessary
             repair and retesting should be carried out by the Club's engineers
             and the results reported to the Council."

8.19   On the 15th May the Building Surveyor's Division received a copy of a
       letter dated 2 August 1988 from Eastwood and Partners. The letter is
       headed "Annual Inspection of Hillsborough Stadium as required by the
       Certificate of Ground Safety".

       The text reads

       "On 18 July 1988, I made an inspection of the ground during the time that
       this year's quota of crush barriers were being tested by my firm.

       The results of the crush barrier testing are given in a separate report of
       to-day's date.

       I made a visual inspection of all the main structural features of the
       ground. Particular attention was paid to gates and entry and exit routes
       and to boundary walls and fences. No significant defects were noted.

       The roof of the South stand was inspected from the ground.   No
       deterioration in its condition was observed.

       I certify that in my opinion the various structures on the ground are in a
       satisfactory condition and appropriate for the stadium to be used to the
       full capacity as laid down in the Certificate of Ground Safety.
                                        - 29 -


9.       NOTES AND COMMENTS

9.1      Tunnel Access

9.1.1.   It appears that this was first constructed as part of the
         1928 West Stand scheme, and that the width and position have
         not altered since.

9.1.2.   The gradient of therear ofthe tunnel accessappears not to have been
         altered from the 1928scheme.Towards    thefront,however,   itappears to
         have been regraded downwards towards the terracing when the 1965 scheme
         (for the present West Stand) was implemented. It is assumed that this
         alteration was necessary to achieve sufficient headroom for spectators to
         pass under the front concrete ring beam supporting the seated spectator
         area of the Stand. Since the walls of the existing accommodation under
         the West Stand appear to date back to the 1928 scheme, the extent of the
         regrading would have been restricted to the areas of new work at the time.

         It is stated in section 1.1 of this report that the banking at the ends of
         the ground were formed by tipping rubbish, and on the 1954 floodlighting
         scheme drawing, many references to Ash Roads appear.

         It may be assumed that the walls to the accommodation under the West Stand
         were built on ground beams (possibly just under the surface of the tunnel
         walkway), and to regrade the whole length of the tunnel would possibly
         have meant expensive underpinning of the structure, when at the time,
         there was no statutory obligation to do so.

9.1.3    The factors of the position, width and gradient appear to have been
         considered at the meetings of the Officers Working Party
         on 12th February, 1979, 30th March, 1979 and 2nd April, 1979
          (see 2.6, 2.7 and 2.8 respectively).

9.1.4.   Due to these considerations, a reduction of capacity to 7,200 was
         accepted for the West Terrace at the time, and has not changed
         since.

9.1.5.    The preference of ramps not to exceed 1 in 10 in the original
          version of the "Green Guide", did not change when the revised
          issue was printed in 1986.
                                            - 30 -


      9.2      Pitch Perimeter Fence and Gates

      9.2.1.   There is no record on the files of when the pitch perimeter
                fences were erected. It would, however, appear that they were
               erected before 1976, since after that time detailed minutes
               and records were maintained by the County Council.

      9.2.2.   The plans of the radial barriers (Drg. 3563/1) show that the
               south radial barrier was constructed as being independent of
               the perimeter fence, whilst the North barrier installed in
               1981 was shown to use the existing perimeter fence post as
               part of its construction.

      9.2.3.   At the time of the 1981 works of installing radial barriers,
                each of the three areas of terrace were provided with pitch
                perimeter gates. A gate to the central section is shown on
                the drawing of the radial fence (This gate now serving the
                sterile area).

      9.2.4.   When the second phase of the radial barriers were installed in
               1985, additional pitch perimeter gates were required - one in
               the neutral (central) area and one in the home supporters
               (North) area - see 7.3.

      9.2.5    The Working Party minutes of the 7th August, 1985 carmented
                that one of the existing gates was within the sterile area,
                but would still be available for spectators in an emergency as
                the gates at the top of the terrace would be under the control
                of the Police. It was, however, noted that steps or a longer
                gate would be required at this point.

      9.2.6    A new gate was also required from the new South Central
                terrace pen at the 7th August, 1985 meeting.

      9.2.7    No drawings can be found on record of the agreed positioning
                of these gates.

      9.2.8    The gate fastening devices, i.e. barrel bolts at top and
                bottom were said to be unsatisfactory in a letter dated 18th
                February, from the Fire Authority - see 8.4

      9.2.9    The letter of the 18th February, 1987 also suggested that the
               pitch perimeter gates formed part of the emergency exits - see
               8.4.
***   9.2.10   New gate release devices (see appended sketch) were designed
                by Eastwoods in August, 1987 (see 8.9). A prototype of the
                new gate release device was fitted and approved on the 25th
                February, 1988 (see 8.9).

      9.2.11   At the time of the incident in April, 1989, all perimeter
                gates had been fitted with the new release devices.
>4sfW OOD & PARTNERS
                                                                                                    Sheet No.
Consulting E ngineers _______              •      __
                                                                                                            Prepared    Date
PROJECT:
                                       jdOUwOS           ACT                                                                -37
SAfETy          At
                                                                                                            Checked    Approved
SUBJECT:              g.o^o«>t.n        c-A T t




                                                         C-ATi -8.AM£
           20
                                                                                      4,0*20            f\-K~




                                                  . •'    S. vWO                     To       S ^ rr}




                                                                   N l v j »Ki t     *5 i. A i c




                                                                        FROM”             L L t V M !0'J
CUlcS. f-R- K n '-
                                                                                   V \ L w iL O           f R.Q H
                                  8o
                                                                                              0 ITCH




                                                                                       Gi
                                                                                        •51




         c a ~ c rt   ' i- at s



                                                                                                         C'lOM
                                                                             Sheet No.
                                                                                Prepared                 Date
PROJECT:
                                              A C.7    l-T-5

                                                                                 Checked               Approved
                                   <sA“ L     Rt.LE.ASc.       D c.V | Cc.
SUBJECT:     ^fl.opoS c.0




                            10 0                  10
                                                                                    fk*4“ I-TB         fcls
                                                                                         P'-ftT c. .




                                                                                         ~T= g-WAC E
                                                                                             ' S1T>£

  £    j
       5
       lU

       J      10         U ^ w U L.I. .



 ^<.   '
       *■i               “KfSCK.          SV^C.


       >
       o
       a
       <


                   5,tCl>CKJ        1 ' i
                                        - 31 -

9.3      Radial Fences

9.3.1    Radial fences were installed in two phases along the West
         Terrace, the first phase being in 1981 and the second in
         1985.

9.3.2.   The original intention of the fences was for segregation of
          the fans from opposing teams on the same terrace, and so aid
          crowd control. The creation of three separate areas was to
          create flexibility of use, so the terrace could be used for a
         visiting team with only a few supporters or for larger
          contingents requiring two or all of the areas.

9.3.3.   The original 3 areas were each served by their own entrances,
         i.e. the middle area by the central tunnel, and the end
         sections by the access ways to the North and South of the West
         Stand.

9.3.4.   The Working Party agreed to the proposals on the 11th
         September, 1981, with a specific condition that the new gates
         at the rear of the Terrace also being under police control.

9.3.5.   Phase I works were substantially complete by mid-Decsnber, 1981,

9.3.6    It should be noted that the North Fence in Phase I was the
          most Northern of the two present fences forming the 2 metre
          sterile area, hence the pitch perimeter gate now serving the
          sterile area was at that time in the Central Area.

9.3.7    The second phase of radial fencing in the terraced area was
         part of an overall package of works to totally segregate fans
         within the ground. These works were progressed at the
         instigation of the Police - see 7.3.

9.3.8    The central area was intended to be a neutral area or
          visiting supporters terrace, the Southern area for visiting
          supporters, and the Northern end of home supporters - see Plan
          6705/2.

9.3.9    The Working Party called for 2 gates to be provided to the
          Central and Southern radial fences. The proposal for the
          second gate in the fences was opposed by Eastwood and Partners
          in their letter of the 8th May, 1985 (see 7.5) on the grounds
          that spectators could evacuate the area quickly enough by the
          various exit routes, and the expense of stewarding those gates
          on each occasion. On the 10th May, 1985, it is recorded that
          the Police had conceded their earlier request - see 7.6.

9.3.10   The reasoning for the creation of the sterile area between the
          areas of opposing fans can be understood, even though it
          appears that the Working Party made comment that the new
          secondary radial fence adjacent to the existing fence should
          be abandoned (see 7.3). No reasoning for the central radial
          fence was, however, given in the minutes of the working party
          meetings.

9.3.11   The Phase 2 works on the terracing appear to have been
          substantially completed at the time of the Working Party visit
          on the 7th August, 1985 (see 7.14).
                                       - 32 -


9.3.12   In the Minutes of the 7th August, 1985 meeting, it was
         reiterated that the gates at the top of the terrace would be
         under the control of the Police - see 7.14.
                                     - 33 -


9.4     Crush Barriers

9.4.1   There is no record on file of when crush barriers were first
        erected at this end of the ground.

        The aerial photograph taken in the 1930's shows the existance of
        crush barriers on the West Terrace and although the detail is
        unclear, it appears that the majority were 2 or 3 sections long.

9.4.2   Eastwood and Partners drawing 1610/26 is undated (but will not date
        back before 1978), shows the layout of the minimal level of
        barriering at that tirrvs.

9.4.3   Drawing 1610/2XC dated December 1978 shows the scheme for
        additional barriers to the West Terrace. Directly affecting pens 3
        and 4, the drawing shows new construction for barriers 149,
        150, 132, 126, 136A (Span 2), 124A (Span 3) and 128(Span 1). All
        were designed for 6KN/metre test load.

9.4.4. The new complete barriers installed were to the design shown on
       drawings 1610/13B and 1610/14B. Infilling of rails between
       existing support legs was by a sleeving technique shown in Detail 1
       on drawing 1610/14B.

9.4.5   When the radial barriers were installed in 1981, Barrier 124 was
        split into two sections (now numbered 124 and 124A) - the rail
        passing through the line of the radial barrier having been removed
        - see drawing 1610/64D. (No. 124A is the barrier which collapsed).

9.4.6   Coincidental with the installation of radial barriers in 1985,
         access to the front of pen 3 appears to have been created by taking
         out sections one and four of barrier 136, thus creating barrier
         136A. Sections of barriers 128, 138 and 150 were also removed to
         create the sterile area.

9.4.7   Sections of barrier 144 were removed at Police request in 1986.

9.4.8   Dr David Uzzell of the Department of Psychology, University of
         Surrey, speaking on Safety at Sports Grounds, in 1987, noted: in a
         crowd persons tended to go to the right rather than to the left,
         and usually travelled forward rather than laterally. Both these
         points appear to show that there may have been a major problem of
         crowd control at the tunnel exit before the above works were
         carried out.

9.4.9   All the works mentioned in 9.4.4 to 9.4.7 above were carried out
         before the issue of the 1986 "Green Guide". As regards the major
         issue of barrier type, strength, spacing and height, there has been
         no significant changes between the two documents to warrant
         reappraisal of previous decisions.

9.4.10 All the barriers in these areas were last tested in 1988 and the
        calibration of the testing equipment was also checked prior to the
        carrying out of these tests.

        These barriers were previously tested in June 1983.
                                      - 34 -


9.4.11   Specifically in relation to barrier 124A and those of similar type,
         they are thought to have been constructed in the early thirties,
         and consisted of vertical cantilever type frane supports of 2 1/8"
         x 2 1/8" x 1/4" (54 x 54 x 6.3) raker struts and 2" x 2" x 1/4"
         (51 x 51 x 6.3) angle vertical ties attached to a riveted/bolted
         gussetted joint at the top carrying a 2 3/8" (60mm) diameter x
         6 s.w.g. hollow section barrier rail tube by means of a clip
         assembly. A sleeve has been inserted between sections 2 and 3 of
         the barrier rail, presumably when span 3 was inserted in 1979.

         The collapse mechanism appeared to follow classic theoretical lines
         with the progressive formation of plastic hinges at critical joint
         locations. It is thought that the rail approached ultimate
         conditions by exhibiting excessive deflection near mid-span of
         approximately 7" (170mm) and behaved in a catenary manner creating
         torsion and longitudinal forces in the frame support members. The
         barrier construction has been modelled using computer finite
         element techniques and within reasonable practical limits the
         analysis gives a good indication of load factors, strengths and
         particularly stiffness which can be compared to recorded test data.
         The analysis carried out shows the additional reserve of strength
         in the barrier system to be of the magnitude of 1.75 times.

9.4.12   In relation to barrier spacing, the terrace angle is approximately
         1 in 4, and considered as peak viewing area. By graphical
         interpolation of table 1 of the Green Guide, the maximum distance
         between barriers is shewn to be approximately 3.9 metres. Actually
         between barriers this figure is not exceeded. The configuration of
         the barriers so as to limit the alignment of gaps is also of a
         correct form.

9.4.13   Regarding the gaps between the crush barriers, these are mainly
         greater than the reconmendation in the "Green Guide", of
         1.4 metres. Most, however, have been as the existing layout of
         barriers (prior to certification) or have been formed within the
         existing barrier construction consequential on the provision of
         radial barriers to aid crcwd control.
                                                           APPENDIX 1




                 BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION
                DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING
                     SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

             TECHNICAL REPORT OF LEPPINGS LANE END

                  WEST STAND AND WEST TERRACE

              Building Surveyor's Staff Involvement




 Item          Date of Meeting              Officers Involved


2.4          13th December, 1978       A. Mills, D. Sheriff
2.6          12th February, 1979       A. Mills, D. Sheriff
2.7          30th March, 1979          J. Stenton, D. Sheriff
2.8          2nd April, 1979           A. Mills, D. Sheriff
3.6          10th April, 1980          A. Mills, D. Sheriff
3.7          10th February, 1981       A. Roberts, D. Sheriff
4.1          8th June, 1981            A. Roberts, D. Sheriff
4.4          11th September, 1981      D. Sheriff
4.9          4th February, 1982        B. Sumner, D. Sheriff
5.3          7th October, 1981         D. Sheriff
5.4          15th April, 1982          A. Atkinson, D. Sheriff
5.8 & 6.1    24th August, 1982         N. Atkinson, D. Sheriff
5.11         28th July, 1983           N. Atkinson, D., Sheriff
6.3 & 6.4    21st February, 1983       N. Atkinson, K. Blount, D. Sheriff
6.6          11th August, 1983         A. Roberts, D. Sheriff
6.9          29th February, 1984       N. Atkinson, D. Sheriff
6.11         9th August, 1984          N. Atkinson, D. Sheriff
6.13 & 7.1   23rd January, 1985        N. Atkinson, D. Sheriff
7.3          18th April, 1985          N. Atkinson
7.11         29th July, 1985           Minutes missing from file
7.14         7th August, 1985          N. Atkinson, D. Sheriff
7.16         13th November, 1985       N. Atkinson, A. McKenzie
7.18         22nd January, 1986        N. Atkinson, G. Swann
8.1          7th August, 1986          A. Butler, G. Swann
8.8          6th August, 1987          A. Butler, G. Swann
8.9          25th February, 1988       A. Butler
8.10         17th September, 1987      A. Butler, G, Swann, M. Harvey
8.14         23rd March, 1988          A. Butler, M. Harvey
8.18         10th May, 1989            A. Butler, G. Swann
                                                                        APPENDIX 2



                          BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION
                         DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING
                             SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL



DRAWINGS REFERRED TO IN TECHNICAL REPORT ON LEPPINGS LANE END, WEST STAND AND
WEST TERRACE, SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB, HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD


Drawing      Drawing     Description                                      Paragraph
No.          Date                                                         Referred
                                                                          To


    -         30.5.28    Proposed new football stand at Leppings Lane     1.3
                         (Building Bye-law application 31214)

1 & 2        March '52   Sanitary accorrmodation                          1.4

1483/IB       16.4.54    Plan showing position of floodlight pylons       1.5

1962/2        19/2/60    Arrangement of access to stand                   1.6

5/190/1      May '59     New turnstiles at Leppings Lane End              1.7

5/103/1A      25.9.61    New turnstiles at Leppings Lane End              1.7

5/103/IB      2.10.61    New turnstiles at Leppings Lane End              1.7

2412/1        18.6.65    Arrangement of New West Stand                    1.8

2454/3        23.5.66    Drainage plan                                    1.9

2454/2        27.4.66    North West Corner - Stage 1                      1.9

2454/20B .    31.10.66   North West Corner - Stage 1A                     1.10

1610/2XC      21.12.79   Plan of West and North West Terrace              2.5
                         Additional barriers shown. 6 KN/m test load
                         assumed

1610/26          -       Remedial work to areas of damaged terrace        2.5

1610/13B      Jan '79    Details of new crush barriers - Foundations      2.5

1610/14B      22.5.79    Scheme for new crush barriers - Steelwork        2.9

1610/33A      May '79    General arrangement of new exits from West       2.9
                         Stand

1610/34       May '79    Details of escape stair at Southern end of       2.9
                         West Stand

1610/35A      20.7.79    Elevations and details - Southern end of         2.9
                         West Stand

1610/36       20.6.79    Details of escape gangway at North end of        2.9
                         West Stand
Drawing    Drawing     Description                                    Paragraph
No.        Date                                                       Referred
                                                                      To


1610/64B    24.6.83    Plan on West and North West Terraces showing   3.1
                       new numbers - Barrier numbering from January
                       1980

3563/1      20.8.81    Details of new radial fences on West Terrace   4.2 & 4.3

            11.8.82    Refreshment bars, toilets, turnstiles and      5.7
  -                    new gate openings (Building Regulation
                       application 82/3012)

4644/2      24.6.83    Details of repair to crush barrier No. 141     6.5

   -        15.11.84   Alterations to existing refreshment room       6.12
                       (Building Regulation application 84/4793)

6705/2     April '85   Possible modification to entrance routes at    7.2
                       Leppings Lane End

6705/10A    26.6.85    Details of new and refurbished toilets at      7.8 & 7.10

6705/11B    3.7.85     Details of new refreshment area under North    7.8 & 7.10
                       West Terrace (Building Regulation                & 7.13
                       application 85/2549B)

6705/1      2.7.85     Existing layout of Leppings Lane entrance       7.10

6705/6      24.4.85    Details of new central fence on West Terrace    7.10

6705/8A     3.6.85     Modification to entrance routes and revised     7.10
                       layout of facilities at Leppings Lane End

6705/9A     13.6.85    Proposed new ladies toilets under West Stand    7.10

6705/12     3.7.85     Details of new handrails - Leppings Lane        7.10
                       entrance and centre of West Stand

6705/14A    3.7.85     New brickwork wall - Leppings Lane entrance     7.10

6705/17     3.7.85     Details of new radial fence on West Terrace     7.10

6705/18A    30.7.85    Details of new fences on access level of       7.10 & 7.1
                       West Stand

6705/19A    30.7.85    Location plan for crowd security fence -       7.10 & 7.1
                       West Stand Access Level

1610/64E    3.8.88     Plan of West and North West Terraces showing    8.15
                       new numbers - Barrier numbering from
                       January 1980

Al/1        24.4.89    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club               8.17
                       West Stand - Existing Plan 15.4.89

1610/64D    20.7.84    Plan of West and North West Terrace -           9.4
                       showing new numbers - Barrier numbering from
                       January 1980
