                                                                                                                                                           540

                               ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE


                       MINUTES
                               The Committee noted that the City Council, at its meeting held on 3rd December, 1997, approved
                       the minutes of the meeting of this Committee held on 28th October, 1997 subject to the amendment of item
                       5 (Licensing Sub-Committee) by (a) the addition of the letter "(a)" immediately following the words
'ick, Colk,            "RESOLVED: That" in the first line of the resolution; and (b) the addition of the following words as a new
re, Pears,;            paragraph to the resolution:- "and (b) Councillor M.C. Brelsford be appointed to serve as a member of the
jster                  Licensing Sub-Committee (Group B) in place of Councillor Ms. Bowden."

                       LICENSING SUB-COMMITTEE
                       RESOLVED: That (a) this Committee joins with the Chair of the Licensing Sub-Committee (Councillor
id Mis.                David Jones) in expressing its appreciation to Officers in the Licensing Section for the excellent work
                       which has been done in licensing-related matters in recent years; and
                               (b) except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the I .icensing Sub-Committee, the following
                       minutes be approved:-
4iof the
si£ted,iftbe                    M p ftin g o f th e T.trfTKtmg -S nh-fnrnm itteg held ntt 23 rd O etnher, 1997. Present Councillors D .
 fibedin                        Jones (Chair)^M- C Brelsford, Hinman, Law, Mrs. Leek, Macfeiane, Nazir, Mrs. Newton, Pears,
ocal                            Mrs. E. Smith, M. Smith, K. Walayat and Websta-.
■ther persons
C om et),

                        (1)     Apologies fo r Absence
                                         Apologies for absence were received from Councillors Ms. Bowden and Councillor P.
fthe                             Moore (for item (3)).
-r Street to the
                        (2)     Events held at The Arena, Broughton Lane
now                                        The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported verbally on three prestigious
                                 events which had recently been successfully staged at The Arena, Broughton Lane. He stated that
-report now                      tickets for the Oasis Concert had sold out within, four hairs, Supercross, amotor-cycle event, had
in (Jjc report;                  been successfully held in an indoor arena for the first time in Britain and the recent Boxing
                                 Tournament, the largest event of its type held in this country, had been virtually incident free. The
  far                            Promoter had thanked Officers of South Yorkshire Police and the City Council for their excellent
                                 handling of the event.
                                 RESOLVED: That (a) the appreciation of this Sub-Committee be conveyed to the G fficos
C. Breisford                     concerned for the excellent manner in which they have responded to the events now reported and
: to the vote                    staged at The Arena, Broughton Lane; and
                                           (b)theCity Solicitor and Head of Administration be reqnestcd to issue a press release
                   t
                   i
                                 about the events on the lines now discussed..
e wifi not be
                                 (NOTE: In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act
                                 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, the Chair
                                 (Councillor D. Jones) decided that the above item should be considered as a matter of urgency in
                                 view of the need for information to be given to the Sub-Committee although it had not beat
. Chadwick,                      possible to give three dear days’ notice of the item prior to the meeting.)
Qadar
                        §(3)    Safety o f Sports Grmmmds HiUiifwmmgk Sparto Stadmm
 es, Jordan,                                    The City                     T f e n i n f A rim in i<a r a t in n s n h n n tm rf a report on action he had taken,
ith, K.                          followings consultation with Sooth Yorkshire Police, in approving an application submitted by
                                 S h e f f ie ld Wednesday Football Club pic to amend the General Safety Certificate issued in respect
                                 of the Hillsborough Spoits .S ta d iu m in order to allow the Club to use the north west comer stand
                                 willwjul the piror                    (rf the O vcf Cocstsblc, South Yorkshire Police and to operate it in the
                                 same manner as the im aintier of the ground The report stated that the South Yorkshire Police
                                 had             f i g m j i i y cxKsutedaodhad cased.b o objection to the proposal.
ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE


 RESOLVED: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
 Administration in amending the General Safety Certificate issued by the Council on 12th August,
 1997 in respect of the Hillsborough Sports Stadium so as to remove Section 18 of Schedule 2
 (page 29) of the General Safety Certificate.

 Public Entertainments and Theatre Licensing
 The Music Factory. London Road
           The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application for
 the renewal of a Public Entertainments Licence in respect of The Music Factory, London Road.
 The hours applied for were 11.00 a.m. until 2.00 a.m. the following morning on Monday to
 Thursday, 11.00 ajn. until 6.00 a.m. the following morning on Friday and Saturday and 12 noon
 until 2.00 a m. die following morning on Sunday..
           At its meeting held on the 26th June, 1997, tins Sub-Committee had decided to grant a
 shortterm licence of three months after considering a report which detailed defects observed on an
 unannounced visit by Licensng Officers (page 220 of the printed minntes). The report stated that
 since that time, the premises harf recently changed ownership and on unannounced visits made to
 the Club by Licensing. Officers on 17th August and 5th October, 1997 no significant issues
 concerning the condition of the premises had been foundand on both occasions, the record,
 systems were in good order. No adverse observations on the condition of the premises had been
 received from the inspecting authorities as a result of the pre-arranged inspection.
           The applicant’s Solicitor addressed the Sub-Committee and stated that his client, AMpm
 Leisure Limited were currently managing the Club on the baas erf an annmd contract, pending
 completion of the transfer of an agreement with Bass Brewers pic and he circulated details of the
 Leeds-based company. A representative of the company addressed the Sub-Committee, gave a
 detailed account of its history with The Music Factory in organising andpromotmg.events at the
 Club and stated that the Manager appointed by AMpm Leisure Limited had worked at The Music
 Factory for three years and would assume complete control for health and safety matters.
 RESOLVED: That the public and press, the applicant, the Manager and their Solicitor and Officers
 of the City Council involved in the application relating to The Music Factory, London Road, be
 excluded from the meeting before further discussion takes chi the grounds that, in view of the
 nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a
 disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Local
 Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985,
 relating to legal matters and advice and proposed actions under any enactment by the Authority.
           The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on
 various aspects of the application.
           At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.

 Licence in respect of The Music Factory, London Road, be grantedfora.periodof six months*.

 The Planet. Effinsham Road
           The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application for
 the renewal o f a Public Entertainments Licence in respect o f The Planet, Effingham Road. The
 hours applied for were 10.00 a.m. until 2.00 ajn. the fallowing morning on Monday to Thursday,
 10.00 a.m.untilAOOa.m.thefbitowingmanni^an Friday and Saturday and 10.00 a.m. until 1.00
 a.m. the following morning on Sunday. On an unannounced visit to the Club by Licensing and
 Police Officers on 19th July, 1997, it was noted that the security staff "personnel" record did not
 include a photograph orphysical description o f the staff concerned; however these records had
 recently been checked and found to be complete in all detail.
           An Officer from the Directorate of Environmental Services and Standards attended the
 Strb-Comrmttee and stated that the premises had been inspected and that a number of minor
 defects, including an electrical fault, had been rectified to the satisfaction of the inspecting
 authorities.
