            ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                    719

★     (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of four cases
    relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing. Two applicants attended the meeting to
    address the Sub-Committee.
      Resolved: That (a) the applications now submitted be determined as follows—
    Case No.    Licence Type                                  Decision
    61/93        Private Hire and Hackney Carriage            Grant for 12 months by reason of
                 Drivers Licence                              previous convictions.
    58/93        Private Hire and Hackney Carriage            Grant for three months by reason of
                 Drivers Licence                              previous convictions and a strong
                                                              warning be given to the applicant as
                                                              regards his future conduct.
    and (b) consideration of the applications now submitted in respect of Case Nos.62/93 and 63/93
    be deferred to a future meeting of the Sub-Committee to enable the applicants to attend before
    the Sub-Committee.


     Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 25th November, 1993. Present— Councillors
    Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Mrs. Barton, Harthman, D. Jones, Mrs. Leek, Miss Mitchell, Mrs. E.
    Smith, Mrs. Walton, Webster and Wigfield.
★    ( 1 ) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS AND THEATRE LICENSING
    Kenwood Hall and Swallow Hotel
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application received
    from Swallow Hotels Limited for the renewal of Public Entertainments Licences in respect of the
    Swallow Hotel and Kenwood Hall, Kenwood Road and he stated that no observations had been
    submitted by the Inspecting Authorities in respect of the reasonable safety of the premises.
    Attached to the report was a petition containing 50 signatures from local residents objecting to
    the application, together with three individual letters of objection, a letter from the Hotel to the
    objectors and a letter from the Solicitor acting for Swallow Hotels Limited which indicated that
    following a meeting between the Hotel Management and local residents, some of the objections
    had now been withdrawn. The City Solicitor and Head of Administration confirmed orally that of
    the 54 objections received, 20 had subsequently been withdrawn.
      The Solicitor acting for the applicant addressed the Sub-Committee and stated that during the
    18 years his client had held Public Entertainment Licences in respect of the premises, no
    complaints had been received from local residents. However, in view of the comments which had
    now been received about parking and noise nuisance during summer evenings, the Hotel
    Management had issued instructions to guests to use the car park provided at the premises and
    had arranged for upgraded lighting to be installed. Discussions were also taking place with the
    disco organiser in order to resolve any possible noise nuisance resulting from functions,
    particularly during the summer.
       An objector who had attended the meeting stated that after hearing the submission made on
    behalf of the applicant she was satisfied that her concerns were being addressed and was prepared
    to withdraw her objection.
      Resolved: That the public and press, the applicants and his Solicitor, the objector and officers
    of the City Council involved in the applications relating to Kenwood Hall and Swallow Hotel, be
    excluded from the meeting before further discussion takes place on the grounds that, in view of
    the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a
    disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Local
    Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985
    relating to (a) legal matters and advice and (b) proposed actions under any enactment by the
    Authority.
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
    aspects of the applications in respect of the Kenwood Hall and Swallow Hotel.
      At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
720       ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Resolved: That the application now submitted for the renewal of Public Entertainments
  Licences in respect of the Kenwood Hall and the Swallow Hotel, be granted for a period of 12
  months.
  The Palais, London Road
     Pursuant to the decision of this Sub-Committee of 28th October, 1993 to defer consideration of
  the application for the renewal of a Public Entertainments Licence submitted by The Palais,
  London Road for one month to enable the applicant and owners of the premises to provide full
  information of the ownership and management of the premises and their proposals regarding its
  future maintenance and the regulation of the door staff, the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration re-submitted the application. He stated that it was necessary to clarify the
  situation concerning the ownership of The Palais in order for the Sub-Committee to be assured,
  in view of the previous history of the premises, about the future safety and control exercised by
  the licensee. It was confirmed that the defects at the premises which had been identified by the
  Inspecting Authorities on 6th October, 1993 had since been rectified and the premises were now
  considered to be satisfactory.
    The applicant, the prospective owner and the newly appointed Managing Director of the
  owning Company attended the meeting and the prospective owner addressed the Sub-
  Committee. He stated that the owner of the controlling shares in Megatones Limited, the
  company which operated The Palais, and his family had resigned from the Board of Directors and
  the shares were currently held by a shelf company. An offer had been made by the prospective
  owner for the controlling interest in the shares, but this had yet to be accepted by the owner and
  his family. He confirmed that he exercised management control over both the applicant and the
  Managing Director.
    A representative of the South Yorkshire Police Authority addressed the Sub-Committee and
  stated that the Police Authority would have no objection to the opening hours of the amended
  application; the door registration log book, which was circulated to the Sub-Committee, had
  been examined by the Police, who were satisfied that a reasonable record was being maintained.
     Resolved: That the public and press, the applicants, the officer of South Yorkshire Police
  Authority and officers of the City Council involved in the application relating to The Palais, be
  excluded from the meeting before further discussion takes place on the grounds that, in view of
  the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a
  disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Local
  Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985
  relating to (a) legal matters and advice and (b) proposed actions under any enactment by the
  Authority.
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
  aspects of the application relative to The Palais.
      A t this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
     Resolved: That the application for the renewal of a Public Entertainments Licence in respect of
  The Palais, London Road be refused on the grounds that the Sub-Committee are not satisfied in
  view of the previous history associated with the premises with the information now provided
  surrounding the existing arrangements for ownership and control of the premises and
  consequently, the control by the licensee of The Palais of the day to day running, maintenance
  and public order at the premises.
★ (3) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS-ANNUAL REPORT 1993-FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY
    The Sub-Committee noted the Football Licensing Authority’s Annual Report in respect of
  1993.
★ (4)   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS-SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB-PROPOSED STORE AT THE REAR
  OF THE NORTH STAND
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
  consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
  submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
  build a new store at the rear of the North Stand at the Hillsborough Stadium. The report stated
  that the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group had made a number of proposals for
  incorporation into the scheme and these were outlined in the report.
          ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                   721

       Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported to build a new store at the rear of the
    North Stand of the Hillsborough Stadium subject to the qualifications now discussed and detailed
    in Section 3 of the report being incorporated into the scheme; and
      (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to submit a report on the lines
    now discussed on whether or not to include a condition within the Certificate issued in respect of
    the Hillsborough Stadium, to take account of the comments now reported of the Safety of Sports
    Grounds Advisory Group and detailed in Section 3 of the report.
★ (5) PRIVATE HIRE UCENSING-LIMOUSINE POLICY
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on that part of the private
  hire and hackney carriage licensing limitation report, consideration of which was deferred by this
  Sub-Committee on 29th October, 1993 and which related to the existing limousine policy. The
  report stated that when the policy was established in 1976 it was clear in its application that all
  vehicles which were capable of carrying more than four passengers, or Mercedes cars and vintage
  cars were classed as limousines. With the advances in motor vehicle technology, many different
  types of vehicles could now fall within the policy and it had become necessary to review the
  procedures.
       Representatives from the Associations of Private Hire Companies addressed the Sub-
    Committee and stated that they believed that the policy should be re-defined that ’’quality” motor
    cars such as Mercedes should be classed as limousines and that the age limitation for licensing
    such vehicles should be extended beyond the limit which normally applied to Private Hire
    Vehicles. It was considered that this would encourage private hire operators to upgrade their
    fleets.
      Resolved: That (a) with effect from 1st January, 1994, the existing limousine policy be
    discontinued, subject to those vehicles licenced under the policy before that date not being
    affected by the revision; and
       (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to submit a further report to
    this Sub-Committee at the end of a trial period of one year on the working of the amended policy.
★   ( 6 ) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS AND THEATRE LICENSING
    Ice Sport Centre, Queens Road
      With reference to the decision of this Sub-Committee of 28th October, 1993 to defer
    consideration of the application for the renewal of a Public Entertainments Licence submitted by
    the Ice Sport Centre, Queens Road to allow the applicant to confirm to the Inspecting
    Authorities that the glazing in the viewing gallery conformed to stipulated safety requirements,
    the City Solicitor and Head of Administration re-submitted the application. He stated that only
    part of the glazing on the viewing gallery complied with British Standards for toughened safety
    glass, the remainder of the glazing on the gallery being boarded over.
      Resolved: That the application now submitted for the renewal of a Public Entertainments
    Licence in respect of the Ice Sport Centre, Queens Road be granted for a period of 12 months
    subject to admission to the viewing gallery being excluded to members of the public until the
    glazing meets standards to the satisfaction of the relevant Inspecting Authorities.
    Lyceum Theatre, Tudor Square
      Resolved: That, in the circumstances outlined in the report now submitted by the City Solicitor
    and Head of Administration, approval be given for the renewal of a Public Entertainments and
    Theatre Licence in respect of the Lyceum Theatre, Tudor Square for a period of 12 months.
    The Octagon, Western Bank
      Resolved: That in the circumstances outlined in the report now submitted by the City Solicitor
    and Head of Administration, approval be given for the renewal of the Public Entertainments
    Licence in respect of the Octagon, Western Bank for a period of 12 months.
    ( n o t e : That (a) Councillor Harthman declared an interest in the item relating to the Kenwood
    Hall and Swallow Hotel and did not speak or vote thereon, (b) Councillor Wigfield left the
    meeting following consideration of the item relating to The Palais, (c) Councillor Mrs. Walton
    left the meeting for a short time during consideration of items 3 and 4 and did not speak or vote
    thereon, (d) Councillor Mrs. Midgley left the meeting following consideration of items 3 and 4
722      ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  and Councillor Webster took the Chair for the remainder of the meeting, (e) Councillor Mrs.
  Barton left the meeting for a short time during consideration of the Ice Sport Centre and did not
  speak or vote thereon and (f) Councillor Mrs. E. Smith left the meeting following consideration
  of the Ice Sport Centre).

3 Clean City Panel
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes be approved—

    Meeting of the Clean City Panel held 29th October, 1993. Present — Councillors J. A. Moore
  (Chair), Mrs. Askham, Mrs. Fleming, D. Jones, Mrs. Midgley and Ms. A. G. Smith.
  ( 1 ) CITY CENTRE MANAGEMENT
    The Director, Cleansing Services Department reported verbally on discussions he had held
  with the respective Chairs of this Panel and the City Centre Management Sub-Committee
  (Policy), the Director of Environmental Services and Standards and the Council’s Environmental
  Planning Officer regarding the future roles of the Panel and the City Centre Management
  Sub-Committee (Policy) and where it had been agreed that this Panel would retain responsibility
  for Clean City Initiatives across the City, except in the defined City Centre area, where cleansing
  would be the responsibility of the City Centre Management Sub-Committee (Policy).
      The Panel noted the information reported.
  (2) HARTLEY BROOK CLEAN-UP
    The Director, Cleansing Services Department reported on the outcome of the annual clean-up
  of the Hartley Brook which had been held on 21st October, 1993, and led by Officers of the
  Ecclesfield Police Station with the participation of local school children, members of the local
  community and representatives from the Cleansing Services Department and the Environmental
  Services and Standards Department.
     Resolved: That the Director, Cleansing Services Department be requested to send a letter to
  PC Peter Booth who is due to leave Ecclesfield Police Station to work as a Community Constable
  in Chapeltown, expressing thanks for the work carried out by him over a number of years with
  respect to the annual clean-up of the Hartley Brook.
  (3) RECYCLING CENTRES—PROGRESS REPORT
    The Director, Cleansing Services Department, submitted a report indicating the amount of
  materials which had been recovered for recycling at the City’s recycling centres.
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
    (b) the Director, Cleansing Services Department, be requested to submit further progress
  reports to this Panel with respect to recycling activities.
  (4) SAVE-A-CAN
    The Director, Cleansing Services Department, submitted a report stating that a request had
  been made from Save-A-Can for the City Council to identify a suitable charity to receive the
  income generated from the seven Save-A-Can banks located in the City.
    Resolved: That the Director, Cleansing Services Department, be requested to inform
  Save-A-Can that charitable payments from the income generated from its Save-A-Can banks
  located in the City should be made on the lines now discussed to the Sheffield Reclamation
  Centre, which is a registered charity who train and employ people with learning disabilities and
  mental health problems and whose operations are an integral part of the City’s approach to
  recycling.
  (5) CLEAN CITY EDUCATIONAL ACTIVITY
    The Panel received and noted a report submitted by the Director, Cleansing Services
  Department on the Clean City educational activities which had been carried out during the
  academic year September, 1992, to July, 1993.
  ( 6 ) ENVIRONMENT WEEK 1993
     The Director, Cleansing Services Department, submitted a report (a) outlining the activities
  which took place in the City during Environment Week which was held from the 15th to 31st
  May, 1993, and (b) stating that the National Environment Week 1994 was planned to take place
  from the 20th May to 30th May, 1994, and that the first meeting of the Working Party in respect
  of Sheffield’s participation would take place on 2nd November, 1993.
