                                     i/ t   -




                 srn&fiuM PaAsn-if
sr^ns^ie^ts 44 &>ruai 4 K rw&iACLj
GrP Z~77j~7 lo
C.TA TG HG^'X

A
                                          S T AT EM E NT OF WITNESS
                           (CJ A ct 1967, s9; M C A c t 1980; s 102: M C Rules 1981,'r70)


S T A T E M E N T O F ... ARTHUR.BUTLER..............................................

Address of Witness ... P.UILDING.SURVEYORS _DIVISION.,..DEPARTMENT. OF.LAND AND. PLANN ING ...

                        S.HEFFIELD CITY.COUNCIL,. TOWN _HALL,. SHEFFIELD S1 2HH                                              ; .....

Age of Witness (if over 21, enter “Over 21”)... ................

Occupation of Witness ...P.RJNCI PAL .DISTRrCT.SURVEYOR..........



    The following statement, consisting of........ page(s) each signed by me, istrue to the bes tof my
knowledge and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to
prosecution ifI have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.

                         Dated the ......... dayof................ 19.......

                                                  (Signed)............... ......................




I am employed by Sheffield City Council in the Building Surveyors Division of

the Department of Land and Planning.                          Since commencing employment with the

City Council in November 1985, I have held the position of Principal District

Surveyor.

I am the service manager of the division's Site Supervision Unit, currently

consisting of 24 staff, whose main functions are to carry out inspections of

building works in progress within the City boundaries, enforce Building

Regulation requirements, and to carry out inspections of licensed premises and

to advise on their constructional and structural suitability.

The Division also incorporates a General Assessment Unit for the examination

 of deposited Building Regulation applications, a Structural Assessment Unit, a

 Public Safety Unit, and a Geotechnical Services Unit.                                             Each Unit is headed by

 a Principal Surveyor or Principal Engineer, and all are directly responsible

 to The Building Surveyor.




                             (Signed) ..................................................................




F o r m SOL. P I 4 Z                                                                                       0 0 8106091 140V* 1/S3
                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS

          (C.J. Act, 1967, S.9; M.C.A. 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, R.70)

Continuation of statement of ARTHUR BOTLER



I am a fellow of the Chartered Institute of Building, a fellow of the

Incorporated Association of Architects and Surveyors, and a member of the

Institute of Building Control.

My first involvement with Safety of Sports Grounds was in mid March 1986, when

I attended a meeting to discuss the transfer of duties (on the first of April

1986) from the South Yorkshire County Council to the City Council.      Specific

involvement with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club began in early July 1986,

when I attended a meeting of the Officer Working Party, where the predominant

discussion was of the new construction to cover over and extend the Spicn Kcp,

the construct ion of which had already commenced.

On both these occasions, the Principal Engineer (Mr. Sheriff) from the

division's Structural Assessment Unit also attended.      This officer had been,

involved with the subject of Safety of Sports Grounds since 1976.      He had

acted as the Division's liaison officer with the County Council, cn behalf of

the Building Surveyor, who was nominated by the City Council to be the officer

representing the Building Authority, and hence a member of the Officer Working

Party.

The Principal Engineer had attended most of the meetings of the officer

working party, with either one of my two predecessors (Mr. Mills and Mr.

Roberts both of whan have new retired) or relevant members of my staff who

dealt with the geographical area of the City appropriate to the sports ground

under discussion.   During this period, it was seen to be appropriate that site

inspections and meetings were attended by members of both the Structural

Assessment Unit and the Site Supervision Unit, since in addition to the

professional advice (where the guide to safety of sports grounds was taken

into account, where appropriate) given to the Working Party, and subsequently



Signed                           Signature witnessed by
                                STATEMENT OF WITNESS

           (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A. 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of ARTHUR BUTLER

the Advisory Group, many of the works required to be carried out for Safety of

Sports Grounds purposes also required Building Regulation approval and

supervision.     The role of the district surveying staff was to ensure that

proposals could comply with Building Regulations-, and that they were

constructed soas to comply with that legislation and any additional

requirements made by the Officer Working Party.        Many issues were discussed "by

that group concerning works required and proposals relating to the football

stadia in the City.      Discussion, and agreement by the group was reached before

works were undertaken and proposals implemented.        During that time there was

never a case where consensus was not reached by the Working Party.        The

minutes of the meeting of the Officer Working Party dated 12th February, 1979

(Ref AB1) (Exh          ) discussed four items of relevance to the West end of the

Hillsborough ground -

1.   The reasonableness of applying the "guide".

2.   The unknown reasoning for the 1.1 metre width of gangways;

3.   The requirement for an additional stairway to be provided to the West

     Stand;

4. ' Regarding the West Terrace, the minutes read, "In view of the lack of

     depth of this terrace, the Club1s offer to reduce the spectator limit to

     7,200, and the discharge time to 6.6 minutes, the Working Party AGREED

     that it would be unreasonable to insist that gangways or additional exits

     would be provided.     However, even if the existing crush barriers were to

     pass the tests, the Working Party AGREED that the barriers would require

     special attention in view of the apparent sharp edges, corrosion etc."

At a further meeting cn 30th March 1979, (Ref AB2) (Exh          ) the discussions

on the above four points were developed.      Regarding the reasonableness of

applying the guide, "the Heme Office had said that the maximum flexibility had

to be maintained in the case of existing structures and differences in such

matters as age, size and mode of construction had to be taken into account".



Si onprl                         Signature witnessed by
                               STMTa-EOT OF WITNESS

       (C.J. Act, 1967, s. 9; M.C.A., 1980, s.102? M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of ARTHUR BOTHER



It is noted that the Home Office had notprovided any guidance for the

reasoning of the widths of gangways.    Inrelation to the fourth point the

following is minuted, "As well as the condition of the crush barriers, the

Building Authority drew attention to the poor condition in places of the

terracing in small areas near to the stand.    The cross-fall cn the steps can

the North West corner exit would also require attention as it tended to threw

people forward.   The height of the crushbarriers mentioned in regard to the

Spion Kcp (i.e.   below the recommendations of the    "Guide") also applied. It

was AGREED that all these points must be drawn to the Club's attention.      In

accordance with the Hone Office recommendations, flexibility in the use of the

"Guide" was used in the subsequent detailed discussions held between the

Club's engineers and staff of this Division since the height of the crush

barriers remained unaltered.    The General Safety Certificate for the ground

was issued cn 21st December 1979 by the South Yorkshire County Council.

The minutes of the Officer Working Party dated 8th June 1981, (Ref AB3)

(Exh        ) state:-

"Following experiences at the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match, the Club were

considering revised arrangements cn the terracing in front of the (West)

Stand.   An assurance was given that the Officer Working Party would be

consulted when these had substance". This is the cnly reference in the

Division's files to an incident on the terraces in 1981, and this matter was

not brought to my attention by any other source.

The design work for the installation of radial fences to the West Terrace was

carried out by the Club's engineers, and was submitted to the officer working

party with covering correspondence on 2nd September 1981, (Ref AB4) (Exh          )

and was discussed at a meeting cn 11th September 1981.      The minutes of that



Signed                             Signature witnessed by
                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS

         (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of ARTHUR BUTLER



meeting (Ref AB5) (Exh        ) state:- "Whilst there are drawbacks to the

division of the terrace into approximately three equal areas, each served by

it's own entrance, the Working Party felt that increased control cn the

terrace should result from the proposals.    For instance there could well be

problems with opposing fans.mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or the

final exit gates, but the police considered that they could cepe with any

problems of this nature.    The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be

installed at the rear of the radial barriers was also discussed, as well as

the use of the existing gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the

front of the terrace".

One of the conditions of acceptance of the proposals by the Working Party was

that the new gates at the rear of the Terrace be under police control. The

representative of the Building Surveyor's Department on this occasion was Mr.

Sheriff.

In 1985, the Club submitted further proposals to subdivide the West Terrace,

by the installation of additional radial fences.     The minutes of the meeting

(attended in this instance by Mr. Atkinson cn behalf of the Building

Surveyor's Division), held cn 18th April 1985, (Ref AB6) (Exh        ) state,

"The Police representatives pointed out that the proposals had been prompted

in the main by comments they had made to the Club". The main purpose of the

proposals was to segregate heme and visiting supporters at the West end of the

ground.    At that meeting the proposals appear to have been discussed in

detail, and it is minuted that:-

"The proposals now outlined by the Club were generally acceptable to the

Police representatives, subject to:- (a) additional gates being provided




Signed                                 Signature Witnessed by
                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS

      (C.J. Act, 1967, S. 9; M.C.A., 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of ARTHUR BUTLER



between turnstile no. 16 and the wall of the inner access road; (b) the

central area of the terrace (indicated as a neutral area or visiting

supporters' terrace) being divided in half by a new central radial fence

running from the tunnel entrance to the pitchside security fence with gates

erected so as to permit entry to be diverted to either half as appropriate

(the proposed new secondary radial fence adjacent to the existing fence

indicated on the plan to be abandoned); (c) the right hand area of the terrace

(indicated as heme supporters' terrace) also to be divided in half by a new

central radial fence running frcxn back to front with two gates (the existing

radial fence dividing the present two terrace areas - neutral area and home

supporters - to have a second gate installed; (d) the existing pitch perimeter

fence to have additional exit gates installed - one in the neutral area and

one in the heme supporters area.   The County Fire Service saw no objection to

the proposals, subject to more detailed investigation of the means of escape

aspects, and the Building Authority similarly saw no cibjecticn, subject to

submission of detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of Sports

Grounds Act and Building Regulations".   It is apparent that discussions cn the

proposals took place outside the formal meetings of the Working Party

subsequent to that date, since the proposals had been modified (to those

actually installed), by the time they were next discussed at the meeting cn

29th July 1985, (minutes included as Ref AB7) (Exh       ) where the scheme was

accepted subject to the installation of a further pitch perimeter gate.

Throughout the period of consideration of radial barrier installations on the

West Terrace, the County Council document (Ref AB8) (Exh      ) was in vogue

which indicated primary and consultation Authorities for various purposes in

the implementation of the sports grounds legislation.   It is clear from the



Signed                         Signature Witnessed by
                               STATEMENT OF WITNESS

         (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of ARTHUR BUTLER



list of subjects that the Building Authority was primarily responsible for all

the structural aspects of the grounds, including the spacing of crush

barriers, and that the Fire Authority was primarily responsible for all

calculations for means of escape.

In retrospect, it is known that the drawings of the West Terrace used by

members of the Working Party were dimensionally incorrect, showing that the

terrace was deeper than it1s actual dimension. It is also known frati minutes

of meetings that the original capacity of 7,200 was an agreed reduction frcm

the computed capacity, and that the works carried out in 1981 and 1985 were

done to increase safety, to reduce the danger of lateral surges, and to

facilitate more efficient police control of insurgents.

Signs appear to have been considered by the Working Party in respect of

indicating exit routes, particularly for means of escape. Signing for ingress

purposes was not, to my knowledge, discussed at any meeting of the Officer

Working Party/Advisory Group which I attended. Whilst signing a means of

escape was clearly within the remit of the Fire Authority, the Building

Surveyor's representative is cn record in correspondence dated 21st March 1980

(Ref AB9) (Exh ) as commenting that exit signs were not clearly displayed.

This is a clear example of the professional interaction of members of the

Working Party.    Coincidental to the transfer of duties under the sports

grounds legislation from the County Council to the City Council, a number of

factors were appreciated within the Building Surveyor's Division which had an

effect on the future representation at meetings.      The recent ill health of the

Principal Engineer, and a knowledge that further hospitalisation was imminent

played a major part, however it was also a time when an internal restructuring

process



Signed                           Signature Witnessed by
                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS

         (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9? M.C.A., 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of ARTHUR BUTTER



was being considered in anticipation of a major increase in workload due to

the regeneration of the Sheffield economy and the anticipation of staging the

World Student Games.   A third sports ground in Sheffield was also expected to

be designated for the purposes of the Act, and it was appreciated that a

considerable input would be required in this respect.      In order to achieve

continuity and apply similar standards to all the grounds, my role in the

representation of the Division changed over a period of months as I became

increasingly involved with the reconstituted Working Party.     During this

initial period of involvement, I had reviewed consultative documentation frcm

the Heme Office on the Fire Safety and Safety at Sports Venues, and had read

the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds for that purpose, and for the resolution

of issues in connection with the ongoing construction of the extension and

roofing over of the Spicn Kcp at the Hillsborough ground.

Regarding the removal of parts of barrier 144, this matter was raised by the

Police representative whilst carrying out    the bi-annual inspection of the

ground on the 7th August 1986.    This inspection was attended by

representatives from the Police, Fire Authority, Administration & Legal

Department of the Council, Building Surveyors Division of the Department of

Land and Planning of the Council, and the Club's engineering consultants.

Whilst considering the effectiveness of the recently installed radial fences

on the terracing, it was reported to the Working Party that fans were coning

out of the tunnel and stopping behind barrier 144 rather than travelling

further into the terrace area.    This was causing a crowd movement problem to

the Police, particularly in pen 3, although similar problems were occuring in

pen 4 to a slightly lesser degree.    The Police representative therefore

suggested the removal of parts of barrier 144.    Corroboration of the problem



Signed                            Signature witnessed by
                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS

      (C.J. Act, 1967, s. 9; M.C.A., 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Ccntinuaticn of statement of ARTHUR BUTLER



is contained in paragraph 46 of Dr. Eastwood's statement (Ref AB10) .(Exh       )

to the Taylor Inquiry, which states, "Spectators tend to congregate at the top

of the West Terrace rather than at the bottctn by the perimeter fence because

their view will not be obscured by the small mesh of the perimeter (fence)".

The request for my canments provoked considerable thought, since I was aware

of the normal desirability to have a barrier in this position, yet officers

who regularly manned that area were informing the group that it's presence was

causing concern for the safety of spectators.

My canments to the group were favourable to the removal of the parts of the

barrier, since I considered that it would alleviate the problem of spectators

backing up within the tunnel, that any incoming crush would be seen cn the

terracing rather than be hidden inside the tunnel, that any problems on the

terrace could also be easily seen frcm the police control box which was

relatively near, that the means of escape from the area was excellent from

both pens, at that point, due to the existance of the tunnel, and that it was

understood that the area of the tunnel mouth would be kept clear throughout

the duration of the game by the Police, who in that position could easily

monitor and resolve any incidents of overcrowding and localised crushing.

I believe that I expressed a reservation that the removal of the barrier could

cause the next barrier directly in front of the tunnel mouth to receive a

greater loading, and it. was therefore necessary for the spectators to be

encouraged to spread into the other areas of the pens.   I am also of the

belief that I suggested marking out the area to be kept clear in front of the

tunnel mouth with painted hatching.

The effect of the removal of the barrier was to be the subject of future




Signed                         Signature witnessed by
                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS

         (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

         Ccntinuaticn of statement of ARTHUR BUTLER



monitoring by the Police, since installation of new barriers and the

alteration of others may "have been required if they had thought it necessary.

No adverse canments were made by the Police, Fire Authority or the Club's

engineers representative at the time (or subsequently ) and I advised that it

was appropriate for action to be taken to remove the relevant parts of the

barrier.

It must be appreciated that it was assumed that spectators would be entering

the areas at turnstile speed oily.    It was never envisaged that an external

gate would be opened to allow a mass entry of spectators.-   The recent

disaster at the Bradford City Football Club ground had the effect of

considering the effects of mass evacuation, not mass admission of spectators.

These notes of that inspection are produced frctn memory only since it was

assumed that the items raised at that inspection were being noted and minuted

by the representative from the Administration & Legal Department of the

Council.    No personal notes were taken at the time.

As far as I am aware, no further discussion took place on this

matter, involving any officer from the City Council.    I am also unaware of any

subsequent correspondence seeking or granting consent for the works which were

carried out.

At the time of the inspection, it was not considered necessary to make any

adjustment to crowd capacity in consequence to the removal of parts of .

barrier 144.    This barrier was positioned across the line of the tunnel

mouth, and as such, the space between the barrier and the rear of the terrace

acted as a continuity of the entrance/exit route, for which there should not

have been an initial capacity calculated.    Indeed the reason for the




Signed                             Signature witnessed by
                               STATEMENT OF WITNESS

      (C.J- Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of ARTHUR BUTLER



discussion on that day was the requirement of the Police to keep that area

clear of spectators.    Other barriers appeared to have been reasonably spaced

for the purposes of the "Guide” and in retrospect the actual barrier spacing

was proven to be less that the dimensions permitted by the "Green Guide" for

that gradient of terracing. The height and type of the remaining barriers were

not reconsidered at this time, since it was assumed that such a

consideration had been part of the process of acceptance of the scheme to

carry out the recent works cn the terrace.    The possibility of crowd movement

effecting barrier 124A, as a result of removing parts of barrier 144 was never

envisaged.

The implementation of the barrier removal was arranged by the Club's

engineers. A contractor was subsequently instructed by the engineers to carry

out the work. I am sure that if the Club's engineers thought this or any other

proposal to have had a detrimental effect cn spectator safety, they would have

made suitable representation before giving instructions, on behalf of their

clients, to any contractor.    During September 1986, discussions took place

within the Division to review the procedure for implementing Safety of Sports

Grounds matters.   A Divisional Memorandum was produced and issued in October

1986, (Ref AB11) (Exh         ) indicating which of the Units of the Division

would take the primary co-ordinating role.

Where a Building Regulation consent was necessary for the work, it was .

determined that the General Assessment Unit would adopt the primary

co-ordinating role and agree in consultation with the Site Supervision Unit

and the Strutural Assesment Unit (at Principal or Assistant Principal level)

matters of compliance with the Green Guide. Where the proposal would not




Signed                         Signature witnessed by
                              STJffEMEOT OF WITNESS

      (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Ccntinuaticn of statement of ARTHUR BUTLER



require Building Regulation consideration, the Site Supervision Unit would

adopt the primary co-ordinating role, would conduct any necessary liason with

external Departments and bodies, and would agree in consultation with the

Structural Assessment Unit and the General Assessment Unit (at Principal or

Assistant Principal level) matters of compliance with the Green Guide.

In November 1986, the Home Office issued the revised version of the "Green

Guide". This document was distributed to the three relevant Units of the

Division.    The two versions were compared and the apparent differences were

discussed.

There was a review of the administration system undertaken by the

Administration and Legal Department, which in September 1987 established a

Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group to replace the Officer Working Party.

This change was also coincidental to the formalisation of an advisory input

from the Department of Health and Consumer Services of the Council, and the

simplification of the areas of responsibility of each of the constituent

Authorities of that Group.    The responsibilities of the Building Surveyor

then became:- All matters relating to the structure of stadia, including crush

barriers, walls, etc.

The South Yorkshire Fire Authority were given the responsibility of Fire

precautions, fire alarms, means of escape, emergency lighting, stadium

capacity.

As it's name implied, it has been an advisory group with the constituent

members providing professional advice for discussion by the group.    An

example of a document giving such professional advice from the Building

Surveyors Division to the Advisory Group was 'the Report of the Works




Signed                          Signature witnessed by
                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS

         (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of ARTHUR BUTLER



required to be carried out to satisfy The Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975, 1

in relation to the Sheffield Sports Stadium, Owlerton, Sheffield, Ref AB12

(Exh        ). One of the effects of this change, was that each of the

Authorities were requested to carry out site inspections and prepare their

individual reports cn a submitted proposal or a required inspection.     The

group have therefore rarely met at the stadia for the purpose of a joint

inspection since that time.   At site meetings, various members of the Working

Party/Advisory Group have discussed matters together as they have inspected

the various stadia, and seme of these matters M v e bean discussed and

resolved, although not agenda items or minuted.      At more formal meetings items

agenda have been followed, and therefore unlisted items of interest to the

group appear to have been missed.    In this context, I refer to crushing

incidents in 1987 and 1988 which do not appear to have bean brought to the

attention of the Group.

Throughout this period I have been conscious of the fact that I should act as

a professional advisor to the Working Party/Advisory Group and not be a

decision maker.   Being employed by the same body as the Certificating

Authority, I have been aware that any personal decision which was contrary to

the thoughts of other members of the Group/Working Party could have caused

embarassment for the Authority and confusion to the recipient of such a

decision.   To this end, I have usually made informal communication with the

other external constituent members of the Group/Working Party and the clubs

through the Licensing Section or have advised them informally (personal

discussion or telephone call) of such a liaison.

It must however be appreciated that in respect of many of the schemes I have




Signed                          Signature witnessed by
                                   STATEMENT OF WITNESS

         (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Centinuation of Statement of ARTHUR BUTLER



"had two roles; the enforcement of Building Regulation requirements as a

statutory duty; and the provision of advice to the Advisory Group/Working

Party.    In many instances the club's engineers have designed the building

proposals and have acted as agent for their clients in the implementation of

the schemes. In this respect contact with the engineering consultants has

professionally been unavoidable and care has been exercised to separate those

two roles as much as possible.

The Internal Divisional Memorandum was revised in October 1988, (Ref AB13)

(Exh          ) to take account of the Building Surveyors role in the Advisory

Group.    The document states:- '"The role of the Building Surveyors Division is

that of " Building Authority", as defined in the Act, and will normally be

represented at the advisory group meetings by the Principal District Surveyor

or the Principal Engineer as seems appropriate for the case in question, or by

both".

The latter statement was modified by an internal memorandum fron the Building

Surveyor to the Administration and Legal Department, dated 29th September,

1989, (Ref AB14)     (Exh     ) where the last paragraph    includes:- "Except where

I attend Advisory Group in person, I am content that Mr.         Butler represents

the Division.      Where it is necessary, however, he may be substituted by

another appropriate officer, or be accompanied by another officer, for

example,     Mr.   Levers or Mr.    Sheriff".

Whilst I have no reasonto doubt the accuracy of this        statement, I reserve the

right to append, amend, or clarify any of the matters       at a later date.




Signed                                  Signature witnessed by
                               STATEMENT OF WITNESS

      (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A.', 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

Centinuation of Statement of ARTHUR BUTLER

Index of References appended to this Statement



AB1     Minutes of Officer Working   Party 12th Fdoruary 1979

AB2     Minutes of Officer Working   Party 30th March 1979

AB3     Minutes of Officer Working Party 8th June, 1981

AB4     Letter from Eastwood & Partners to South Yorkshire County Council

         2nd September 1981

AB5      Minutes of Officer Working 11th September 1981

AB6     Minutes of Officer Working   Party 18th April 1985

AB7     Minutes of Officer Working   Party 29th July,   1985

AB8      South Yorkshire County Council document:-Implementation of the Safety

         of Sports Grounds Act 1975 - Area Officer Working Parties.

AB9      Letter frcm the Building Surveyor to the South Yorkshire County Council

         21st March 1980

AB10     Paragraph 46, Page 18 of the Statement of Dr. W. Eastwood submitted to

         Taylor Inquiry.

AB11     Building Surveyor's Divisional Memorandum No. 26 (October 1986) -

         Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

AB12 ~ 'Report of the Works required to be carried out to satisfy The Safety of

         Sports Ground Act 1975 - Sneffield Sports Stadium, Owlerton, Sheffield,

         by the Building Surveyor's Division, Department of Lard and Planning,

         Sheffield City Council- September.1989.

AB13     Building Surveyor's Divisional Memorandum No. 26 (October 1988) -

         Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

AB14     Internal Memorandum frcm the Building Surveyor to the Head of

         Administration & Legal Department - 29th September, 1989.




Signed                               Signature witnessed by
     'oy              1^/79.


           S A F E T Y O F SP0BT3 G R O U N DS .^CT 1975

        Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working; party
                     (Sheffield District’)

N e w Town Hall Extension, Sheffield : 12th February, 1979

PRESENT:               1 (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                                [
                                (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                             [
                             (South Yorkshire Count}' Fire Service)
                         (South Yorkshire Police)
               K. Jones (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                        (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                            [(South Yorkshire County Council - Architects Division)
                           [(South Yorkshire Police)
               D. Sherriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
               ______________ (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration
                                                                     Department)
               D. L Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration
                                                                     Department).

JL____ Purpose of Meeting

Following the Working Party’s meeting with the representatives of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. on 13th December, 1978, the
Secretary of the Club had (by letter dated 22nd January, 1979) circulated a
Report, together with Plans, drawn up by Dr. W. Eastwood of Eastwood
and Partners. The Secretary had also suggested a meeting on Friday,
16th February, 1979, to discuss the documents.

The purpose of today's meeting was to consider the views which the Working
Party should put to the Club on the 16th February.

2.____ Plans

(a)     Whilst the "Notes for the Guidance of Applicants” stated that detailed
plans at 1:100 scale should be supplied of all buildings and other accommodation
for spectators, some of the plans supplied were to 1:200 scale. The Fire
Service felt that the latter size were acceptable provided all of the plans 'were
to the same scale, and it was A G R E E D that the "Notes for the Guidance of
‘
Applicants" should be amended to read plans to 1:200 scale.

(b)    The site plan at 1:500 scale had not been supplied as required by the
Notes, but Eastwood and Partners had undertaken to prepare this in time for
Friday's meeting. The firm had also promised that all site fixtures would be
indicated on that plan.
(c)     It was A G B E E D that theplanssupplied had inaccuracies and
inadequacies. In particular, they lacked indications of cress sections,
profiles, structural stability, position of handrails and balustrades, width
of stairways, etc. Where appropriate, these could, as an alternative, be
described in a Beport.

(d) • The CountyCouncil's hope was that, in view of limitedresources in
the Architectural & Building Services Division, the plans supplied and finally
accepted by the Working Party could form the basis of the Certificate
Drawings.

3.____ Beport

(a)    General

It was recognised that the criteria set out in the Home Office "Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds .(Football)" required new work or reconstruction
to be to a standard not lower than the standard set out in the Guide, and that
in existing situations the criterion was that of a reasonable degree of safety.
As the Guide stated, it would be unreasonable, even if it were practicable,
to seek the absolute safety, of everyone attending a ground.

With these factors in mind, both the Fire Service and the Police felt that
the flow of spectators was the most important criteria to be adopted.
Whilst not disagreeing with this viewpoint, the Building Authority suggested
it would be useful to know the reasoning behind the recommendation in the
Guide that gangways should n o t be less than 1.1 metres wide. The County •
Council A G B E E D to try to find this information out, and the Fire Service
A G B E E D they would contact their colleagues in other areas who had been
Involved in the Certification process to ascertain how nearly the 1.1 metre
gangway recommendation had been observed in existing situations in their
respective areas.

At the request of the Fire Service, the County Council also A G B E E D to try
and find out if there was any general recommendation on reduced
admission if a ground were used at a night time instead of during the day
time.

(b)     Front Cover

Whilst it was probably a typing mistake, it was A G B E E D that the wording
on the Front Cover should read " B E P O B T TO_ S OU TH YOBKSHIBE C O U N T Y
COUNCIL" and not " B E P O B T O F SOUTH YOBKSHIBE C O U N T Y COUNCIL".
(d)     The West T erra ce   (pages 4&5)

In view of the Lack of depth of this terrace, the Club’s offer to reduce the
spectator Limit to 7,200, and the discharge lime of 6. 6 minutes, the
Working Party A G B E E D that it would be unreasonable to insist that
gangways or additional exits must be provided.

 However, even if the existing crush barriers were to pass the tests, the
•Working Party A G E E E D that the barriers would require special attention
 in view of the apparant sharp edges, corrosion, etc.

(e)     The North West Corner Reinforced Concrete       Terrace (pages 5 & 6)

The Working Party A G E E E D there were no real problems here, but the
Building Authority pointed out that as well as the crush barriers, the
existing corrugated sheeting would require to pass the appropriate tests.

 (f)    The North Stand (pages 6 & 7)

Whilst the flow rates and discharge times were probably satisfactory(the
construction and width of the ramps being such that they could quite properly
be regarded as elevated roadways), the fact remained that the gangways in
the North Stand were only 640mm wide for much of their length, compared
with the recommended width of 1.1 metres.

Additionally, observations had shown that two-thirds of the spectators used
the upper exit, whilst the remainder used the lower exit. An ideal would be
to provide additional exits at the top of the stand but, in view of its cantilever
construction, the cost would be prohibitive.

As   an alternative, the Working Party A G E E E D that consideration might he
 given to removing a row of seats from the top of the stand down each gangway
 to the upper exits, with a physical barrier across the stancT5el6'w"the upper
 exits to ensure more equal use of both upper and lower exits by spectators.
 If this would cause difficulties, a barrier in the gangways only below the upper
 exits might be considered.

 So far as the Wire Mesh barriers under the stand were concerned, the
 Working Party A G E E E D that these must either be removed or made of a
 permanent construction.

 (g)    The West Stand

 Whilst the exits were adequate and well spaced and the discharge times
 were acceptable in view of the type of stand, the Fire Service felt that
                                   - 4 -
the means of escape 7/ere not adequate as the only means of egress was
by way of two staircases. The, Working Party A G E E E D that it was essential
that another staircase be provided, and one on the south-west corner was felt
to be the most acceptable.

•(h)   The South Stand (pages 7 & 3)

So far as the seating arrangements were concerned, the Working Party
felt that it was the front, open air part which caused the concern. Because
of the bad ingress/egress, the Working Party A G E E E D that two additional
exits would be required. It was suggested that the most economical way of
doing this was by means of one discharging at the Spion Kop end and the
other by breaking through the wall by the Tea Bar.

Additionally, the penning arrangements of the seating would need to be
looked at closely.

As the balustrades and handrails were constructed of timber, the’Bullding
Authority considered they would be likely to-fail the appropriate tests.
Also, as the staircase was a 24 instead of the maximum 12 riser recommended
In the Guide it was probable that this would have to be reconstructed.

Contrary to their Initial reaction, the Fire Service felt that, provided that the
necessary Increased fire resistance measures were carried out, the stand
would not be the problem from a combustability point of view that they had
anticipated.

The Building Authority expressed concern as to the corrosion of the steel
work of the s ta n d , and considered that this would require investigation.

The Police expressed concern about the use of the car park behind the
Stand.. Persons entitled to use this car park frequently arrived just before
the start of a match and drove through the spectators attempting to gain
access to the ground. As they left Immediately afterwards, the same thing
occurred at the end of a match. This practice had to be stopped, either by
banning the use of the car park entirely on match days or Imposing some sort
of time restriction on its use before and after a match.

 (h)    General Requirements

These were not discussed by the Working Party at this stage.
(i)    Future Ground Capacity

If additional exits are not provided on the Spion Kop, this will have the
effect of reducing the ground capacity to 45,140, made up as follows:-

       Seating approximately                  24,000.
       Standing on Spion Kop                  11,040
       Standing at Leppings Lane end
       (Including N. W. Corner)               10,100

                                              45,140




                                  - 6-
                S A F E T Y OF SPORTS G R O U N D S A CT 1S75

              Note of a Meeting of the Officer Working Party
                            (Sheffield District)

          Fire Service Headquarters, Sheffield: 30th March, 1979

    PRESENT:                ~1(South Yorkshire Count}'-Fire Service)
                                    ](Soutli Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                                 (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                              (South Yorkshire Police)
                  K. Jones (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                                  (South Yorkshire County Council - Architect’s
                    Division)
                               ](Scuth Yorkshire Police)
                  D. Sherriff (City o£ Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                                    ~~|(South Yorkshire County Council -
                    Administration Department)
                  J. H. Stenton (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
                  D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council - Administration
                     Department)
                   W     V O h^ U x                               Vivi
H
    1.       Purpose of Meeting

    Following the postponement of the meeting with the Club because of adverse
    weather and the difficulty in agreeing a mutually convenient alternative
    date, the purpose of the meeting was to review the position since 12th February,
    1979, prior to the re-arranged meeting with the Club which was now to take
    place on 2nd April, 1979.

    2.       Plans

    The plans at 1:500 scale and indicating all site fixtures were, it was still understood,
    to be supplied by Eastwood & Partners at the meeting with the Club.

    3.       Report
    (a)      General

    The County Council had contacted the H o m e Office, but had been given little
    information additional to that contained in their various Circulars. Basically,
    they had said that any new work or reconstruction had to be to a standard not
    lower than that set out in the Guide. However, the maximum flexibility had
    to be maintained in the case of existing structures and differences in such
    matters as age, size and mode of construction had to be taken into account.

    The Fire Service had contacted four other Brigades with designated grounds,
    and only in one case had the recommendations of the Guide been strictly
    adhered to.

                                      1.
(b)      Spion Kop (pages 2, 3 & 4)

Additional to the points mentioned cn 12th February, 1979, concern was
expressed by the Building Authority as to the general maintenance of the Kop
and the loose and broken concrete at the bottom in particular. If attention
was not given to this, it was. A G R E E D that it would be necessary to restrict
admission to the Kop, additional to the restriction to 11, 040 if the extra
exits are not provided.

On the question of exits, it was again A G R E E D that it was essential to line
up the gates in the existing barrier with the gangways.. Of the existing two
exits, concern was expressed as to the effect of the right-angled turn on
the embankment at the exit at the rear. After discussion, It was A G R E E D
that the best compromise was to leave things as they existed, provided
handrails are provided on the stairways, taking into account the
desirability of maintaining a smooth flow.

The Fire Service queried the exact form of the lateral separation discussed
at the meeting on 12th February, 1979, as this would naturally have a
bearing on the means of escape recommendations. After discussion, it
was A G R E E D that the metal fences should not be of the climb-proof type,
that it was not intended that they should obstruct the gangways, and that
in consequence the padlocked gateway recommendation should be dropped.
However, it was A G R E E D that it was still desirable to seek 3 x 2 central
barriers but, if the Club really resisted the suggestion, 2 x 2 could
reluctantly be conceded. The Building Authority stressed that whatever
barriers were provided would have to pass the appropriate strain tests.

The fact that the height of many of the existing crush barriers was below the
recommendation in the Guide, in some cases well below, was pointed out by the
Building Authority. The corrosion point mentioned at the last meeting was "‘
also reiterated. It was A G R E E D that these points must be drawn to the
Club's attention, as must the condition of the Score Board Structure.

 (c)      The West Terrace (pages 4 & 5)

As well as the condition of the crush barriers mentioned at the last meeting,
the Building Authority drew attention to the poor condition in places of the
terracing in small areas near to the stand. The cross-fall on the steps on
the north-west corner exit would also require attention as it tended to throw
people forward. The height of the crush barriers mentioned in regard to the -
Spion Kop also applied. It was A G R E E D that all these points must be drawn
to the Club's attention.

 (d)      The North West Corner Reinforced Concrete Terrace (pages 5 Sz 6)

Having now had the opportunity of having a closer look at the existing corrugated
sheeting, the Building Authority confirmed that it would require alteration to
meet the requirements of the Guide.
  (e)      The North Stand (pages 6 & 7)

  The removal of a row of seats from the top of the stand down each gangway
  to the upper exits and the removal of four seats at those exits was
  confirmed as being a reasonable compromise to put to the Club.

  As the asbestos sheets at the top of the stand were protected, the Building
  Authority felt that these could be accepted, and confirmed that the glazing'
  at the ends of the stands was not glass ana so would not shatter.

  (f)      The West Stand (page 7)

  Consideration was given to the Building Authority’s suggestion of lateral
  gangways and the segregation of exits but, after discussion, it was A G R E E D
  that the additional staircase agreed at the last meeting should be confirmed.
  So long as it was of 4-unit exit width, it was A G R E E D it was not necessary
  to insist it should be on the south-west corner* Such staircases could be
  bought "off the peg" and, if not installed in the close season, it was
  A G R E E D that a -g reduction in capacity would be necessary.

  (g)       The South Stand '(pages ,7St 8)

  As mentioned at the last meeting, the penning arrangements of the seating
  and the-numbers of seats in the rows caused problems. Bearing in mind the
  need for reasonableness and to make the situation batter, it was A G R E E D
  that, even though not strictly in accordance with the Guide, that the best
  compromise was to seek the removal of the existing barriers and their
  re-alignment, together with the widening of the gangways at the position
  of the wings.

  The Fire Service pointed out and it was A G R E E D that Fire Resisting Doors
  would be required leading to the Directors' seating, and 1 hour fire
  resistance would be required for all problem areas under the stand. This
  could be reduced to | hour if automatic detection equipment were to be
' installed.

  For their part, the Building Authority reiterated their concern as to the
  corrosion of the steelwork of the stand, and also pointed out the concrete
  spalling which was occurring. Again, the likelihood of the balustrading,
  barriers and guardrails needing to be reinforced or replaced was mentioned.
  It was A G R E E D all would need to be given attention by the Club.

  (h)       General Requirements (pages 8 & 9)

  As well as the Fire Service pointing out that the present temporary
  structures used for police and first-aid purposes would need removal
  from a means of escape point of view if the capacity of the North Stand
was not to be reduced, the Police stated that they were ready to discuss
with the Club the facilities they would require. Briefly, they envisaged
a permanent structure almost'twice as large as the existing temporary
structure, and expected communications, detention, toilet, parade room,
etc.,•"facilities.

So far as First-Aid was concerned, the Sheffield Area Health Authority
had confirmed their willingness to provide advice on First-Aid and
Medical Facilities, but the person nominated (Dr. H. Bailey - Specialist
in Community Medicine (Social Services)) was on holiday until
2nd April, 1979. He had been invited to the meeting, with the Club on
2nd April, but it was recognised that possible practical difficulties might
prevent his doing so.
                 SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

       Note of a Visit to the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield,
                         on 8th June, 1981

PRESENT:   'Representing the' Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

            E. England (Secretary)

            Representing the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)

            C. Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
                     [(South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
            R. Grimshaw (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
            R. Herold (South Yorkshire Police)
                        IfCity of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
            J. P. Ruddy (South Yorkshire Police)                             1
            D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
            D.I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1._____ Purpose of Meeting

The visit was the second in the twice-yearly programme of visits by Officer
Working Parties to all five League Football Clubs in South Yorkshire* as
mentioned at the meeting on 10th February, 1981, and originally referred to
in the Chief Executive's letter to the Club dated 10th January, 1981. The
visit on 7th April had been a special one in view of the Stadium being the
venue on 11th April for a F.A. Cup Semi-Final match.

2 .____Inspection of   Stadium

The representatives made a joint inspection of the Stadium.

(a)     South Stand

The progress of the monitoring of the apparent deflection in the steel
trusses referred to at the meeting on 10th February was queried but, in
the absence of Dr. W. Eastwood, no specific answer could be given.

It was noted that the monitoring device to be sited adjacent to the new
metal case for the batteries supplying the emergency power supply for the
public address system (referred to at the meeting on 7th April) had yet to
be provided.

 (b)    ’West Stand

The cracked brickwork at the rear of the stand, as well as the apparent
distress on the concrete pillars supporting the steps at the rear of the
stand and the cracks in the concrete at the top of both sets of stairs,
had been made good.

As previously agreed, as soon as a grinder was next present at the Stadium
the Club would round off the steel supports to the new emergency exit
(nearest to the South Stand).

Following experiences at the F.A. Cup Seni-Final match, the Club were
considering revised arrangements on the terracing in front of the Stand.
An assurance was given that the Officer Working Party would be consulted
when these had -substance.
(c )   N o rth -W e s t T e rra c e

The two small areas where water seepage had continued to take place after
treatment had now been satisfactorily treated.

It was also noted'that the tie bars through the upper level concrete
area to the rear had been -protectively wrapped.

(d)    North Stand

The expansion cracks in the wall of the North Stand (nearest to the Spion
Kop) had been made good.

(e)    Spion     Kop

The infilling of the step adjacent to the handrail on the left of the
original exit at the top of the Kop had not been done to date but would
be attended to shortly.

The temporary barrier of scaffolding tubes erected between the end of the
new Kop exit outer barriers and the concrete pillar of the lowest of the
Kop original exit steps (adjacent to the new brick built chip shop) prior
to the F.A. Cup Semi-Final match remained. However, the Club intended to
extend the existing barriers to fill the gap on a permanent basis and to
level off the area between the bottom of the new Kop exit staircase and the
original Kop exit steps prior to the commencement of the forthcoming season.

 (f)   General

It was noted

(i)    that the steel girders with mesh on top adjoining the wall at the
rear of the Butcher's Shop on Penistone Road required attention because of
corrosion, and (ii) that the top of the brick built wall between the Spion
Kop and the South Stand required pointing.
EASTWOOD                        & PARTNERS                                                                                         _B O W M A K E R      HOUSE
                   Consulting     Enginaars                                                                                        ’ {23 KINGF1ELD ROAD
                                                                                                                                   SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
VV. Eastwood                B.Eng., Ph.D.. F.Eng.. FJ.C.1.
                                                                                                                                    Tel.:   (0 7 4 2 )   583871
                            F.I.Stiuct.E, F.G.S.. M.Cons.S.

A. A. Wood                  S.Eng, P h.D . C.Eng, F .f.C .i.
                            F.I.SUuct.E_ M .I.W .E.S. M.Cans.E

A. G. Burdett               G.M „ B.Sc.(Eng). C.Eng.. M.l.C.E.

R. C. A. Eastwood           s'sc.. C.Eng.. M .l.C .E . M.I.St/uct.E.

M s o d a tts :
G eoffrey S pir             C .= n t „ M .l.C .E., M .I.M «ch.E.

C. S. G reaves              B,En{., C . E n j ., M J .C .E ., M .i.S sru c t.£ .

A. J . C lough              3 ^ . , C .E n g ., M .C .].S .S .,.M J.M * c h .£ ,                                Our Ref:       WE/JAS/PB/3563
J . A. S tra n g e          C .E n j., M.I.Scrucc.E.
                                                                                                                Your R e f :
Consultant:
A. L. P ercy                M .T ech .(H o n.), B.S«„ C . S n j .. F.J.C.E.,
                            M .S tr u c t.E ., F.I.M un.E., M .R .T.P.I.




 South Yorkshire County Council,                                                                                               2. September              1981
 County Hall,                                                                                                                                      ’
 BARNSLEY, S. Yorks,
 S70 2 T N .


 For the attention of Mr. D. V a u ghan.


 Dear Mr. Vaughan,

                           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club L t d .
                                Radial F ences-at Leppings lane End

                  We have been instructed by the Club to organise the
 installation of two radial fences,on the terrace at the
 Leppings lane end of the ground.

                  It is intended that these fences are so positioned
 that they divide this-section of the terrace into
 approximately three equal areas, each served by its own
 entrance.

                  By dividing the terrace more control over supporters
 should result.                       A visiting team with only a few followers
will be allocated one section, with the other two sections
retained by the home supporters.

                  Larger contingents of visiting spectators could be
 accommodated in two or all three areas as their numbers
 dictate.

                  A 1.15 metre wide gate is proposed at the rear of
each fence to give access for maintenance and also policing
during a game.                       The gate could be left open, but fastened
back,              to connect the areas during a game if adjacent ones


                                                             Reg ist e r e d       in   En g lan d -   No. 1134531
E A S T W O O D &■ P A R T N E R S




     are accupied-by supporters of the same team.             When establishing
     the height we have considered that the views to the corner
     flags should not be restricted any further than they are at
     present by the perimeter fence.            We therefore propose that the
     top of the fence should be approximately 1680mm above the
     terrace.

              This may not prevent the odd spectator climbing the fence
     but should eliminate a mass invasion from one area to the other.
     Fences this height appear to work successfully at St. James's
     Park,      the home of Newcastle United.

              We would be pleased if this specific point can be discussed
     within the Working Party and your comments forwarded to us.

              Also to be included in the same contract are some gates at'
     various locations around the north stand.             Now the gymnasium is
     open to the general public security to ether parts of the ground
     must be maintained.             It is proposed that gates are provided at
     the top of the ramps at both ends of the stand with additional
     gates at ground floor level at the Penistone Road end of the
     stand.         A separate gate will be placed behind the west ramp to'
     prevent people going round the rear of the gymnasium towards
     Leppings Lane.

              Six copies of our drawing 3563/1 together with two copies
     of our drawings 3563/2 and 3 (for-,.reference only) are enclosed.



                                                   Yours sincerely,




     c.c.      Mr. E. England,
               S.W.F.C. Ltd.
                        SAFETY O f SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                   Note of a Meeting of the. Officer Working Party
                   (Sheffield District);'held at the Division Street
                 ''Fire Station, Sheffield, ’on 11th September 1981


PRESENT:     |
             ____________(South. Yorkshire Police)
                           |(South. Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                          (South Yorkshire Police)
                         [(South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
                           (South Yorkshire Police)                        . •
                    H CSouth Yorkshire County Fire Service)
              D. Sheriff (City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
           .* T. W. Stuart (South Yorkshire, Police)
              D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)

1. .   Purpose of Meeting

The purpo'se of the meeting was to consider the letter dated 2nd September
and plans submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. relating to the proposed erection
of Radial Barriers on the Wes-t Terrace for crowd control purposes and
Security Gates at various locations around the North Stand now that the
gymnasium was open to the general public..

2.     Radial Barriers on West Terrace

Whilst there were drawbacks to the division of the terrace into
approximately three equal areas, each served by its own entrance, the
Working Party felt that increased control on the Terrace should result
from the proposals. For instance there could well be problems with
opposing fans mixing at the rear of the West Stand and/or the final exit:
gates, but the police considered that they could cope with any problems
of this nature.

The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be installed at the rear o£
the radial barriers was also discussed, as well as the use of the
existing gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the front of the
Terrace.

It was noted that the plans submitted did not indicate the amount of head­
room which would be available at the rear of the Terrace should the
radial barriers and gates be installed.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
that the Officer Working Party sees no objection to the proposals to instal
two 1680mm high radial barriers, with 1.15 metre wide gates at the rear,
on the West Terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium, subject to:-

       (i)-         the further calculations required by the Building
                    Authority being satisfactory;
                                                                  DEPART?,':iri7 G.'; r.
       Cii)         confirmation that adequate headroom will be
                                                                            a :;d
                    available at the rear of the Terrace, and
                                                                        p   ~   .   —   ,   -



        ( iii)      the new gates at the rear of the Terrace   al L  . .1 c crpio'
                                                                  =0 beiragO —■- r
                    under police control.
                                                                  2>X -
3 .____ Security Gates around North Stand

Now _that the gymnasium was open to .the general public, the Club wished to
erect security gates at. the top of -the ramps at both ends of the North
Stand, with, additional gates at ground floor level at the Penis tone#Road
end of the Stand. A separate gate would also be placed behind the West
Ramp to prevent people going round the rear of the gymnasium towards
Lepping? Lane.

These gates would .be fastened when the gymnasium only was ir. use so as to
provide security for the rest of the ground. However, on match days they
would be secured in the fully open position to allow unrestricted access. ■

IT WAS AGREED that Hr. Vaughan should notify Messrs. Eastwood and Partners
that the Officer Working Party sees no objection to the erection of security
gates around the'North Stand, subject to* the gates and/or their supports, '
hinges, etc not impinging'on the existing critical ramp widths, and to the
gates being secured in the fully open position on match days.

4 .____Police and First Aid Facilities

It was recalled that the existing unsatisfactory police and first aid
facilities under the North Stand had been accepted on an interim basis'.
The Club had undertaken to provide purpose built facilities in a similar
position to the existing timbered facilities during the 1980 close
season. Whilst some progress had Been made in discussing details of the
facilities, no firm, indication had yet been given as to when they would
actually be provided.

IT WAS AGREED that Mr..D, Vaughan should press the Club and/or its
Consultants   for a firm indication as to when the new- police and first
aid facilities are to'-B-e provided.

5.    Lottery Ticket Boxes

Attention was drawn to the blocked egress which could result if the
timber lottery ticket boxes presently sited close to the ramps ware, to
be tipped over or ignited, either" accidentally or deliberately,

IT WAS AGREED that Mr, Vaughan should draw the Club's attention to the
desirability of re-siting the lottery ticket boxes.
                          SAFETY OF -SPORTS ■ —GROUNDS
                                                ■
                                                       ACT 1975                       A
                                                                      ^
                 Note of' a meeting of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield
                 District) held at the Police Sports & Social Club, N i a g a r a ^
                                Sheffield, on 18th April 1985       ...


PRESENT:)                |(Cityof Sheffield Metropolitan District Council)
            C.  Calvert (South Yorkshire Police)
                         [(South Yorkshire County Fire Service)
             \           (South Yorkshire Police)
             T. Stewart (South Yorkshire Police)
             G. Sykes    (South Yorkshire Police)
             D. I. Vaughan (South Yorkshire County Council)
            I     1    I (South Yorkshire County Fire Service)


1.     Purpose of Meeting

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the letter dated.9th April
and   planfrom Messrs. Eastwood & Partners relating to the proposals of
theSheffield Wednesday Football Club to construct two new banks of
turnstiles and various runs of fencing and new gates in order to achieve
segregation of visiting supporters- at the Leppings Lane end of the
Hillsborough Stadium.

2.     Consideration of Proposals

The Police representatives pointed out that the proposals had been
prompted in the main by comments they had made to the Club. At one
.time,.both the West Stand and Terrace had been regarded as. exclusively
 for the use of visiting supporters, but recent patterns or attendances
 at the Stadium made it necessary to allow for some element of use by
home supporters as well.

The proposals now outlined by the Club were generally acceptable to the
Police representatives, subject to:-

 (a)   additional gates being provided between the turnstile numbered 16
       and the wall of the inner access road;

 (b)    thecentral area of the Terrace (indicated as the neutral area or
       visiting supporters' terrace) being divided in half by a new
       central radial fence running from the tunnel entrance to the
       pitchside security fence with gates erected so as to permit entry
       to be diverted to either half as appropriate (the proposed new
       secondary radial fence adjacent to the existing fence indicated
       on the plan to be abandoned);

 (c)   the right hand area of the Terrace (indicated as home supporters’
       terrace) also to be divided in half by a new central radial fence
       running from back to front with .two gates (the existing radial
       fence dividing the present two Terrace areas - neutral area and
       home supporters - to have a second gate installed;

 (d)   the existing pitch perimeter fence to have additional exit gates
       installed - one in the neutral area and one in the home supporters
       area


                                              1.
The County Fire Service saw no objection in principle to the proposals,
subject to more detailed investigation of the means of escape aspects,
and the Building Authority similarly saw no objection, subject to
submission of detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act and Building Regulations.

3.   Action

IT WAS AGREED

(a) That              [should investigate as a matter of urgency the means
of escape aspects of the proposals and let D. I. Vaughan know the
outcome.

(b) That, subject to satisfactory clearance of these aspects by the
County Fire Service, the outline proposals submitted by Messrs. Eastwood
& Partners be agreed as now amended by the suggestions of the South
Yorkshire Police, also subject, of course, to the submission of the
necessary detailed plans and calculations under both the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act and Building Regulations.
                             SAFETY 0? SPOKTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

Note of a M e eting; of the Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) held at
the Police. Sports and Social Club, Niagara, Sheffield, on 29th July, 1985

PRESENT:                  (South Yorkshire County Fire Service).    ■
                          |(City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council). .
                             [(South Yorkshire Police).
                         [(South Yorkshire Police).
              D. Sheriff (City or Sheffield Metropolitan District Council).
              D. I. Vaughan (South_ Yorkshire County Council).

1.        Purpose of Meeting                      ..                •.. ......

The purpose of the meeting was to consider the detailed plans submitted by the
letter dated 25th July from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners of arrangements
for the segregation of visiting spectators at the Leppings Lane End of the
Hillsborough Stadium of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. It was
recalled that consideration of outline proposals had taken place by the
Officer Working Party on 18th April, 1985. Whilst formal application had been
made for Building Regulation approval and some of the work had actually
 commenced, Messrs. Eastwood'aid P-axtjiejrs had apologised by ’phone that
 submission of the detailed proposals- for. Safety of Sports Grounds Act
 approval had'apparently been overlooked due' to pressure of work and staff
.holidays.  The jjlans also included details .of' repairs to..certain crush,
 barriers on the Spion Kop.       .

 2.        Consideration of Proposals ' " ' ■ ' . - ' ■ I   ' **„

 The 14 detailed plans submitted- vifre. each.' considered and discussed individually.

 IT WAS A G R E E D — * that, subject to the;-following jpoints and to the submission, of
 the necessary detailed calculations^. to _the Building Authority, the proposals
 for segregating visiting supporters' a t 'Che Leppings Lane End of the
 Hillsborough Stadium were generally-..'acceptable:_-            .... .

 (a)    Plan No. 6705/6 - for both security access and emergency egress purposes
 a pitch perimeter fence gate t£> b& provided;.

 (b)    Plan No.. 6705/8A - the new handrail by. Turnstile 23 to be either
 shortened or re-aligned so as to- maintain the 'exit width between the outer
 (river) wall and Turnstile 23, and the exit width between -Turnstile 16 and
 the new handrail not to be less than, the,width of the roller shutter gate
 between Turnstiles 16 and 17;      ...

 (c)   Plan No. 6705/9A - the single block thickness of the interal walls
 (e.g. the cubicles) is not considered to be substantial enough, and'a' - '
 substantial stud partition (tinier or steel — suitably faced) is felt-to
 be required;

  (d)       Plan No. 6705/10A - same comments as- for plan 9A;

  (e)-   Plan No. 6705/11A - no objection in principle* but details of exact
  location required;

  (f)   Plan No. 6705/12 - no objection' in principle, but no barrier height
  indicated;

     (g)'   Plan No. 6705/14A - so long as increased thickness is achieved by steep
     slopes as indicated or. the plan and not b3 _.’T£tarrDed,'' arrangements to give
f a o f c h o l ^ . th« p r o f e s c . l s 2 r s s<a:is factor- but the possible need to take
m<2t3 Sur 2 S c-n top vt the wa.ll to discourage persons from attempting to climb
over will have t? ic- borne in." o m d ;

(h)       Plan'No.. 6705/16A - in view of experiences last year, the front
c o m e r of the Spion Kop (by the crush barriers numbered 5, 8 and 22) to
either have a Pitch Perimeter Pence Gate or radial barrier(s) to overcome
possible lateral crushing hazard when large crowds are present;

(i)    Plan No. 6705/17 - for both security access and emergency egress
purposes, a Pitch Perimeter Fence Gate to be provided;

(j)    Stewarding of New Gates - as mentioned in my letter of 2nd May, 3.985
it is essential that all the new gates1axe fully supervised by Stewards*'
who must be fit, able and properly trained.                 . .
              IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                                  Area Officer Working Parties

    In order to avoid duplication and division of resources, the primary authority has been .
    designated for the carrying out of inspections, reinspections, and making final
    technical recommendations necessary using the headings given in the contents summary
    of the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" with some additions. Where there is an
    overlap of the spheres of control, the primary authority responsible must consult the
    other authority(ies) concerned before finalising any recommendation (s). The following
    abbreviations have been used:-

                                             C.     =    County
                                             P.     =    Police
                                           F.B.     ==   Fire Brimne
                                           B.A.     =    Building Control Authority


                            Primary               To be
    Subject                                                           Matters for Consultation
                            Authority             Consulted


Ingress to the ground -
(I) structural                 B.A.               F.B.&P.           j Possible adverse effects
(ii) means of escape           F.B.               B.A.&P.           | on area of responsibility of
                                                                    j Primary Authority •


Egress from the ground -
(i) structural                 B.A.               F.B.-&P.          ) Possible adverse effects
(ii) means of escape           F.B.               B.A.tP.           j on slt-2 of responsibility
                                                                    5 of Primary Authority


Terraces -
(i) structural                 B.A.               F.B.fcP.          ) Possible adverse effects
(ii) means of escape           F.B.               B.A. &P.          ) on area of responsibility
                                                                    ) of Primary Authority


Stands -
(!) structural                 E. A.              F.B.&P.           ) Possible adverse effccts
(ii) means of escape           F.B.               B.A.&P.           | or, ?rea. of responsibility
                                                                    1 of Primary Authority


Staircases and ramps -
(i) structural                 B .A .             F.-B.fcP.         ) Possible adverse effects
                                                                  i j
i'll) means of escape          F.B.               B.A.fcP.        j ) on area of responsibility
                                                                  i
                                                                  1 i of Prirnsn Authoritv
                                                                  I
                             Primary •   To be
     Sub] ect                                           Matters for Consult'.f
                                                                             iion
                             Authority   Consulted
                                                                         t

Fire Precautions               F.B.      B.A. &P.       Auxiliary and emergency
                                                        lighting. Emergency
                                         P.             procedure and staff trainii


Access for emergency
 vehicles                      P.        F.B.           Fire Brigade appliances.


Spacing of crush barriers      B.A.      P.             Effect on crowd control.
                                         F.B.           Effect on means of escape.


Strength of crush barriers
 and perimeter walls           B.A.


Terrace to touch-line
 distance                      P.


Estimation of safe
 ground capacity               C.        P..F.B.&B.A.   Final Figures.


Communications                 P..       F.B.           Effect on are warning
                                                        system.


First Aid and Medical          C.        Area Health
                                         Authority to
                                         be consulted


Police at ground               p.


Legal and Administration       C.


Certificate drawings           c.
South Yorkshire County Council,
Department of Administration,
County Hall,
BARNSLEY,
South Yorkshire.
S70 2TN                                              Mr. Sherriff
                                                          4173

             DV/HH/583/S               BR/DS/ADM          2-lst March, 1980


Dear Sira,

Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club

I would refer to your letter dated 14th March in connection with the above and
enclose a list of coarsents on outstanding natters primarily concerning the
Building Authority,

There will, of course, be saae overlap of responsibilities and the items are
presently being discussed with the County Fire Service and Eastwood & Partners.

Yours faithfully,
                          B»~nri1ng Authority Comments


1.   Fire resisting door frames to be sealed against supporting walls,

2.   Check to be made that fire retardant paint has been used on the partitions
     within the South Stand,

3.   Confirm the requirements for the use of wired glass in the sane area for
     fire and/or safety purposes,

4.   South Stand restaurant and access areas to be checked for compliance with
     fire regulations,

5.   New stair construction at South-West Stand to be checked for clearance.
     Suggest sharp edges to steelwork removed and timber fascia provided.

6.   Perimeter fencing at North-East comer of Spion Kop to be appraised for
     condition and strength.

7.   Upper exit area on Spion Kcp to be checked for step obstruction.

8.   Mesh fencing under North Stand to be assessed for strength and potential
     hazard to crowd surges.

9.   Exit signs not clearly displayed.


Note: Items 1, 2, 3 and 4 involve the County Fire Service to a considerable
      exbent.



\o~~*




 Department of Planning & Design,
 Town Hall.»
 SHEFFIELD.
 SI 2HH

 BR/DS/ADM                                                        2is.t March. 1980
game if adjacent areas were to be occupied by supporters of the

same    team.           Approval      for the installation of the                      two    radial

fences     was    given by S.-Y. C. C.             in their letter of 14th September

1981    (pages* 76-77).              The approval was subject to the condition

(paragraph        1. c.    at page        76)     that the gates at the rear of the

fences should be under Police control.



46.     The      installation             work     was      carried       out   by     a    firm     of

Contractors,            Blessvale,          in    October         and    November      1981.         In

places      the crush barriers passed through the radial fences                                      and

there      was    discussion         between Mr _________ and Mr England                          about

this,      as    recorded in the memorandum of 4th November 1981                                   (page

79).        There       was    further           discussion        between      them       about    the

relevant barriers              on 13th November 1981                    (page 8.1).    The Police

w a nted    those       barriers      which        passed through the             radial       fences

removed         because       otherwise          spectators        might use     them to           climb

over      the     radial       fences.           Neither         the    Club,   nor    Mr

w ished     the    barriers         to be removed because to do so might have

a ffected safety.              If the relevant barriers had been removed,                             an

uninterrupted             " channel”        would        have      been     created        along     the

radial        fence front the top of the terrace down to the perimeter

 fence.         Also,     spectators        tend to congregate at the top of the

west     terrace        rather than at the bottom by the perimeter fence

 because        their     view will         not be obscured by the small                      mesh of

 the     perimeter.            It     was        agreed     in    the     discussions        cm     13th

 November        1981     that      the    barriers         would remain in position, for

 the next match to see what happened.




                                                   -   18   -
47..    The next discussion between M r ________ |and Mr England took

place following the match on 17th November 1981 (page 82).                                                  Ths

Chief       Constable           had     seen     the       barriers           in    position         and    was

content       that        they        should     remain             because        there   had       been     no

problems       at     the       match.         It        was,       therefore,        agreed      that       the

barriers       would        remain       in    position -passing through                       the    radial

fences as they are today.



48.     I    wrote         to    S. Y. C, C.        on     14th       December.        1981      (page       83)

updating       them        on    progress        regarding             the     installation           of     the

radial       fences        and     security          gates.           S. Y. C. C.     replied        on     20th

January       198.2       (pages      84-85).        That letter recorded doubts                           still

being voiced by the Police concerning the crush barriers which

passed       through            the     radial           fences.          I    therefore          wrote       to

S. Y. C. C.       on 26th January 1982 (pages 86-88) with my views as to

why I felt that the relevant barriers should not be terminated

short of the radial fence.                       I pointed out the aspects of safety

and segregation which were involved and felt that what had been

done        was       a     "reasonable              compromise               between       the       various

interests".'              These       matters       were discussed at a meeting of the

w o r ki ng party held on 4th February 1982 (pages 89-91).                                             It was

agreed       at     that        meeting       that       it     was    preferable          from   a safety

point of view to retain the crush barriers which passed through

the radial f e n c e s .



 49.    The installation of two further radial fences in the west

 terrace       were        considered           in        1985.        These        were      part     of    the

 reorganisation             of     the    west       terrace which I shall                    refer to' in




                                                     -    19    -
                                DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING

                                    BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION


DIVISIONAL MEMORANDUM NO. 26                                                               October 1986



SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT -1975

1.     Powers and R e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s

1.1    T h i s Act became a f u l l r e s p o n s i b i l i t y of t h e Ci t y Council on
       . 1 s t A p r i l , 1986 and i t s i mp l e me n t a t i o n r e s t s wi t h the A d m i n i s t r a t i o n
        and Legal De p a r tme n t ( C h i e f L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r ) a s s i s t e d as n e c e s s a r y
        by a panel o f o f f i c e r s ("The Working P a r t y " ) drawn from v a r i o u s
        D e p a r t m e n t s , o t h e r s t a t u t o r y a u t h o r i t i e s and e x t e r n a l s o u r c e s .

1.2     The Working P a r t y c o m p o s i t i o n , r e l e v a n t r o l e s and r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s
        wer e f i r s t drawn up by t h e t h e n South Yo r k s h i r e County Council in
        1975 ( s e e Ap p e n d i x ) . These a r rang e men t s have l a r g e l y been c o n t i n u e d
        in t h e C i t y , b u t a r e l i k e l y t o be r evi ewed s h o r t l y b e c a u s e : -

        (a)     The Act has been widened in scope (By Order; SI 1986: 1044,
                21.7.86).

        ( b)    Additional         e x p e r t i s e has been sought t o add to the Working P a r t y .

        (c)     The Act may be. amended in t h e n e x t p a r l i a m e n t a r y s e s s i o n .

1 . 3 . T h i s memorandum r e g a r d i n g t h e r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s of BSD s h o u l d t h e r e f o r e
        be r e g a r d e d as a p o s i t i o n s t a t e m e n t pending such a r ev i ew.          I t shoul d
        be n o t e d t h a t t h e BSD r o l e i s t h a t o f " Bu i l di n g A u t h o r i t y " , as d e f i n e d
        i n t h e Act , on beh aTf o f t h e C i t y Co u n ci l . Normally 8SD w i l l be
        r e p r e s e n t e d a t Working P a r t y me e t i ng s by the Head o f the SAU o r SSU as
        seems a p p r o p r i a t e f o r t h e c a s e in q u e s t i o n o r by both.

1.4     B a s i c a l l y t h e r e a r e two c a s e s where t h e views o f BSD w i l l be s o u g h t or
        w i l l have t o be p u t f o r w a r d : -

         CASE A

        Where a l t e r a t i o n s o r new work i s pr oposed where in a d d i t i o n t o t h e need
        t o s a t i s f y r e q u i r e m e n t s u nd e r t h e Act ("Green Code" r e q u i r e m e n t s ) ,
        a p p r o v a l u n d er B u i l d i n g R e g u l a t i o n s w i l l be n e c e s s a r y , i r r e s p e c t i v e of
        w h a t s t a g e i t w i l l be s o u g h t , or

         CASE B

         Where work i s p r o p o s e d o r i s t o be r e q u i r e d to s a t i s f y t h e Green Code,
         b u t which w i l l n o t r e q u i r e appr oval under Bu i l d i n g R e g u l a t i o n s or
         planning permission.
         NB.     I t w i l l u s u a l l y have been the c a s e t h a t the Chief L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r
                 w i l l have d i s s e m i n a t e d any a p p r o p r i a t e i n f or ma t i on i n c l u d i n g plans
                  a t o r between me e t i n g s o f t h e Working P a r t y .

 2.     P r o c e d u r e w i t h i n BSD

 2.1    Where Case A a p p l i e s GAU w i l l ad o pt t h e primary c o - o r d i n a t i n g r o l e in t.
        D i v i s i o n , w i l l c o n d u c t any n e c e s s a r y l i a i s o n wi t h e x t e r n a l Departments
        and b o d i e s , and w i l l a g r e e , in c o n s u l t a t i o n with SSU and SAU a t P r i n c i p
        o r A s s i s t a n t P r i n c i p a l l e v e l , m a t t e r s of compliance wi t h t h e Green Code
                                                   -   2 -



2.2    Such c o n s u l t a t i o n w i l l a l s o t a k e p l a c e where f o r example any d e t a i l s
       a r e s u b m i t t e d i n r e s p o n s e t o a c o n d i t i o n a l approval or where amend­
       me n t s a r e s u b m i t t e d t o t h e scheme, even i f such d e t a i l s a p p e a r t o be
       o f i n t e r e s t o n l y t o one o f t h e BSD U n i t s concerned.

2.3    Where Case B a p p l i e s SSU w i l l a d o p t t h e - p r i m a r y c o - o r d i n a t i n g r o l e
       i n t h e D i v i s i o n , w i l l c o n d u c t any n e c e s s a r y l i a i s o n with e x t e r n a l
       D e p a r t m e n t s and b o d i e s , and w i l l a g r e e , in c o n s u l t a t i o n w i t h SAU
       and GAU, a t P r i n c i p a l o r A s s i s t a n t P r i n c i p a l l e v e l , m a t t e r s o f
       c o m p l i a n c e w i t h t h e Green Code.

2.4 G enerally a ll observations                  r e l a t i n g to Green Code r e q u i r e m e n t s s h o u l d
     be p u t i n w r i t i n g t o A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and Legal Department.                 All me et i n g s
     s h o u l d be p r o p e r l y m i nu t e d as a p p r o p r i a t e us i ng c e n t r a l f i l e s 73
     ( S h e f f i e l d Wednesday), 72 ( S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d ) , 71 (General SSGA ma t t e r s ) ,
     and 96 ( Owl er t o n S t a d i u m ) , which a r e k e p t by Mr s . |                                ]


3.    Planning Permission

3.1    L a r g e improvements r e q u i r e p l a n n i n g p e r mi s s i on and t h i s may have been
       s o u g h t in advance o f a p p r ov a l u n d e r t h e Green Guide or B u i l d i n g
       Regulations.           In o r d e r t h a t t h e p o s i t i o n under s . 55 SYA 1930 ( a c c e s s
       f o r f i r e b r ig a d e) i s safegu arde d i t is e s s e n t i a l t h a t the p r o v i s i o n s
       o f t h e s e c t i o n a r e b r o u g h t t o t h e n o t i c e o f t h e a p p l i c a n t when t h e
        planning permission is issued.




Circulation:            All BSD s t a f f
                        En v i r o n men t al P l a n n i n g O f f i c e r
                        B. Edge, P r i n c i p a l A d m i n i s t r a t i v e O f f i c e r
             St^ieia^GilfcGouricil




     Sheffield Sports Stadium
        Cwlerton, Sheffield



    Report of the Works required
    to be carried out to satisfy
The Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975




 By the Building Surveyor’s Division
   Department of land and Planning
       Sheffield City Council

           Septeniber 1989
CONTENTS


1.0    INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1.1    Sections
1.2    Extent of Report
1.3    General Requirements

2.0   IMMEDIATE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
2.1   Introduction
2.2 . Gate A
2.3   Gate B
2.4   Gate C
2.5   Dates  D, E and F
2.6   Gate G
2.7   Gate H
2.8   Gate I
2.9   Stock Car Paddock Area
2.10  East Terrace
2.11  South Terrace
2.12  Greyhound Terrace
2.13  Grandstand
2.14  Sportsman Terrace
2.15  Exit Signs
2.16  Sportsman Tavern
2.17  Greyhound Bar
2.18  The Panoram Suite

3.0    WORKS TO BE CARRIED OUT WiltLLN 2 YEARS
3.1    Introduction
3.2    Stock Car Paddock Area
3.3    Greyhound Terrace
3.4    Grandstand/Panorama Suite Area
3.5    Sportsman Terrace/Tavern
3.6    South-West Co m e r of Stadium Land
3.7    Additional General Requirements

4.0    WORKS REQUIRED TO INCREASE CBCWD CAPACITY
4.1    Introduction
4.2    Rugby Football.
4.3    Other Activities

APPENDIX - Layout plan of Cwlerton Sports Stadium
                               SHEFFIEID SPORTS STADIUM
                                  CKLERTON, ShEbVTFTri

                            REPORT OF THE TORKS REQUIRING
                            TO BE CARRIED CUT TO SATISFY .
                        THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                         BY THE BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION
                           DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING
                               SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

                                    SEPTEMBER 1989


1.0      INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

1.1     SECTIONS

         1.0   Introduction and general requirements
         2.0   Immediate safety requirements
         3.0   Works to be carried out within 2 years
         4.0   Works required to increase crowd capacity

1.2     EXTENT OF REPORT

         The contents of this report are those from my office only, and do not
         include any comments or requirements rrede by the Police, Fire
         Authority, Department of Health and Consumer Services, the South
         Yorkshire Ambulance Service, the Council's Administration and Legal
         Department (Licensing Authority) or any other department, bcdy or
         organisation.

1.3     GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

1.3.1   Electrical Safety

         All electrical appliances, circuitry and fittings should be inspected
         and tested, by a competent person, and a certificate of satisfaction
         should be issued to the Council (as Licensing Authority). It is very
         important that the ccinpetent person is appointed without delay and that
         the works of achieving electrical safety to all parts of the stadium
         are commenced as soon as possible and conpleted in the shortest
         possible time.

1.3.2   First Aid Facilities

         The number of qualified first aiders and the provision of first aid
         equipment and facilities within the ground to be agreed between the
         Stadium management and the Council's Department of "Health and Consumer
         Services, in respect of each type of event and crowd capacity Revels.

1 j.3    Ambulance and Fire Brigade Access

         For the duration of any event, access for ambulance facilities must be
         maintained via an unrestricted access, and stewarded gate, directly to
         the ground's first-aid facilities.                                “

         Access for fire appliances to all buildings on the site must be
         provided for the duration of any event, through stewarded gates. The
         position, width and unrestricted height of such access points to be
        .agreed by the Fire Authority, and those access points to be narked on
         any safety certificate.
1.3.4    Stewardinq

         In addition to the stewarding requirements in 1.3.3. above, sufficient
         stewards must be in attendance at each event (the numbers to be agreed
         between the management of the stadium and the Licensing Authority).
         All stewards must be trained in normal and emergency evacuation
         procedures in addition to the recognition of spectator dangers, and
         should be deployed at agreed positions.

2 .0     IMMEDIATE SAFETY RBgJIRgEOTS

2 .1     INTHOCUCTICN

2.1.1    The requirements detailed in this section of the report are required to
         be carried out immediately.

2.1.2    The items relate directly to ingress, egress and general safety
         requirements to ensure reasonable safety. Hoover, sane of these
         measures are short term and will require further works which are
         covered in later sections to bring them up to a satisfactorystandard.

2.1.3 The report is based on the retention of all the existingseating and
       terracing (except the South Terrace). The provisions of the report are
       however only applicable if a walkway is maintained for the spectators
       use through the South Terrace area.

2.1.4    For clarity gates have been identified by letters A to I inclusive,
         starting frcm Lowther Read and working anti-clockwise around the
         Stadium.

          In the interests of safety and maintenance, a permanent identity beard
          should be mounted on or adjacent to each gate to assist identification
          to unfamiliar persons.

2.2      'GATE A

2.2.1     Paint yellow box with diamond cross hatching, immediately outside
          gates, projecting 3.0 metres by full width of gates, and provide
          adequate stewarding to ensure that obstruction of the gateway is
          prevented when spectators are in the stadium.

 2.2.2    Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person, frcm inside
          the stadium (in an e m e r g e n c y situation) without delay or need for
          additional equipment, e.g. keys.

 2.2.3    Carport structure adjacent to Gate A to be demolished. This structure
          consists of timber posts, timber roof purlins and asbestos cement
          sheeting to the roof. The timber roof members are considerably, under­
          sized for their span and are showing excessive deflection. Sncm-
          loading could cause collapse.

 2.2.4 Inside turnstile 3A adjoining Gate A, the light switch on the wall is
        loose and is considered a danger. The turnstile equipment appears not
        to have been used for seme time. It is therefore suggested that the
       turnstile be permanently sealed up.

 2.3-    GATE B

 2.3.1 Paint yellow'box with diamond cross hatching, irrrrediately outside
        gates, projecting 3.0 metres by full width of gates, and provide
                                       — J -



         adequate stewarding to ensure that obstruction of the gateway is
         prevented when spectators are in the stadium.

2.3.2    Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person, from inside
         the stadium (in an emergency situation) without delay or need for
         additional equipment, e.g. keys.

2.3.3    The wicket door in these gates is not accepted as being suitable for a
         means of egress or emergency egress, when spectators are in the
         stadium.

2.3.4   Positive stand open catches, positioned so as not to create a triD
        hazard, and of sufficient strength for the size of the gates, need to
        be fitted.

2.3.5    Loose materials on rcof of ladies and gents toilets, iirmediately inside
         Gate B, to be removed.

2.4     GME C

2.4.1    "NO PARKINS" sign to be placed on external face of gates.
                                                                       )
2-4.2    Provide adequate stewarding to ensure .the gates are unobstructed at all
         times that spectators are in the stadium.

2.4.3    Fit positive stand open'catches, positioned so as not to create a trio
         hazard, a n d o f sufficient strength for the size of the gates.

2.4.4    Barbed wire on tcp of gate not to be within 2.4 metres of adjacent
        • ground level.

2.5     GfllES D, E AND F

2.5.1 Paint yellow box with diamond cross hatching, projecting 3.0 metres bv
      the full width of all three gates and turnstiles, on the surface of the
      ground outside the stadium. Additionally NO PARKINS should be painted
      along the front edge of the box.

         If after an initial trial period of 3 months, the yellow box system is
         ineffective in prohibiting parking of vehicles in this area, a physical
         barrier of concrete bollards or other suitable means must be provided
         to ensure unrestricted egress from any of the gates is maintained at
         all tines'during’the use of the stadium.

2.5.2   All of these gates to remain unlocked and permanently stewarded whilst
        any spectators are in the stadium.

2.5.3   Positive stand open catches, positioned so as not to create a trio
        hazard, and of sufficient strength for the size of the gates   need to
        be fitted.                                                   ’


2.5.4    Earrier recently installed outside Gate F, to segregate parking area
         from entrance area, has already been damaged by vehicular impact. The
         barrier needs to be repaired, strengthened and satisfactorily bedded *so
         as to achieve the desired stability.

2.5.5   On the top of the external walling between the stadium and the car
        p^ark , barbed wire has been installed, and is at acoroximately 1.3
        metres above car park level irrrrediately adjacent to Gate f T All
        barbed wire to be minimum 2.4 metres above adjacent ground"level.
                                        - 4 -



2.5.6    Although the gates at D, E and F have been altered so as to be capable
         of opening outwards, it is found on close inspection that one of each
         of the double gates needs first to be opened inwards in order to
         release the second gate in each pair. Having released the second gate
         by its vertically mounted hccp handled bolt, both gates can then be
         o p e n e d outwards. This process is unsatisfactory for a major means of
         escape route.

         Further structural alterations are required so as to achieve readily
         available opening outward facilities for both gates in each pair.

2.6      GATE G

2.6.1    Fit suitable panic device, able to be opened by any person frcm inside
          the Stadium, in an energency situation, without delay or need for
          additional equipment, e.g. keys. This need only apply when spectators
          are in the Stadium.

2.6.2    Building adjacent to Gate G appears to be in a delapidated condition.
          Loose roof tiles must be removed and broken windows must be boarded up..

2.7      GATS 5

2.7.1    Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person frcminside
         the Stadium, in an emergency situation, without delay or need for
         additional equipment, e.g. keys.

2.7.2    Area immediately inside Gate H presently used for storage of plant and
          materials. This area, should not be open to spectators, and must be
          adequately fenced off and' gated. When recovery plant is being used for
          stock car racing, the opening to this area must be adequately stewarded,

2.7.3    Partially buried barbed wire in this area to-be removed.

2.8      GATE I

 2.8.1   Identification plate "I" to be positioned on inside of gate.

 2.8.2   Barbed wire over top of gate to be removed or increased in height to
          minimum 2.4 metres.

 2.9     STCCK CAR PADCCCK AREA

 2.9.1    Provide additional floodlighting to paddock area and track access road.
          The level of illumination must be sufficient in all parts of the
          paddock and the access road, to enable the ground surface and any other
          potential hazards to be seen.

 2.9.2    Make gccd to paddock ground surfaces to form an even walking surface.

 2.9.3    Provide fire fighting appliances, at a suitable position or positions,
           of such type and number so .as to be suitable for extinguishing a
          vehicle fire.

 2.9.4    When vehicles are being refuelled, the stadium management must devise a
          safe sy'stsn to ensure that a ND SMOKING rule is enforced for both
          ccrncetitors and spectators who m y be near to that operation.

 2.9.5    Spectators attending events other than stock car racing should not have
          access to this part of the ground.
                                         - b -



2.9.6      Spectators attending stock car events must not be allowed to-use the
           banking to the rear of the East Terrace as an access to, or egress
           frcm, the stock car paddock area.

2.9.7      Loose barbed wire to wall between Gates H and I to be removed. Anv
           barbed wire most be a minimum of 2.4 metres above adjacent ground
           level.

2.10       EAST TERRACE

2.10.1     Refix or replace Icose timbers to advertising hoardings along rear of
           terrace.

2.10.2     Provide adequate fence, capable of withstanding 3.4 KN/M, along the
           rear of the terrace, so as to prohibit spectators fran entering into
           the vegetation or under the advertisement hoardings.

2.10.3     Prohibit the use of the track along the rear of the terrace by any
           vehicles when spectators are in the stadium.

2.10.4     Remove all litter and debris frcm the terrace after every event.

2.10.5- Provide 1200 nm high fencing with gate(s) across the ends of the East
     ■ sTerrace abutting the track access road. The construction should be
        strong enough for its purpose and have vertical balusters at 100 im
        maximum centres. The gate(s) must be steward controlled during stock
        car events, but may be-left open during other events where the track
        access road is not used. The width of the gate(s) should satisfy rreans
        of escape requirements fran the East Terrace for spectators to use Gate
        H in an evacuation.

2.10.6     Fix Warning Notices each side of track access road in clearly
           illuminated and visible positions, stating BEWARE VESICLES CROSSHsG.

2.10.7     Provide new gate for opening in perimeter wall midway along terrace,
           and ensure it is in position and locked during every event.

2.10.8     Clear out drainage channel to terrace front.

2.10.9 •Remove all loose structures and items of plant and other Icose material
        from the useable terrace area before it is used by spectators.

2.10.10 Rotted front and rear facias to snack bar to replace.

2.11       S00T5 TERRACE

2 . U .1   This terrace requires extensive re-building to make it safe to.use,
           therefore, it must not be used for spectators until such works have
           been carried out.

2.11.2     To maintain full access around the stadium, the terrace will require a
           path with a smcoth even surface to be constructed so as to connect* the
           Greyhound Terrace to the track access road adjacent to Gate H. The
           path must be of a width capable of satisfying means of escace recru1
                                                                              'r—_
           ments frcm the Greyhound Terrace and be not less than 1500 rtm wide?"
           Throughout its length it should be adequately balustraded and
           illuminated.
2.li.3     Provide 1200 mm high fencing with gate(s) across the end of the South
           Terrace abutting the track access road. The construction should be
           strong enough for its purpose and have vertical balusters at 100 mm
           maximum centres. The gate(s) must be steward controlled during stock
           car events, but may be left open during other events where the trade
           access road is not used. The width of the gate(s) should satisfy means
           of escace requirements fran the Greyhound Terrace for spectators to use
           Gate H in an evacuation.

2.U.4      Rerove shale overspray frcm terraced passage in front of Greyhound Ear.
           Make geed to any uneven surface.

2.11.5     Clean out any drainage gulleys which are blocked.

2.U.6      The perimeter wall or other suitable structure.must be continued
           between the site of the former totalizator board and the trade access
           road, (if this is adjacent to the site of the pathway, through the South
           Terrace) so as to prevent any spectator gaining unauthorised access to
           the greyhound track or any of its operating mechanism.

2. U . 7   The access gate frcm the greyhound terrace should be removed.

2.U.8      Barbed wire on the stadium external wall to be removed where less than
           2.4 iretres above adjacent ground level.

 2.11.9    Remove bench seat from south terrace.

 2.11.10 I m m e d i a t e action must be taken to alter ground levels to achieve public
         safety where approximately 900 rtm vertical drop in levels exists to
         East end of former 'Totalizator Board' on line of walkway used by
         spectators.

 2.11.11 The extensive areas of thistles and nettles in the vegetation to the
         back of this terracing is considered to be very dangerous.

 2.11.12 Exit from this terracing towards Gate G is very uneven and overgrown
         with vegetation. It is very dangerous for this route to be used in the
         hours of darkness.     _

 2.12       GREYBOUND TERRACE '

 2.12.1     Ranove, and prevent the use of, crates on the terrace. Loose materials
            such as these should not be allowed to be used as seats or for standing
            on.

 2.12.2     Replace corroded or damaged corrugated sheeting to rear of terrace, or
            seal to prevent exposed rough edges.

 2.12.3     Prevent      glasses and bottles being taken onto the terracing.       If
            drinks are allowed on terraces, plastic containers must be used.

 2.12.4 Clean and maintain yard gulleys to terrace front, in an operative
         condition. Any broken gratings are to be replaced, preferably with
         screw dewn type covers.

 2.12.5     Make good to uneven tanrac to terrace front to provide an even walking
            surface and better drainage.
2.12.6    Fix any Icose wiring to prevent it being pulled or further damaged.
          - Any electrical connections or joints must be within approved junction
          boxes.

2 12.7    The concrete terracing to the northern end is cracked, and seme parts
          are Icose - satisfactory repairs must be carried out.

2.12.8 ‘The top riser of the terracing is greater than other risers on the
        terracing. Particularly outside the Greyhound Bar this could cause
        a trip hazard. The edge of this nosing needs to be highlighted in
        yellow or white paint.

2.12.9    'Pit1 area at south end of terrace is constructed on the line of the
          track perimeter wall.■ The perimeter wall adjacent to this needs to fce
          increased from 800 irm to approximately 1000 mm. The opening in the
          perimeter wall requires to be gated.

2.12.10 Lcose materials and debris on terracing to be removed before spectators
        are admitted to any event.

2.12.11 Timber barrier rail in terraced area to be removed immediately.

2.12.12 Access between rear of Terrace and toilet block, to be gated to prevent
        unauthorised access.

 2 12.13 If Gate G is to be used as an exit gate for spectators (in any circum­
         stances) either the route(s) must be clearly defined and balustraded,
         or lcose materials stored at the rear of the Greyhound Terrace must be
         removed or adequately fenced off.

 2.13      GEUaroSTRND

 2.13.1    Renair to a satisfactory standard, all broken or damaged seats ana
           seat backs. All protruding bolt heads, etc., mist not present sharp'
           edges, or cause snagging of clothing. •

 2.13.2    Refix or replace all broken or worn flcorboaraing to the seating
           gangways. All lcose boarding to be secured.

 2.13.3    Prohibit beer glasses and bottles from being taken onto the seating.

 2.13.4    Clean all accumulations of rubbish and materials fran beneath seating
           tiers, and ensure no build-up of rubbish cccurs in.the future.

 2.13.5    Prohibit sitting on steps, gangways and balustrading associated with or
           forming part of the seating.

 2.13.6    Secure lcose balustrading to all sections of seating.

 2.13.7    At southern end of South seating unit open risers to 1st and 2nd steps
           to be closed .down to 100 mm maximum.

 2.13.8    Balustrading to ends of seating units to be maximum 900 itm high above
           pitch line of terracing.

  2.14     SPORTSMAN TERRACE

  2.14.1 Barbed wire within 2.4 metres of terrace level should be removed frcm
          around the low rcof of the building of the southern end of the terrace.
                                        -   a   -




          This must however be replaced by other materials which prevent this
          rcof frcm being used as a "vantage point" by spectators.

2.14.2    Remove projecting screws frcm wall in front of the lew rcof referred to
          in 2.14.1 above.

2.14.3    Re-hang steel gate, between the terrace and the greyhound track access
          road, to swing outwards frcm the terrace. The hinges of such a gate
          mist be on the track side of the gate opening. It should be ensured
          that the gate is capable of being held in the open position and that it
          is unlocked at all times during any event.

2.14.4    Clean out all yard gulleys to terrace front, and replace any damaged
          gratings with screw dewn type gratings.

2.14.5    On the large double dcors at the rear of the terrace a suitable NO EXIT
          sign should be affixed.

2.14.6    Wiring loom overhead frcm Sportsman Terrace to offices is within easy
          reach. These cables must be increased in height to at least 2.4 metres
          over this area.

2.14.7    Wires at eaves level to the back of the terracing is hanging down arsd
          now within easy reach of spectators - it is suggested that all wiring
          in these areas should be trunked.

2.14.8     Steel purlin in 6th bay of rcof (frcm to southern end) is badly
           corroded and considered to be in need of urgent replacement.

2.14.9     Sloping coping to top of wall outside entrance to "Sportsman Tavern" to
           be extended to end of wall.

 2.14.10 Guttering to entire length of sportsman terrace to clean out and clear
         of vegetation.

 2.14.11 Materials and plant to be    removed from rear access road. This is a
         dedicated means of escape    route and should not be obstructed in any
         way. Any permanent plant     storage adjacent to the roadway should be
         adequately balustraded ‘to   form a separate area.

 2.14.12 Openings to underflcor void of betting booths to be sealed - Adequate
         means of natural ventilation to be provided.

           Before sealing, earth needs to be removed so that timber and steel
           floor members are clear of ground. All timber and steel members to be
           checked for deterioration, and steelwork painted before being sealed
           in.

 2.14.13 Renove lcose building and maintenance materials frcm area between rear
         of terrace and toilet blcck.

 2.15      EXIT SIGNS

 2.15.1     In all spectator areas, exit signs should be provided so as to guide
            spectators to a place of safety and to the designated exits for means
            of escape purposes. The Fire Authority should be consulted as to the
            positions of these signs and the designated emergency evacuation exits
            relevant to a particular area.
2.15.2    The signs are to have white arrows and instructions on a green
          background, and comply with BS 5378 Part 1, 1980. The signs must be
          mechanically fixed, durable, and adequately illuminated.

2.16      SPORTSMAN TAVERN

2.16.1    Lew level void (at midpoint of length of building on the track frontage)
          to seal so as to prohibit debris arid refuse being deposited there.

2.16.2    Manhole to the North East corner of the building needs rebedding o£
          loose masonry.. Balustrading to be built into the construction to
          provide spectator safety to the present 1.5 metre unguarded difference
          in height of ground levels.

2.16.3    The waste pipe entering into the manhole (see 2.16.2 above) is
          unprotected against damage, and the redding eye cap to the pipe is
          missing - Repairs and replacement are necessary.

2.16.4    Access to underflcor space of these premises to be sealed - Adequate
          means of natural ventilation to be incorporated by the use of
          225 x 225 mn airgrates at maximum 1.0 metre centres. Before sealing
          all rubbish to be extracted and steelwork cleaned and painted.

2.16.fi Vegetation in guttering to rear of premises to be cleaned out.

2.17      GREYBDUND BAR

2.17J . Part of rear pathway between emergency exit and rear steps to be
        adequately surfaced.

'2.17.:! Timber gate immediately adjacent to rear emergency exit is capable of
         opening outwards and blocking emergency escape route. Since the
         storage area that it serves dees not appear to be used, the gate
         should be permanently fixed shut.

2.18      THE PANORAMA SUITE

2.18.:L The treads of the bottom flight of steps, on the external means of
        escape at the southern 'end of the building, are to be replaced.

2.18.:I   Whiti/green arrcwed directional signs to tunnel under Panorama roan
          indicate ingress direction. These coloured signs should be for egress
          ai'id emergency egress purposes. Alternative coloured signs required for
          ingress routes.

3.0       W H S TO BE CARRIED OOT WITHIN 2 YEARS

3.1        INTRODUCTION

3.1.1 .    The requirements in this section of the report should be carried out as
           soon, as possible, and certainly before the expiration of 2 years from
           the date of this report.

3.1.2      Seme of the items in this section are given the extended period' of time
           on the basis that the works in Section 2.0 of this report are carried
           out as a matter of umiediacy.

3.1.3      If further deterioration is noted, it may be necessary to reclassify
           works as then requiring iirmediate action.
                                      - iU -


3.2     STOCK CAR PADDOCK AREA

3.2.1   Bottom of banking to East Terrace to be fenced off to stop
         unauthorised access to the vegetation.

3.2.2   In connection with 3.2.1 above, consideration should be given to
        forming a purpose made stairway frcm the mid point at the rear of the
        East Terrace, down the bank to the Stock Car Paddock. This would ease
        spectator congestion along the access read to the paddock, and would
        achieve an additional means of escape (if necessary) from the East
        Terrace.

3.2.3   A. separated pathway for pedestrians only should be laid along the
        Stock Car Paddock access road. This pathway should be surfaced and
        balustraded from the vehicular roadway.

3.3     GREYHOUND TERRACE

3.3.1   Fractured and damaged rcof sheeting to be replaced. •

3.3.2   The cracked terracing outside the entrance to the Greyhound Bar
        requires to be repaired.

3.3.3   All structural steelwork to be wire brushed, and repainted. Any
        severe corrosion found must be reported to the City"Council’s Chief
        Licensing Officer without delay.

3.3.4   Timber hut in North West comer of terrace to be reroved.

3.4 .   GRANDSTAND/PANORAMA SUITS AREA

3.4.1   Timber seating units to be removed, and any replacement to be
        constructed of non-combustible materials.

3.4.2   Cracked asbestos cement rcof sheeting of main canopy to be replaced.

3.4.3   Repaint all structural steelwork. Any corrosion to be wire brushed
        before re-painting. If corrosion is found to be severe, it must be
        reported to the City Council’s Chief Licensing Officer without delay.

3.5     SPORTSMAN TERRACE/TAVERN

3.5.1   All structural steelwork to be wire brushed, andrepainted-       Any
         severe corrosion found must be reported to the City" Council's Chief
        Licensing Officer without delay.

3.5.2    Broken asbestos wall sheeting to rear of betting booths (approximately
         at central point of terrace) to be replaced.

3.5.3    Shattered asbestos cement rcof sheeting to re??: of Sportsman Tavern to
         be replaced.

3.5.4   Access steps frcm centre dcors to rear.roadway to be formed in
        -accordance with plans submitted to, and approved by the City Council
         as Licensing Authority.

3.6     SCCTH-WEST CORNER OF STADIUM LAND

3.6.1   The growth of grass, weed and other lewvegetation to beinhibited bv -
         either catting or use of chemicals, so as to reduce the risk of fire* in
         summer months, and to maintain designated escape routes, through the area.
                                        - 11 -


3.6.2    The presently derelict building adjacent to Gate G must be either
         restored arid be used, or demolished.

3.7      ADDITIONAL GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

3.7.1    All external perimeter walls to Stadium to be inspected and     all
          necessary works carried out to achieve safety and security.

3.7.2    Exposed reinforcement in track perimeter walling, to be covered bv
          suitable means to be agreed with the City Council's Building Surveyor.

3.7.3    Clean out all manholes on the site, and red all lengths of drainage to
         achieve a clear flowing drainage system. - Any consequential remirs
         to be carried out at t±ie time. The works of cleansing and repairs to
         be carried out to the satisfaction of the City Council, and to be
         monitored throughout by the Council's Building Surveyor.

3.7.4    All trees, bushes and shrubs overhanging or encroaching into the
         spectator areas to be kept well trinroed back:

4.0      WGRKS REQUIRED TO INCREASE CROWD CAPACITY

4.1      INTRODUCTION

4.1.1    Before any consideration is given to increasing the crowd capacity
         above the present figure of 4000, all the works in Sections 1.3,
         2.0 and 3.0 must be carried out.

4.1.2    Any increase in crowd capacity must be considered in the light of
         legislation and knowledge current at the time of the request.

4.1.3    Due to the diversity of activities at the Stadium, it may be necessary
         to design requirements to cater for a specific spectator group, and not
         to increase capacity for all events.

4.2      RUGBY FOOTBALL

4.2.1    Any increase in crowd capacity for this purpose must be considered only
         when total segregation of opposing supporters has been achieved.

4.2.2     In order to achieve segregation of opposing supporters, it will be
          necessary to have structural alterations within the ground to separate
          the tvro parts of the. ground, the, provision of refreshment facilities in
          each part, and separate turnstiles of adequate, numbers to cater for
          estimated demand.

4.2.3     An increase in crowd capacity for this purpose would also necessarily
          involve the installation of properly designed and positioned crush
          barriers in any used terrace areas.

4.2.4    Proposals for this purpose would need to be the subject of very
          detailed discussions between all members of the SSGA advisory group.

4.3      OTHER ACTIVITIES ~ •

4.3.1    . Requests for increase of cro*d capacity for other than Rugby Football
         must be considered according to 4.1.2 above, and in addition the
         .knowledge of trends of behaviour of fans at the tine.


M14AEW
                                                                                          \ O W l E R T O H SPORTS
                               HIE   EASf   1CRRACS
                             (HOI ;0 DE USED .M mSlHI)                                     \5JA O IU K




      rr/        rv“ ^is1




                            TOTAL    CAPACITY         IN THIS APPUCATIOM
                            FOR A SAFETY       CERTIFICATE     678 1.




IIEVf STAIRCASE iO
BE COfijlRUCitO.


                                                                                           EAS TW O O D & PARTNERS
                                      HAIH S1A
                                                                                           Consulting        Engineers
                                                                                           St . A n d r e w s H o u s e
                                                                                           23   Kingfield      Road
                                       mL                                                  Sheffield       S11 9 A S        «” 4JI

                                                                                      K
                                                                                      DRAWN

                                                                                      CHECKED
                                                                                                                           j a W M M W H ;
                                                                                                                          o n A W I N G No.
                                                                                      APPnOVED
                                                                           CAR PARK                                 'tf   8 8 6 3 /1.
                        DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING

                          BUILDIN3 SURVEYOR'S DIVISION


DIVISIONAL MEMORANDUM NO 26 (Revised)                          October 1988




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

1.    Powers and Responsibilities

1.1   Following the demise of the County Council, the implementation of
       of this Act became the full responsibility of the City Council cn
       the 1st April 1986. Its implementation rests with the Administration
       and Legal Department (Chief Licensing Officer) assisted as necessary
       by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, which is a panel of
       officers drawn from various Departments, other statutory
       authorities, and external sources as required.

1.2   The 1975 Act has been amended by the Fire Safety and Safety of
       Places of Sport-Act 1987, and currently covers sports grounds at
       which either Association Football, Rugby League Football or Rugby
       Union Football is played, and having a ground capacity, in the
       opinion of the Secretary of State, in excess of 10,000. Future
       commencement orders may bring operational Part III of the 1987 Act,
       which will introduce a system of safety certification for stands
       with covered accommodation for 500 or more spectators (Regulated
       stands).

1.3    In connection with the above powers, the following have been agreed
       as being the general areas of responsibility for the participating
       authorities.

              Authority                        Area of Responsibility

       The Building Surveyor            All matters relating to the structure
                                        of stadia, including crush barriers,
                                        walls,- etc.

       South Yorkshire County           Fire Precautions, fire alarms, means
       Fire Service                     of escape, emergency lighting,
                                        stadium capacity.

       South Yorkshire Police           Stadium policing, evacuation
                                        procedures, access of emergency
                                        vehicles and emergency planning.

       Department of Health and         An advisory input on aspects of
       Consumer Services                general safety, general safety
                                        management of stadia and first aid.

1.4   The role    of the BSD is that of "Building Authority", as defined in
       the Act,   and will normally be represented at the advisory group
      meetings    by the Principal District Surveyor or the Principal
      Engineer    as seems appropriate for the case in question, or by both.
1.5   Basically there are two cases where the views of BSD will be sought
      or will have to be put forward

      CASE A

      Where alterations or new work is proposed ;where in addition to the
      need to satisfy requirements under the Act ("Green Cede" requirements),
      approval under Building Regulations will be necessary, irrespective
      of what stage it will be sought, or

      CASE B

      Where work is proposed or is to be required to satisfy the Green
      Code, but which will not require approval under Building Regulations
      or planning permission.

      NB.   It will usually have been the case that the Chief Licensing
            Officer will have disseminated any appropriate information,
            including plans, at or between meetings of the Advisory Group.

2.    Procedure within BSP

2.1   Where CASE A applies GAU will adopt the primary co-ordinating role
       in the Division, will conduct any necessary liaison with external
       Departments and bodies, and will agree, in consultation with SSU
       and SAU at Principal or Assistant Principal level, matters of
       compliance with the Green Cede.

2.2   Such consultation will also take place where for example any
      details are submitted in response to a conditional approval or where
      amendments are submitted to the scheme, even if such details appear
      to be of interest only to one of the BSD Units concerned.

2.3   Where CASE B applies SSU will adopt the primary co-ordinating role
       in the Division, will conduct any necessary liaison with external
       Departments and bodies, and will agree, in consultation with SAU and
       GAU, at Principal of Assistant Principal level, matters of
       compliance with the Green Cede.

2.4   Generally all observations relating to the Green Cede requirements
      and any other matters relating to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
      should be in writing, and sent to or via .the Chief Licensing Officer
      of Administration and Legal Department. All meetings should be
      properly minuted as appropriate,•using central files as follows
      which are kept by the Building Surveyor's secretary

            Sheffield Wednesday          -       File 73
            Sheffield United             -       File 72
            General SSGA matters         -       File 71
            Owlerton Stadium             -       File 96

      Other files will be created as necessary for additional sports
      grounds or designated stands.

3;    Planning Permission

3.1   Large improvements require planning permission and this may have
       been sought in advance of approval under the Green Guide or Buildincr
                            - 3 -



Regulations. In order that the position under s.55 SYA 1980 (access
for fire brigade) is safeguarded it is essential that the provisions
of the‘section are brought to the notice of the applicant when the
planning permission is issued.




ESD/a ! bi}/K 19M d "




This supercedes the document dated October 1986



Circulation:- All BSD staff
              Environmental Planning Officer
              Principal Administrative Officer
              Chief Licensing Officer
                      (Administration and Legal Department)
The B u i l d i n g ■Surveyor                  Acting Head of Admin. & Legal Dept.

                                               For the attention of Ms. F Vocdhead
29 September 1989
K ?^/iw /K H6A IX J
4169 - Mr K Blount




Safety at Sports Grounds
Advisory -Group Meetings


I refer to your irenrrancum of 25 September concerning the perimeter walls
of Sheffield United Football Club and the question of the membership of
the Advisory Group.

 Mr Butler is currently indisposed and therefore a full reply concerning
 the walls will be sent: after his return. However, may I draw your
 attention to-my report to you dated 24 May, 1989 (for the attention of
 Mr D Eownes) wherein the condition of these walls-was infact noted (at
 item 6.5) and that further investigation would be needed in order to
 determine appropriate action.

 As to the msrbership of the Advisory Group, I note ycur intention to
 invite Mr B J G Levers to future meetings. As a matter of principle X g o
 not think it is necessary for an authority or department to be represented
 bv more than one person. To do otherwise is to invite the Advisory Group
 to become again an unwieldy body consumed by indecision.

 dearly, however, there will.be occasions when such a representative might
 wish to be accompanied by other officers of the same department to give
 advice to him/her as nay be necessary on particular issues. I see no
 problem in that.

 Except where I attend an Advisory Group in person, I am content that
 Mr Butler represents the Division. Where it is necessary, however, he Kay
 be substituted by another appropriate officer or be accompanied by another
 officer, for example, Mr Levers or Mr Sheriff. I trust that I iraxe. -nr/self
■ clear on this point.
 .                           L
      ________________________ _____________




     cc.     Mr G Lever s
             Mr D S h e r i f f
             Mr A B u t l e r
             Director
             F i l e s 71B & 72B
                 IM P L E M E N T A T IO N OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS G110WHD3

                                          Area Officer Working Parties
                                                                                     DPP DOG
       In order to avoid duplication and division of resources, the primary-auth c n ty has fceei
                                                                                                                        82
       designated for the carrying out of Inspections, . reinspections; and making final
       technical recommendations n e c e s s a r y using the headings given in the contents summary
       of the '"Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" with some additions. Where there is an
       overlap "of the spheres of control, the primary authority responsible must consult the
       other authority (les) concerned before finalising any recommendation(s). The following
       abbreviations have been u sed :-          . •, -

                                                        C.       =   County
                                                        P.      •*   P o lice
                                                     F .B .      =   Fire Bripade
                                                     B .A .      =   Building Control Authority



                                    Primary                   To be               Matters for Coasrdtstian
       Subject                      Authority                 Consulted



  In g r ess to the ground -
                                      B . A.                  F . B .f c P .       P ossib le adverse effects
'•> (i) structural
                                      F .B .                  B’.A . t P .         on area of responsibility of
; (ii) m eans of escape
                                                                                   Primary Authority


  E g r e s s from the ground
                                                               F . B .f c P .      Possible adverse effects
   (i) structural                     B .A .
                                                               B .A .f c P .       on area of responsibility
   (ii) m eans of escape              F .B .
                                                                                   of Primary Authoritv



       ’-aces
                                       fl.A .                  F .B .& P .          p os si hie adverse effects
    /r' structural
                                                               B .A .tP .           on area of responsibility
  \ u ) means of escape                F .B .
                                                                                    of Primary Authority



   Stands -
                                                                F .B .tP .          Possible adverse effccts
   (i) structural                      B .A .
                                                                B .A .& P .         on area of r e s p o n s i b i l i t y
   (ii) m eans of escape               F .B .
                                                                                    of Prim ary Authority



   S t a ir c a s e s and ramps -
                                                                F.B.&P.             Possihle adverse effccts
   (i) structural                      B.A.
                                                                B .A .tP .          on area of r e s p o n s i b i l i t y
   (il) means o[ escape                 F .B .
                                                                                    of Primary Authority

                                                                                                                     449
                                        Prim ary                be     ■■
         .-/.^Subject
     .   ' -X '                         Authority            Consulted
                                                                                       Document Noi'       ..   8 2 CONVD
 /
         Fire P recautions                 F .B . ' •   '“I B - A . t p ^               Auxiliary and emergency
                                                                                   t
                                                                                        lighting. Em ergency *
                                                            P.                          procedure and staff tralair

                                                                                                  • .   "V *    .
 / A c c e s s for em er g en cy
     vehicles                          . . P. .             f   . b'.                   Fire Brigade.appliances.

                                                                                                                               1
     Spacing- of c r u s h b arriers     ' B .A .           P .'                         Effect on crowd control.
                                                            F .B .          .•         ' Effect on m e a n s of escape.


     Strength of cru sh barriers
      and p e r im e t e r w alls          B .A .


 ^TeTr^ce to touch-line                                            -
   distance                                P.                                                                        '   / '


^ Estimation of safe
   ground capacity                         C.               P . , F . B . ScB.A.        Final F ig u r e s .


^C om m unications                        P.                F .B .                      Effect on fir e warning
                                                                                        s y ste m .


     F ir s t Aid and Medical              C.               A r e a Health
                                                            Authority to
                                                            be. consulted


  P o lice at ground                      P.


     Legal and Administration              C.                                                                            0

                                                        •
     Certificate drawings                  C.




                                                                                                                    450
The Building Surveyor                         Acting Head of Admin. & Legal Dept.

                                              For the attention of Ms. F Woodhead
29 September 1989
KW33/AW/KH6ADU
4169 - Mr K Blount




Safety at Sports Grounds
Advisory .Group testings


I refer to your menorandum of 25 September concerning the perimeter walls
of Sheffield United Football Club and the question of the members hie of
the Advisory Group.

Mr Butler is ■currently indisposed and therefore a full reply concerning
the walls will be sent: after his return. However, may I draw your
attention to-my report to you dated 24 May, 1989 (for the attention of
Mr D Ecwnes) wherein the condition of these walls was infact noted (at
item 6.5) and that further investigation would be needed in order to
determine appropriate action.

As to the membership of the Advisory Group, I note your intention to
invite Mr B J G Levers to future meetings. As a matter of principle I do
not think it is necessary for an authority or department to be represented
by more than one person. To do otherwise is to invite the A d v is o r y Group
to become again an unwieldy body consumed by indecision.

Clearly, however, there will,be occasions when such a representative might
wish to be accanpanied by other officers of the same department to give
advice to him/her as may be necessary on particular issues. I see no
problem in that.

Except where I attend an Advisory Group in person, I am content that
Mr Eutler represents the Division. Where it is necessary, however, he irav
be substituted by another appropriate officer or he accompanied by another
officer, for example, Mr Levers or Mr Sheriff. I trust that I make myself
clear on this point.

           , J     _




       \


cc. Mr G Lever s
    Mr D S h e r i f f
    Mr A B u t l e r
    Director
    F i l e s 71B & 72B
                                     54
                                                W. EASTWOOD



Q. Yes, but Mr. Calvert is not necessarily an expert in crov/d
   safety on terraces, is he, he has a certain view that it
   wo u l d ease the ingress of spectators? - A. --Well Mr. Calvert
   was put ti n g forward a Police point of view.

Q. As ray Lord has pointed out, the whole purpose of a crush
   b a r r i er at that point is in part at least to prevent
   people being able to go straight down, isn't it? - A. It
   is so.       I think at some stage, my Lord, you might care to
   co and look.       It is very difficult to assess when you go ....

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, co and look at what?
     - A. At where the barrier was taken out.

Q. Well I have seen it. - A. Well now sir I have looked again
   there and I can see the great dilemma - you can see whsra
   the barrier was - and I can see the great dilemma and I
   believe that there was a discussion as to whether another
   b a r r i er could be placed elsewhere and this was not going
   to solve the problem ana this very strong feeling on the
   part of the Police that there was going to be greater
   safety if it was taken out.

         Now'we can all with hindsight know, but I have locked
   at that terrace and I was not at the meeting but I can
.^.understand ..exactly -.what Kr. Calvert was sayinc.   .-

O.           MR. COLLINS:  But Dr. Eastwood, you were being asked
  '* to ’approve this 'work':'~ Y o u 'were' ~your se If -an e x p e r t - -Die- •- ----
     you not consider i t sensible that you consider it yourself
   /and give your advice as to whether it was something that
 . ’ was desirable in safety terms? - A. I talked at length
     w i t h John Strange.  I should explain that two days later
     I w ent on holiday, but I talked at length with John Strange
     after it.     He told me what had gone on.           I respect his
     judgment because he works not only at this ground but
     several others and he is very immersed in it.                He felt that
     w hat was being said was reasonable and did not feel that
     we should object.

Q. Did you clso consider the effect upon the safe numbers
   that ought to be allowed' in that side? - A. Part of the
   conversation had been about safe numbers and Inspector
   Calvert had the used the words that in his view the safe
   nuiiber would be increased rather than reduced by this.

Q. What no one seems to have borne in mind is by creating that
   long corridor down, indeed you had referred to the vertical
   corridors as being an- argument against the severing of the
   barriers? - A. Yes.

O. True this was not a vertical but it was a diagonal corridor,
   w a s n ’t it? - A. Well it is a corridor and not a gangway.
   It is very diagonal, not very diagonal it is quite diagonal
   and it is obvious that it does create a line along which
   pressure can flow.
       NOTE OF A MEETING.OF THE OFFICER WORKING P A l ^ I Y ^ - - —       ^

                     (SHEFFIELD PISTEICT)                      -/V-            —f:

PRESENT:                           |, South Yorkshire County Fire Service
                              South Yorkshire Police
                   K. Jones, South Yorkshire Count}* Fire Service
                   J . N. Sten ton, Sheffield Metropolitan District Council
                   D. I. Vaughan, South Yorkshire County Council
                   (Administration Department)

1.      The Working P arty were informed that the Secretary of the Sheffield
        United Football Club Ltd. had written to the Chief Executive of the
        County Council "enclosing further drawings obtained through the good
        offices of the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council relating
        to the John Street Stand and ground which are required by you to support
        an application for a licence at this .ground under the second designation
        o rd er". The letter concluded by saying that "we shall be grateful to
        hear from you in due course what prog ress has been made in relation to
        our application".

2.1     The work which had been undertaken prior to the Club indicating in
        September, 1976 that they did not wish to proceed in anticipation of
        designation was reviewed.

2.2     Whilst the County's A rchitectural and Building Services Officer had
        originally commenced work on the preparation of single line drawings,
        it had proved to be more difficult than had been envisaged due to the
        numerous different scale plans supplied at various stages as well as
        staffing difficulties, and had been nowhere near completed by the time
        they had been instructed not to take any further action on the Club
        deciding (in September, 1976) not to proceed.

2. 3    The latest plans supplied appeared to be either the District Council’s
        originals loaned to the Club or copies of them. The same problem of
        different scales would apply.

3.       The Working P arty felt that the position had become so confused by the
         "stop/go" situation, and staff changes, that there was little alternative
       • but to s ta rt again from the beginning. There seemed to be some doubt
         whether the Club had been suppiiec.t witn the Notiis for Guidance of ■
         Applicants for Safety Certificates (which indicated the type and form of
         information required).

4.1     It appeared that it had been intended to ask the Fire Service Committee in
        December, 1976 to agree to an Application Fc-e of £713 (based on the
        work being ca rrie d out by officers of a salary at the maximum of Grade
        P .O . 1C on the basis of 17 man/days.’ work), as recommended bv the
                                  -2-


    Officcrs' Joint Working P arty . However, the County T re a s u re r
    evidently had taken the view that this should not be determined until
    such time a s South Yorkshire ground(s) became designated and
    the experience of other Authorities became known.

2   In any case, the fee to be charged to the Sheffield United Football Club
    would have to await the ground being designated and a formal
    application being made.

    It was not clear whether the Schedule of responsibility for the carrying
    out of-inspections, re-inspcctions and making final'technical decisions
    had been agreed in its final form. This was checked and approved.

    So far as a draft South Yorkshire Certificate was concerned, it was
    pointed out that the Officers' Joint Working Party had considered the
    draft G reater Manchester Certificate in great detail in November, 1976,
    and had made quite a number of suggestions.

    IT WAS AGREED that                    '                                    '■

    (a)    The Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. should be supplied with
    a copy of the Notes for Guidance of Applicants for Safety Certificates
    and requested to supply the necessary information in the standard form
    and type required by the County Council.

    (b)      The G reater Manchester Certificate should be regarded as a
    b asis for the draft South Yorkshire Certificate to be submitted to the
    F ire Service Committee for approval in view of the detailed consideration
    given to and comments made on it by the Officers' Joint Working Party.




    DV/MB
     4th April, '1973
                                       DEPARTMENT 0.F LAND AND PLANNING

                                          BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION


       DIVISIONAL MEMORANDUM NO. 26                                                               O c t o b e r 1986



       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

       1.    Powers and R e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s

       1.1   Thi s Act became a f u l l r e s p o n s i b i l i t y o f t h e C i t y Council on
              1 s t A p r i l , 1986 and i t s i m p l e m e n t a t i o n r e s t s wi t h t h e A d m i n i s t r a t i o n
              and Legal Depar t men t ( C h i e f L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r ) a s s i s t e d as n e c e s s a r y
              by a panel o f o f f i c e r s ("The Working P a r t y ” ) drawn from v a r i o u s
              D e p a r t m e n t s , o t h e r s t a t u t o r y a u t h o r i t i e s and e x t e r n a l s o u r c e s .   . _

.'~v   1.2   The Working P a r t y c o m p o s i t i o n , r e l e v a n t r o l e s and r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s
             were f i r s t drawn up by t h e t hen Sout h Y o r k s h i r e County Council in
             1975 ( s e e App e nd i x) . These a r r a n g e m e n t s have l a r g e l y been c o n t i n u e d
             i n t h e C i t y , b u t a r e l i k e l y t o be r evi ewe d s h o r t l y b e c a u s e : -

              (a)     The Act has been widened i n s c o p e (By Or der ; SI 1986: 1044,
                      21.7.86).               ;

              (b)     A d d i t i o n a l e x p e r t i s e has been s o u g h t t o add t o t h e Working P a r t y .

              ( c)    The Act may be amended in t h e n e x t p a r i i a m e n t a r y s e s s i o n .

       1.3   Thi s memorandum r e g a r d i n g t h e r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s o f BSD s h o u l d t h e r e f o r e
             be r e g a r d e d as a p o s i t i o n s t a t e m e n t pendi ng such a r e v i e w .        I t should
             be n o t e d t h a t t h e BSD r o l e i s t h a t o f " Bu i l d i n g A u t h o r i t y " , -as d e f i n e d
             in t h e Act , on behaTf o f t h e C i t y C o u n c i l . Normally BSDw i l l be
             r e p r e s e n t e d a t Working P a r t y m e e t i n g s by t h e Head o f t h e SAU o r SSU as
             seems a p p r o p r i a t e f o r t h e c a s e in q u e s t i o n o r by b o t h .

Cy     1.4   B a s i c a l l y t h e r e a r e two c a s e s where t h e views o f BSDw i l l be                      s o u g h t or
             w i l l have t o be p u t f o r wa r d

              CASE A

             Where a l t e r a t i o n s o r new work i s p r o p o s e d where in a d d i t i o n t o t h e need
             t o s a t i s f y r e q u i r e m e n t s u n d e r t h e Act ("Green Code" r e q u i r e m e n t s ) ,
             ap p r o v a l u n d e r B u i l d i n g R e g u l a t i o n s w i l l be n e c e s s a r y , i r r e s p e c t i v e o f
             what s t a g e i t w i l l be s o u g h t , o r

              CASE B

             Where work i s pr op os e d o r i s t o be r e q u i r e d t o s a t i s f y t h e Green Code,
             b u t which w i l l n o t r e q u i r e a p p r o v a l under B u i l d i n g R e g u l a t i o n s or
             pianning permission.
              N8.     I t w i l l u s u a l l y have been t h e c a s e t h a t t h e C h i e f L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r
                      w i l l have d i s s e m i n a t e d any a p p r o p r i a t e i n f o r m a t i o n i n c l u d i n g pl a n s
                       a t o r between m e e t i n g s o f t h e Working P a r t y .

       2.    P r o c e d u r e w i t h i n BSD

       2.1   Where Case A a p p l i e s GAU w i l l a d o p t t h e pr i mar y c o - o r d i n a t i n g r o l e i n t h e
             D i v i s i o n , w i l l c o n d u c t any n e c e s s a r y l i a i s o n wi t h e x t e r n a l Depar t ment s
             and b o d i e s , and wi.ll a g r e e , i n c o n s u l t a t i o n wi t h SSU and SAU a t P r i n c i p a l
             o r A s s i s t a n t P r i n c i p a l l e v e l , m a t t e r s o f compl i ance w i t h t h e Green Code.
2.2    Such c o n s u l t a t i o n w i l l a l s o t a k e p l a c e where f o r example any d e t a i l s
       a r e s u b m i t t e d in r e s p o n s e t o a c o n d i t i o n a l a ppr oval o r where amend­
       ments a r e s u b m i t t e d t o t h e scheme, even i f such d e t a i l s a p p e a r t o be
       o f i n t e r e s t o n l y t o 'one o f t h e BSD U n i t s c o n c e r n e d .

2.3    Where Case B a p p l i e s SSU w i l l a d o p t t h e p r i m a r y c o - o r d i n a t i n g r o l e
       i n t h e D i v i s i o n , w i l l c o n d u c t any n e c e s s a r y l i a i s o n w i t h e x t e r n a l
       D e p a r t m e n t s and b o d i e s , and w i l l a g r e e , in c o n s u l t a t i o n w i t h SAU
       and GAU, a t P r i n c i p a l o r A s s i s t a n t P r i n c i p a l l e v e l , m a t t e r s o f
       c o m p l i a n c e w i t h t h e Green Code.

2.4    G e n e r a l l y a l l o b s e r v a t i o n s r e l a t i n g t o Green Code r e q u i r e m e n t s s h o u l d
       be p u t in w r i t i n g t o A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and Legal Dep ar t ment .                All m e e t i n g s
       s h o u l d be p r o p e r l y mi nu t e d as a p p r o p r i a t e u s i n g c e n t r a l f i l e s 73
        ( S h e f f i e l d Wednesday), 72 ( S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d ) , 71 ( Gener al SSGA m a t t e r s ) ,
       and 96 ( Owl e r t o n S t a d i u m ) , which a r e k e p t by Mrs. K. H a r r i s o n .

3.     Planning Permission'

3. 1   Large impr ovement s r e q u i r e p l a n n i n g p e r m i s s i o n and t h i s may have been
       s o u g h t in ad van c e o f a p p r o v a l u n d e r t h e Green Guide o r B u i l d i n g
       Regulations.           In o r d e r t h a t t h e p o s i t i o n und e r s . 55 SYA 1980 ( a c c e s s
       f o r f i r e brigade) is safeguarded i t is e s s e n ti a l t h a t the provisions
       o f t h e s e c t i o n a r e b r o u g h t t o t h e n o t i c e o f t h e a p p l i c a n t when t h e
       planning permission is issued.




Circulation:            All BSD s t a f f
                        En v i r o n me n t a l P l a n n i n g O f f i c e r
                        B. Edge, P r i n c i p a l A d m i n i s t r a t i v e O f f i c e r
                             E-tPLSI-rSNTATICN 0? T IP SAFETY AT SPORTS GROJTiDS ACT.                         1Q75


         In o r d e r to avoid d u p lic atio n , and d i v i s i o n of r e s p o n s i b i l i t y , th e resp o n s ib le
         a u t h or i ty     has been d e s ig n a te d f o r the carrying: out of i n s p e c t i o n s , r e i n s p e c t i e n s ,
         and making f i n a l t e c h n i c a l d e c is io n s n ecessary using the headings giv en in the
         contents s unwar y of th e "Guide to S a f e ty a t Sports Grounds", w ith some a d d i t i o n s .
         Where t h e r e i s an overlap o f ' t h e spheres of c o n tr o l, the primary a u t h o r i t y
         r e s p o n s i b l e must c o n s u lt the o t h e r a u t h o r ! t y ( i s s ) concerned b efo re f i n a l i s i n g
         any d e c i s i o n . The follo w in g a b b r e v ia tio n s have been u s e d :-

                                     C.        =    County
                                     P.        =    P o lice
                                   F.B.        =    F i r e Brigade
                                   B.A.        =    B u ild in g C ontrol A u th o rity

         S u b je c t              Primary              To be                            M atters f o r C o n s u lta tio n
                                   A u th o rity        Co n s u lte d

In g ress t o t h e                B.A.               P.                                               A ll
ground

^6Tess from th e                    B.A.              F .B . & P.                                      A ll
ground

T erraces                           B.A.              P.

Stands                              B.A.              f .b .   & p.          F i r e hazards and ev acu atio n tim.es.

S t a i r c a s e s and             B.A.              F.B .                   F i r e p r o te c tio n f o r s t a i r c a s e s .
Ramps

F i r e P re c a u tio n s          F.B.              B .A . & P .           A u x ilia r y and emergency l i g h t i n g .
                                                      P.                     Emergency procedure and s t a f f t r a i n i n g

Access f o r emergency              P.                F.B.                    F i r e Brigade a p p lia n c e s .
v ehicles       - _>■

Spacing o f crush                   B.A.              P.                                              •
b arriers

S tr e n g th of crush              B.A.
b a r r i e r s and
p e rim e te r w alls

T e rra c e t o to u c h -          P.
lin e d istance

E stim a tio n of s a f e           B.A.              P. & F.B.               F in a l .Figures.
ground c a p a c i t y

Communications                      P.                F.B.                                             A ll

F i r s t Aid and                   C.                A rea H ealth
Medical                                               A u t h o r i ty to
                                                      be c o n s u lte d

P o lic e a t ground                P.

Legal and                           c.
A d m in is tr a tio n

C e rtificate                       c.
drawings
game if adjacent areas were to be occupied by supporters of the

same    team.          Approval          for the installation of                         the   two radial

fences    was     givsn by S. Y. C. C.            in their letter of                      14th September

1981    (pages 7 6-77).             The approval was subject to the condition

(paragraph        I.e.    at page         76)    that the gates                at the rear of the

fences    should be under Police control.



46.     The      installation            work        was        carried        out       by    a     firm     of

Contractors,           Blessvale,          in     October             and     November         1981.          In

places     the    crush barriers passed through the radial                                     fences and

there     was    discussion         between Mr                               and    Mr    England         about

this,     as recorded in the memorandum of 4th November 1981                                               (page

79).       There       was    further           discussion             between       them          about    the

relevant        barriers      on 13th November 1981                         (page 81).         The Police

wanted     those       barriers          which       passed          through       the    radial         fences

removed       because        otherwise          spectators             might       use    them      to    climb

over     the     radial       fences.            Neither             the    Club,        nor   Mr    Strange

w ished    the    barriers         to be removed because to do so might have

affected safety.              If.the relevant barriers had been removed,                                      an

uninterrupted            "channel"         would           have        been    created             along     the

radial     fence from the top of the terrace down to the perimeter

fence.         Also,     spectators        tend to congregate                      at the top of the

west     terrace       rather than          at the bottom by the perimeter fence

because        their     view will         not       be obscured by the                    small     mesh of

the     perimeter.            It     was    agreed              in    the     discussions            on     13th

November        1981     that      the    barriers          would          remain    in position             for

the next match to see what happened.




                                                 -    18    -
47.     The next discussion between Mr|_________ |and Mr England took

place       following the match on 17th November 1981                                     (page 82).         The

Chief       Constable              had     seen     the          barriers        in    position        and   was

content        that          they        should     remain             because        there    had    been     no

problems           at       the    match.          It       was,       therefore,        agreed       that    the

barriers       would              remain    in     position passing                   through    the    radial

fences as they are today.



48.     I     wrote          to     S. Y. C. C.     on           14th    December        1981        (page    83)

updating           them       on    progress        regarding             the     installation          of    the

radial        fences          and    security           gates.           S. Y. C. C.     replied       on    20th

January       1982          (pages       84-85).            That letter recorded doubts still

being voiced by the Police concerning the crush barriers which

passed        through              the     radial           fences.         I     therefore          wrote     to

S. Y. C. C.    on 26th January 1982                         (pages 86-88) with my views as to

why I felt that the relevant barriers should not be terminated

short of the radial fence.                          I pointed out the aspects of safety

and segregation which were involved and felt that what had been

done        was         a     "reasonable                   compromise           between       the     various

interests".                 These        matters    were discussed at a meeting of the

working party held on 4th February 1982                                      (pages 89-91).             It was

agreed        at    that          meeting     that          it     was    preferable          from    a safety

point of vi e w to retain the crush barriers which passed through

the radial fences.



49.     The installation of two further radial fences in the west

terrace        were          considered            in        1985.        These        were    part     of    the

,reorganisation               of     the    west        terrace          which    I shall       refer to in




                                                        -    19    -
                       DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING

                          BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION


DIVISIONAL MEMORANDUM NO 26 (Revised)                            October 1988




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

1.    Powers and Responsibilities

1.1   Following the demise of the County Council, the implementation of
       of this Act became the full responsibility of the City Council on
       the 1st April 1986. Its implementation rests with the Administration
       and Legal Department (Chief Licensing Officer) assisted as necessary
       by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, which is a panel of
       officers drawn from various Departments, other statutory
       authorities, and external sources as required.

1.2   The 1975 Act has been amended by the Fire Safety and Safety of
       Places of Sport Act 1987, and currently covers sports grounds at
      which either Association Football, Rugby League Football or Rugby
       Union Football is played, and having a ground capacity, in the
       opinion of the Secretary of State, in excess of 10,000. Future
       commencement orders may bring operational Part III of the 1987 Act,
      which will introduce a system of safety certification for stands
      with covered accommodation for 500 or more spectators (Regulated
       stands).

1.3    In connection with the above powers, the following have been agreed
       as being the general areas of responsibility for the participating
       authorities.

              Authority                      ‘ Area of Responsibility

       The Building Surveyor            All matters relating to the structure
                                        of stadia, including crush barriers,
                                        walls, etc.

       South Yorkshire County           Fire Precautions, fire alarms, means
       Fire Service                     of escape, emergency lighting,
                                         stadium capacity.

       South Yorkshire Police           Stadium policing, evacuation
                                         procedures, access of emergency
                                         vehicles and emergency planning.

      Department of Health and          An advisory input on aspects of
      Consumer Services                 general safety, general safety
                                        management of stadia and first aid.

1.4    The role   of the BSD is that of "Building Authority", as defined in
       the Act,   and will normally be represented at the advisory group
       meetings   by the Principal District Surveyor or the Principal
       Engineer   as seems appropriate for the case in question, or by both.
      \




1.5       Basically there are two cases where the views of BSD will be sought
          or will have to be put forward

          CASE A

          Where alterations or new work is proposed (where in addition to the
          need to satisfy requirements under the Act ("Green Code" requirements),
          approval under Building Regulations will be necessary, irrespective
          of what stage it will be sought, or

          CASE B

          Where work is proposed or is to be required to satisfy the Green
          Code, but which will not require approval under Building Regulations
          or planning permission.

          NB.   It will usually have been the case that the Chief Licensing
                Officer will have disseminated any appropriate information,
                including plans, at or between meetings of the Advisory Group.

2.        Procedure within BSD

2.1       Where CASE A applies GAU will adopt the primary co-ordinating role
           in the Division, will conduct any necessary liaison with external
           Departments and bodies, and will agree, in consultation with SSU
           and SAU at Principal or Assistant Principal level, matters of
           compliance with the Green Code.

2.2       Such consultation will also take place where for example any
           details are submitted in response to a conditional approval or where
           amendments are submitted to the scheme, even if such details appear
           to be of interest only to one of the BSD Units concerned.

2.3       Where CASE B applies SSU will adopt the primary co-ordinating role
           in the Division, will conduct any necessary liaison with external
           Departments and bodies, and will agree, in consultation with SAU and
          GAU, at Principal or Assistant Principal level, matters of
           compliance with the Green Code.

2.4       Generally all observations relating to the Green Code- requirements
           and any other matters relating to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
           should be in writing, and sent to or via the Chief Licensing Officer
          of Administration and Legal Department. All meetings should be
          properly minuted as appropriate, using central files as follows
          which are kept by the Building Surveyor's secretary

                Sheffield Wednesday        -        File   73
                Sheffield United           -        File   72
                General SSGA matters       -        File   71
                Owlerton Stadium           -        File   96

          Other files will be created as necessary for additional sports
          grounds or designated stands.

3.        Planning Permission

3.1       Large improvements require planning permission and this may have
           been scug\i In advance of approval under the Green Guide or Building
                             - 3 -



Regulations. In order that the position under s.55 SYA 1980 (access
for fire brigade) is safeguarded it is essential that the provisions
of the section are brought to the notice of the applicant when the
planning permission is issued.




BSD/A.BiV k I9AAD




This supercedes the document dated October 1986



Circulation:-   All BSD staff
                Environmental Planning Officer
                Principal Administrative Officer
                Chief Licensing Officer
                        (Administration and Legal Department)
              SfreffieldlGityiCounci




      Sheffield Sports Stadium
         Owlerton, Sheffield



    Report of the Works required
    to be carried out to satisfy
The Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975




 By the Building Surveyor's Division
   Department of Land and Planning
       Sheffield City Council

           September 1989
CONTENTS


1.0    INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1.1    Sections
1.2    Extent of Report
1.3    General Requirements

2.0    IMMEDIATE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
2.1    Introduction
2.2    Gate A
2.3    Gate B
2.4    Gate C
2.5    Dates D, E and F
2.6    Gate G
2.7    Gate H
2.8    Gate I
2.9    Stock Car Paddock Area
2.10   East Terrace
2.11   South Terrace
2.12   Greyhound Terrace
2.13   Grandstand
2.14   Sportsman Terrace
2.15   Exit Signs
2.16   Sportsman Tavern
2.17   Greyhound Bar
2.18   The Panorama Suite

3.0    WORKS TO BE CARRIED OUT Wl'lHlN 2 YEARS
3.1    Introduction
3.2    Stock Car Paddock Area
3.3    Greyhound Terrace
3.4    Grandstand/Panorama Suite Area
3.5    Sportsman Terrace/Tavern
3.6    South-West Corner of Stadium Land
3.7    Additional General Requirements

4.0    WORKS REQUIRED TO INCREASE CROWD CAPACITY
4.1    Introduction
4.2    Rugby Football
4.3    Other Activities

APPENDIX - Layout plan of Owlerton Sports Stadium
                             SHEFFIELD SPORTS STADIUM
                                CWLERTON, SHEFfcTETD

                          REPORT OF THE WORKS REQUIRING
                          TO BE CARRIED OUT TO SATISFY
                      THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                       BY THE BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION
                         DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING
                             SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

                                  SEPTEMBER 1989


1 -°    INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

1.1     SECTIONS

        1.0   Introduction and general requirements
        2.0   Inmediate safety requirements
        3.0   Works to be carried out within 2 years
        4.0   Works required to increase crowd capacity

1.2     EXTENT OF REPORT                           *

        The contents of this report are those fxcra my office only, and do not
        include any caiments or requirements made by the Police, Fire
        Authority, Department of Health and Consumer Services, the South
        Yorkshire Ambulance Service, the Council's Administration and Legal
        Department (Licensing Authority) or any other department, body or
        organisation.

1.3     GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

1.3.1   Electrical Safety

        All electrical appliances,.circuitry and fittings should be inspected-
        and tested by a competent person, and a certificate of satisfaction
        should be issued to the Council (as Licensing Authority). It is very
        important that the canpetent person is appointed without delay and that
        the works of achieving electrical safety to all parts of the stadium
        are cormenced as soon as possible and canpleted in the shortest
        possible time.

1.3.2   First Aid Facilities

        The number of qualified first aiders and the provision of first aid
        equipment and facilities within the ground to be agreed between the
        Stadium management and the Council's Department of Health and Consumer
        Services, in respect of each type of event and crowd capacity levels.

1 o.3   Ambulance and Fire Brigade Access

        For the duration of any event, access for ambulance facilities must be
        maintained via an unrestricted access, and stewarded gate, directly to
        the ground's first-aid facilities.

        Access for fire appliances to all buildings on the site must be
        provided for the duration of any event, through stewarded gates. The
        position, width and unrestricted height of such access points to be
        agreed by the Fire Authority, and those access points to be marked on
        any safety certificate.
                                        - 2 -



1.3.4   Stewardinq

        In addition to the stewarding requirements in 1.3.3. above, sufficient
        stewards must be in attendance at each event (the numbers to be agreed
        between the management of the stadium and the Licensing Authority).
        All stewards must be trained in normal and emergency evacuation
        procedures in addition to the recognition of spectator dangers, and
        should be deployed at agreed positions.

2.0     IMMEDIATE SAFETY RBQUIREMEOTS

2.1     IN1RODOCTICN

2.1.1   The requirements detailed in this section of the report are required to
        be carried out imnediately.

2.1.2   The items relate directly to ingress, egress and general safety
        requirements to ensure reasonable safety. However, sane of these
        measures are short term and will require further works which are
        covered in later sections to bringthem upto a satisfactorystandard.

2.1.3 The report is based on the retention of allthe existingseating and
       terracing (except the South Terrace). The provisions of the report are
       hcwever only applicable if a walkway is maintained for the spectators
      use through the South Terrace area.

2.1.4   For clarity gates have been identified by letters A to I inclusive,
        starting fran Lawther Road and working anti-clockwise around the
        Stadium.

        In the interests of safety and maintenance, a permanent identity board
        should be mounted on or adjacent to each gate to assist identification
        to unfamiliar persons.

2.2     GATE A

2.2.1   Paint yellow box with diamond cross hatching, immediately outside
        gates, projecting 3.0 metres by full width of gates, and provide
        adequate stewarding to ensure that obstruction of the gateway is
        prevented when spectators are in the stadium.

2.2.2   Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person, fran inside
        the stadium (in an emergency situation) without delay or need for
        additional equipment, e.g. keys.

2.2.3   Carport structure adjacent to Gate A to be demolished. This structure
        consists of timber posts, timber roof purlins and asbestos cement
        sheeting to the roof. The timber roof members are considerably under­
        sized for their span and are showing excessive deflection. Sno-
        loading could cause collapse.

2.2.4 Inside turnstile 3A adjoining Gate A, the light switch on the wall is
       loose and is considered a danger. The turnstile equipment appears not
       to have been used for sane time. It is therefore suggested that the
       turnstile be permanently sealed up.

2.3     GATE B

2.3.1 Paint yellow box with diamond cross hatching, immediately outside
      gates, projecting 3.0 metres by full width of gates, and provide
                                       - 3 -



         adequate stewarding to ensure that obstruction of the gateway is
         prevented when spectators are in the stadium.

2.3.2    Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person, fran inside
         the stadium (in an emergency situation) without delay or need for
         additional equipment, e.g. keys.

2.3.3    The wicket door in these gates is not accepted as being suitable for a
         means of egress or emergency egress, when spectators are in the
         stadium.

2.3.4    Positive stand open catches, positioned so as not to create a trip
         hazard, and of sufficient strength for the size of the gates, need to
         be fitted.

2.3.5    Loose materials on roof of ladies and gents toilets, immediately inside
         Gate B, to be removed.

2.4      GATE C

2.4.1    "NO PARKING” sign to be placed on external face   of gates.

2.4.2    Provide adequate stewarding to ensure the gatesare unobstructed    at all
         times that spectators are in the stadium.

2.4.3    Fit positive stand open catches, positioned so as not to create a trip
         hazard, and of sufficient strength for the size of the gates.

2.4.4     Barbed wire on top of gate not to be within 2.4 metres of adjacent
        • ground level.

2.5      GATES D, E AND F

2.5.1    Paint yellcw box with diamond cross hatching, projecting 3.0metres by
         the full width of all three gates and turnstiles, on the surface of the
         ground outside the stadium. Additionally NO PARKING should be painted
         along the front edge of the box.

         If after an initial trial period of 3 months, the yellow box system is
         ineffective in prohibiting parking of vehicles in this area, a physical
         barrier of concrete bollards or other suitable means must be provided
         to ensure unrestricted egress from any of the gates is maintained at
         all times during the use of the stadium.

2.5.2    All of these gates to remain unlocked and permanently stewarded- whilst
         any spectators are in the stadium.

2.5.3    Positive stand open catches, positioned so as not to create a trip
         hazard, and of sufficient strength for the size of the gates, need to
         be fitted.

2.5.4    Barrier recently installed outside Gate F, to segregate parking area
         from entrance area, has already been damaged by vehicular impact. The
         barrier needs to be repaired, strengthened and satisfactorily bedded so
         as to achieve the desired stability.

2.5.5    On the top of the external walling between the stadium and the car
         park, barbed wire has been installed, and is at approximately 1.3
         metres above car park level imrediately adjacent to Gate F. All
         barbed wire to be minimum 2.4 metres above adjacent ground level.
                                       - 4 -



2.5.6   Although the gates at D, E and F have been altered so as to be capable
        of opening outwards, it is found on close inspection that one of each
        of the double gates needs first to be opened inwards in order to
        release the second gate in each pair. Having released the second gate
        by its vertically mounted hocp handled bolt, both gates can then be
        opened outwards. This process is unsatisfactory for a major means of
        escape route.

        Further structural alterations are required so as to achieve readily
        available opening outward facilities for both gates in each pair.

2.6     GATE G

2.6.1   Fit suitable panic device, able to be opened by any person fran inside
        the Stadium, in an emergency situation, without delay or need for
        additional equipment, e.g. keys. This need only apply when spectators
        are in the Stadium.

2.6.2   Building adjacent to Gate G appears to be in a delapidated condition.
        Loose roof tiles iraist be removed and broken windows must be boarded up.

2.7     GATE H

2.7.1   Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person frominside
         the Stadium, in an emergency situation, without delay or need for
         additional equipment, e.g. keys.

2.7.2   Area immediately inside Gate H presently used for storage of plant and
        materials. This area should not be open to spectators, and must be
         adequately fenced off and gated. When recovery plant is being used for ■
         stock car racing, the opening to this area must be adequately stewarded.

2.7.3   Partially buried barbed wire in this area to be removed.

2.8     GATE I

2.8.1   Identification plate "I" to be positioned on inside of gate.

2.8.2   Barbed wire over top of gate to be removed or increased in height to
         minimum 2.4 metres.

2.9     STOCK CAR PADDOCK AREA

2.9.1   Provide additional floodlighting to paddock area and track access road.
        The level of illumination must be sufficient in all parts of the
        paddock and the access road, to enable the ground surface and any other
        potential hazards to be seen.

2.9.2   Make good to paddock ground surfaces to form an even walking surface.

2.9.3   Provide fire fighting appliances, at a suitable position or positions,
         of such type and number so as to be suitable for extinguishing a
         vehicle fire.

2.9.4   When vehicles are being refuelled, the stadium management must devise a
        safe system to ensure that a ND SMOKING rule is enforced for both
        ccsnpetitors and spectators who may be near to that operation.

2.9.5   Spectators attending events other than stock car racing should not have
         access to this part of the ground.
                                         - 5 -



2.9.6      Spectators attending stock car events mast not be allowed to use the
           banking to the rear of the East Terrace as an access to, or egress
           from, the stock car paddock area.

2.9.7      Loose barbed wire to wall between Gates H and I to be removed. Any
           barbed wire must be a minimum of 2.4 metres above adjacent ground
           level.

2.10       EAST TERRACE

2 .10.1 Refix or replace loose timbers to advertising hoardings along rear of
           terrace.

2 . 10.2   Provide adequate fence, capable of withstanding 3.4 KN/M, along the
           rear of the terrace, so as to prohibit spectators fran entering into
           the vegetation or under the advertisement hoardings.

2.10.3     Prohibit the use of the track along the rear of the terrace by any
           vehicles when spectators are in the stadium.

2.10.4     Remove all litter and debris fran the terrace after every event.

2.10.5     Provide 1200 inn high fencing with gate(s) across the ends of the East
           Terrace abutting the track access road. The construction should be
           strong enough for its purpose and have vertical balusters at 100 mm
           maximum centres. The gate(s) must be steward controlled during stock'
           car events, but may be left open during other events where the track
           access road is not used. The width of the gate(s) should satisfy means
           of escape requirements fran the East Terrace for spectators to use Gate
           H in an evacuation.

2.10.6     Fix Warning Notices each side of track access road in clearly
           illuminated and visible positions, stating BEWARE VEHICLES CROSSING.

2.10.7     Provide new gate for opening in perimeter wall midway along terrace,
           and ensure it is in position and locked during every event.

2 .10.8    Clear out drainage channel to terrace front.

2.10.9     Remove all loose structures and items of plant and other loose material
           from the useable terrace area before it is used by spectators.

 .
2 10.1     Rotted front and rear facias to-snack bar to replace.

2.11       SOOTH TERRACE

2 .11.1    This terrace requires extensive re-building to make it safe to use,
           therefore, it must not be used for spectators until such works have
           been carried out.

2 .11.2    To maintain full access around the stadium, the terrace will require a
           path with a smooth even surface to be constructed so as to connect the
           Greyhound Terrace to the track access road adjacent to Gate H. The
           path must be of a width capable of satisfying means of escape require­
           ments fran the Greyhound Terrace and be not less than 1500 irm wide.
           Throughout its length it should be adequately balustraded and
           illuminated.
                                        -6 -



2.11.3    Provide 1200 am high fencing with gate(s) across the end of the South
          Terrace abutting the track access road. The construction should be
          strong enough for its purpose and have vertical balusters at 100 urn
          maximum centres. The gate(s) must be steward controlled during stock
          car events, but may be left open during other events where the track
          access road is not used. The width of the gate(s) should satisfy means
          of escape requirements from the Greyhound Terrace for spectators to use
          Gate H in an evacuation.

2.11.4    Remove shale overspray from terraced passage in front of Greyhound Bar.
          Make good to any uneven surface.

2.11.5    Clean out any drainage gulleys which are blocked.

2.11.6 The perimeter wall or other suitable structure most be continued
          between the site of the former totalizator board and the track access
          road, (if this is adjacent to the site of the pathway through the South
          Terrace) so as to prevent any spectator gaining unauthorised access to
          the greyhound track or any of its operating mechanism.

2.11.7    The access gate fran the greyhound terrace should be removed.

2.11.8 Barbed wire on the stadium external wall to be removed where less than
          2.4 metres above adjacent ground level.

2.11.9    Remove bench seat fran south terrace.

2.11.1    Iirmediate action must be taken to alter ground levels to achieve public
          safety where approximately 900 mm vertical drop in levels exists to
          East end of former 'Totalizator Board' on line of walkway used by
          spectators.

2 .11.1   The extensive areas of thistles and nettles in the vegetation to the
          back of this terracing is considered to be very dangerous.

2 .11.1   Exit fran this terracing towards Gate G is very uneven and overgrown
          with vegetation. It is very dangerous for this route to be used in the
          hours of darkness.

2.12      GREYHOUND TERRACE

2 .12.1   Rsnove, and prevent the use of, crates on the terrace. Loose materials
          such as these should not be allowed to be used as seats or for standing
          on.

2 .12.2   Replace corroded or damaged corrugated sheeting to rear of terrace, or
          seal to prevent exposed rough edges.

2.12.3    Prevent beer glasses and bottles being taken onto the terracing.   If
          drinks are allowed on terraces, plastic containers must be used.

2.12.4    Clean and maintain yard gulleys to terrace front, in an operative
          condition. Any broken gratings are to be replaced, preferably with
          screw down type covers.

2.12.5    Make good to uneven tarmac to terrace front to provide an even walking
          surface and better drainage.
                                      - 7 -



2.12.6   Fix any loose wiring to prevent it being pulled or further damaged.
         - Any electrical connections or joints must be within approved junction
         boxes.

2.12.7   The concrete terracing to the northern end is cracked, and seme parts
         are loose - satisfactory repairs most be carried out.

2.12.8   The top riser of the terracing is greater than other’risers on the
         terracing. Particularly outside the Greyhound Bar this could cause
         a trip hazard. The edge of this nosing needs to be highlighted in
         yellow or white paint.

2.12.9   'Pit,' area at south end of terrace is constructed on the line of the
         track perimeter wall. The perimeter wall adjacent to this needs to be
         increased fran 800 urn to approximately 1000 mm. The opening in the
         perimeter wall requires to be gated.

2.12.10 Loose materials and debris on terracing to be removed before spectators
        are admitted to any event.

2.12.11 Timber barrier rail in terraced area to be removed immediately.

2.12.12 Access between rear of Terrace and toilet block, to be gated to prevent
        unauthorised access.

2.12.13 If Gate G is to be used as an exit gate for spectators (in any circum­
        stances) either the route(s) must be clearly defined and balustraded,
        or loose materials stored at the rear of the Greyhound Terrace must be
        removed or adequately fenced off.

2.13     GRANDSTAND

2.13.1 Repair to a satisfactory standard, all broken or damaged seats and
       seat backs. All protruding bolt heads, etc., must not present sharp
       edges, or cause snagging of clothing.

2.13.2 Refix or replace all broken* or worn floorboarding to theseating
       gangways. All loose boarding to be secured.

2.13.3   Prohibit beer glasses and bottles fran being taken onto the seating.

2.13.4   Clean all accumulations of rubbish and materials frcm beneath seating
         tiers, and ensure no build-up of rubbish occurs in the future.

2.13.5   Prohibit sitting on steps, gangways and balustrading associated with or
         forming part of the seating.

2.13.6   Secure loose balustrading to all sections of seating.

2.13.7   At southern end of South seating unit open risers to 1st and 2nd steps
         to be closed down to 100 mn maximum.

2.13.8 Balustrading to ends of seating units to be maximum900 mm    high above
       pitch line of terracing.

2.14     SPORTSMAN TERRACE

2.14.1 Earbed wire within 2.4 metres of terrace level should be removed frcm
       around the low roof of the building of the southern end of the terrace.
                                       -   8 -




         This must however be replaced by other materials which prevent this
         roof fran being used as a "vantage point" by spectators.

2.14.2   Remove projecting screws frcm wall in front of the low roof referred to
         in 2.14.1 above.

2.14.3   Re-hang steel gate, between the terrace and the greyhound track access
         road, to swing outwards from the terrace. The hinges of such a gate
         most be on the track side of the gate opening. It should be ensured
         that the gate is capable of being held in the open position and that it
         is unlocked at all times during any event.

2.14.4   Clean out all yard gulleys to terrace front, and replace any damaged
         gratings with screw down type gratings.

2.14.5   On the large double doors at the rear of the terrace a suitable NO EXIT
         sign should be affixed.

2.14.6   Wiring loom overhead fran Sportsman Terrace to offices is within easy
         reach. These cables must be increased in height to at least 2.4 metres
         over this area.

2.14.7   Wires at eaves level to the back of the terracing is hanging down and
         now within easy reach of spectators - it is suggested that all wiring
         in these areas should be trunked.

2.14.8   Steel purlin in 6th bay of roof (fran to southern end) is badly
         corroded and considered to be in need of urgent replacement.

2.14.9   Sloping coping to top of wall outside entrance to "Sportsman Tavern1
                                                                            ’ to
         be extended to end of wall.

2.14.10 Guttering to entire length of sportsman terrace to clean'out and clear
      . of vegetation-.-----

2.14.11 Materials and plant to be   removed frcm rear access road. This is a
        dedicated means of escape   route and should not be obstructed in any
        way. Any permanent plant    storage adjacent to the roadway should be
        adequately balustraded to   form a separate area.

2.14.12 Openings to underfloor void of betting booths to be sealed - Adequate
        means of natural ventilation to be provided.

         Before sealing, earth needs to be removed so that timber and steel
         floor members are clear of ground. All timber and steel members to be
         checked for deterioration, and steelwork painted before being sealed
         in.

2.14.13 Remove loose building :ind maintenance materials frcm area between rear
        of terrace and toilet block.

2.15     EXIT SIGNS

2.15.1   In all spectator areas, exit signs should be provided so as to gui<ie
         spectators to a place of safety and to the designated exits for means
         of escape purposes. The Fire Authority should be consulted as to the
         positions of these signs and the designated emergency evacuation exits
         relevant to a particular area.
                                       - 9 -



2.15.2   The signs are to have white arrows and instructions on a green
         background, and comply with BS 5378 Part 1, 1980. The signs must be
         mechanically fixed, durable, and adequately illuminated.

2.16     SPORTSMAN TAVERN

2.16.1   Low level void (at midpoint of length of building on the track frontage)
         to seal so as to prohibit debris and refuse being deposited there.

2.16.2   Manhole to the North East comer of the building needs rebedding of
         loose masonry.. Balustrading to be built into the construction to
         provide spectator safety to the present 1.5 metre unguarded difference
         in height of ground levels.

2.16.3   The waste pipe entering into the manhole (see 2.16.2 above) is
         unprotected against damage, and the rodding eye cap to the pipe is
         missing - Repairs and replacement are necessary.

2.16.4   Access to underfloor space of these premises to be sealed - Adequate
         means of natural ventilation to be incorporated by the use of
         225 x 225 nm airgrates at maximum 1.0 metre centres. Before sealing
         all rubbish to be extracted and steelwork cleaned and painted.

2.16.!   Vegetation in guttering to rear of premises to be cleaned out.

2.17     GREYHOUND BAR

2.17.:   Part of rear pathway between emergency exit and rear steps to be
         adequately surfaced.

2.17.:   Timber gate immediately adjacent to rear emergency exit is capable of
         opening outwards and blocking emergency escape route. Since the
         storage area that it serves does not appear to be used, the gate
         should be permanently fixed shut.

2.18     THE PANORAMA SUITE

2.18.:   The treads of the bottom flight of steps, on the external means of
         escape at the southern end of the building, are to be replaced.

2.18.:   White/green arrowed directional signs to tunnel under Panorama rocrn
         indicate ingress direction. These coloured signs should be for egress
         and emergency egress purposes. Alternative coloured signs required for
         ingress routes.

3.0      WORKS TO BE CARRIED OUT WITHIN 2 YEARS

3.1      INTRODUCTION

3.1.1    The requirements in this section of the report should be carried out as
         soon, as possible, and certainly before the expiration of 2 years from
         the date of this report.

3.1.2    Some of the items in this section are given the extended period of time
         on the basis that the works in Section 2.0 of this report are carried
         out as a matter of iimediacy.

3.1.3    If further deterioration is noted, it may be necessary to reclassify
         works as then requiring inroediate action.
                                      - 10 -


3.2     STOCK CAR PADDOCK AREA

3.2.1   Bottom of banking to East Terrace to be fenced off to    stop
         unauthorised access to the vegetation.

3.2.2   In connection with 3.2.1 above, consideration should be given to
        forming a purpose made stairway from the mid point at the rear of the
        East Terrace, down the bank to the Stock Car Paddock. This would ease
        spectator congestion along the access road to the paddock, and would
        achieve an additional means of escape (if necessary) fran the East
        Terrace.

3.2.3   A separated pathway for pedestrians only should be laid along the
        Stock Car Paddock access road. This pathway should be surfaced and
        balustraded fran the vehicular roadway.

3.3     GREYHOUND TERRACE

3.3.1   Fractured and damaged roof sheeting to be replaced.

3.3.2   The cracked terracing outside the entrance to the Greyhound Bar
         requires to be repaired.

3.3.3   All structural steelwork to be wire brushed, and repainted. Any
        severe corrosion found must be reported to the City Council's Chief
        Licensing Officer without delay.

3.3.4   Timber hut in North West comer of terrace to    be removed.

3.4     GRANDSTAND/PANORAMA SUITE AREA

3.4.1   Timber seating units to be removed, and any replacement to be
        constructed of non-canbustible materials. -

3.4.2   Cracked asbestos cement roof sheeting of main canopy to be replaced.

3.4.3   Repaint all structural steelwork. Any corrosion to be wire brushed
        before re-painting. If corrosionis found to be severe, it must be
         reported to the City Council's Chief Licensing Officer without delay.

3.5     SPORTSMAN TERRACE/TAVERN

3.5.1   All structural steelwork to be wire brushed, and repainted.   Any
         severe corrosion found must be reported to the City Council's Chief
         Licensing Officer without delay.

3.5.2    Broken asbestos wall sheeting to rear of betting booths (approximately
         at central point of terrace) to be replaced.

3.5.3    Shattered asbestos cement roof sheeting to re?:: of Sportsman Tavern to
         be replaced.

3.5.4    Access steps fran centre dcors to rear roadway to be formed in
         accordance with plans submitted to, and approved by the City Council
         as Licensing Authority.

3.6     S0C7TH-WEST CORNER OF STADIUM LAND

3.6.1   The growth of grass, weed and other low vegetation to be inhibited by
         either cutting or use of chemicals, so as to reduce the risk of fire in
         sunmer months, and to maintain designated escape routes, through the area.
                                       - 11 -


3.6.2    The presently derelict building adjacent to Gate G most be either
         restored and be used, or demolished.

3.7      ADDITIONAL GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

3.7.1    All external perimeter walls to Stadium to be inspected and    all
          necessary works carried out to achieve safety and security.

3.7.2    Exposed reinforcement in track perimeter walling, to be covered by
          suitable means to be agreed with the City Council's Building Surveyor.

3.7.3    Clean out all manholes on the site, and rod all lengths of drainage to
          achieve a clear flowing drainage system. - Any consequential repairs
          to be carried out at the time. The works of cleansing and repairs to
          be carried out to the satisfaction of the City Council, and to be
          monitored throughout by the Council's Building Surveyor.

3.7.4    All trees, bushes and shrubs overhanging or encroaching into the
         spectator areas to be kept wall trimned back.

4.0      WORKS REQUIRED TO INCREASE CROWD CAPACITY

4.1      INTRODUCTION

4.1.1    Before any consideration is given to increasing the crowd capacity
          above the present figure of 4000, all the works in Sections 1.3,
          2.0 and 3.0 must be carried out.

4.1.2    Any increase in crowd capacity must be considered in the light of
         legislation and knowledge current at the time of the. request.

4.1.3    Due to the diversity of activities at the Stadium, it may be necessary
         to design requirements to cater for a specific spectator group, and not
         to increase capacity for all events.      ____

4.2      RUGBY FOOTBALL

4.2.1    Any increase in crowd capacity for this purpose must be considered only
         when total segregation of opposing supporters has been achieved.

4.2.2    In order to achieve segregation of opposing supporters, it will be
         necessary to have structural alterations within the ground to separate
         the two parts of the ground, the provision of refreshment facilities in
         each part, and separate turnstiles of adequate numbers to cater for
         estimated demand.

4.2.3    An increase in crowd capacity for this' purpose would also necessarily
         involve the installation of properly designed and positioned crush
         barriers in any used terrace areas.

4.2.4    Proposals for this purpose would need to be the subject of very
         detailed discussions between all members of the SSGA advisory group.

4.3      OTHER ACTIVITIES   ■

4.3.1    Requests for increase of crowd capacity for other than Rugby Football
         must be considered according to 4.1.2 above, and in addition the
         knowledge of trends of behaviour of fans at the time.


M14ABW
                     THE EJS5r IfBMCJ
                   (HOT 10 9E USED AT PRESENT)                                     \ O W L E R T O N SPORTS
                                                                                     5 T A O IU K




                 TOTAL    CAPACITY        IN THIS APPLICATION
                 FOR A SAFETY       CERTIFICATE    6781.




NEW STAIRCASE
BE CDN5IRUCTFD




                          MAIH STAND SEATING.                                      EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                  THE'PANORAMA'ROOM |EOI                                           Consulting       Engineers
                                                                                   St. A n d r e w s H o u s e
                                                                                   2 3 Kingfield Road
                                                                                   S h e f f i e l d S11 9 A S   t.i     (0   7 4   J)       5   M« r t


                                                                              D RAWN

                                                                              CHECKED
                                                                                                             HHSHHF®*
                                                                              APPROVED                       |       D R AW I N G No
                                                                                                                     DR
                                                                CAS P A R K
                                                                                                T^TS             8   8    63             /         1.
<^'TA-r£n£'N*r.

(I.   rfA/e.SHAuc
Voluntary statement of Superintendent Roger Marshall,

Page and Paragraph numbering is consecutive to those of the letter
dated 6th June 1990 referred to below .x


I have already provided much information concerning the events of
15th April 1989 at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground,
Leppings Lane end, where I was in charge outside the ground.

I refer to my statement of evidence supplied to the investigating
force and to the transcript of my evidence at the Taylor Enquiry.
I also wish to refer to the letter from my solicitor to Chief
Superintendent Foster dated 6th June 1990.  Because of the need
for expedition, it now seems unlikely that that letter will be
forwarded to the complainants, through their solicitors.   It also
seems unlikely, given their vested interest in the civil
proceedings, that the complainants would be prepared to give
ground, at least until their civil proceedings have been disposed
of.  That is a pity, as I genuinely feel for them in their
bereavement, but I hope that subsequent events, including the
present World Cup events, will persuade them that it is not easy
as they suggest to control crowds without tear-gas and riot
shields - and not even then!

For ease of reference, I propose to number my following
observations consecutive to the 42 paragraphs of my solicitor's
letter of 6th June.

43.   I am prepared to acknowledge that the statements mentioned
      above contain a true and accurate statement of my evidence
      given fresh after the event but subject to the comment that
      I was rigorously cross-examined at the Taylor Enquiry by the
      Judge and by counsel for interested parties who were all
      concerned to show that the fans outside the ground in the
      half-hour or so before kick-off at 3.0 pm were good-natured
      and orderly, with a few exceptions, and that they were
      nothing out of the ordinary for the police to control.   As a
      consequence, everything that was said to me and the
      reception of.my answers was slanted by the impression that
      the crowd on that day was not the sort of crowd that
      everyone had become accustomed to seeing at football
      matches, i.e. unruly and fighting with each other or the
      opposite team's fans, and that consequently it had no part
      whatever to play in the tragedy.

44.   Scant evidence was placed before the Enquiry about the
      actual behaviour of those fans in the time leading up to
      their approach to the turnstiles.  I believe that an
      unnecessarily legalistic view may have been taken - that
      particular fans could not be identified as being in a
      particular condition or as being in tj>e'"’jbrowd which caused
      the crush and that any evidence aboyt tjiem(would have be^n
      inadmissible or prejudicial.
45.   I am not at all happy about this approach.   The fact is that
      many of the fans who caused the crush were under the
      influence of drink to some extent - some of them quite
      badly.   I believe that a Court - particularly a jury - could
      properly take into account the behaviour of large number of
      fans not only on this occasion but on virtually every other
      occasion on which fans in large numbers attend football
      matches.   I make this statement because the allegations made
      against me - that I could have dealt with the large number
      of fans on the day in some way which would have caused them
      to approach the ground, the turnstiles and eventually the
      stands inside the ground in an orderly manner, is pure
      speculation and hypothesis.   Consequently, I consider I am
      entitled to refer to many other similar events to show that
      any such hypothesis is contrary to all known experience of
      football matches and crowd behaviour and that there is not
      the slightest evidence to show that the crowd at
      Hillsborough was so different from normal as to make the
      hypothesis likely to be true.   In fact, almost all the
      evidence, including the suppressed evidence, is to the
      contrary - it was not an unusually well-behaved crowd.
      Although there were many family groups and people who could
      have been expected to be well-behaved, I refer elsewhere to
      the effect that even small numbers of self-centred, brutally
      selfish persons can have on a larger group.   From my
      observations - from about 2.35 pm onwards - this crowd was
      bound to react with considerable hostility if attempts had
      been made to control it by force.

46.   I say that on the day the crowd was not amenable to any form
      of instruction from the police - partly because of the fact
      that any crowd which is intent on going somewhere will not
      take kindly to being held up or stopped in any way -
      particularly when kick-off time is approaching and they fear
      they are going to be excluded from the ground - and partly
      because there is a great deal of evidence that this
      particular crowd had significant numbers in it of

      (a) people who had been drinking heavily and

      (b) people who had no tickets and could therefore only
      gain access by creating such a crush that-the police
      would have to open the gates to relieve that crush and
      they could therefore slip in.

47.    Although there were plenty of people after the event with
       tickets saying that they had got in without showing their
       tickets, it is not surprising that none of those without
       tickets went on television to say how they .had managed to
       beat the system.                            /




                                     Page
48.   Any experienced policeman knows that such tactics are used
      regularly.  I believe that the problem was greater than
      usual on that day

      (a) because there was what may well have been a genuine
      grievance against the Football Association for choosing
      Hillsborough as a venue for the fixture, knowing that it
      would result in allocating Liverpool less tickets than they
      ought to have had.  The allocation also made it more
      expensive for Liverpool, who had 14,000 (approx) seated and
      10,000 standing, whereas Nottingham Forest had 6,000
      (approx) seated and 18,000 standing.

      (b) because it was a hotter day than the previous year
      and they stayed outside the ground drinking for longer than
      they did the previous year

      (c) because, having been the previous year, many of the
      fans would think that there was not as much need to
      arrive early because they thought they knew their way
      around the ground.  The previous year, being the first
      occasion, they had generally come earlier so as to be able to
      find their way.

49.   I am entitled to refer to other examples of crowd behaviour
      to defend myself when it is alleged that it would have been
      such a simple matter to filter or control this crowd.

      (a) At the cup-final, that very year, when the dead were \ s o
      recently being mourned it ought to have been in everyone's
      mind, I allege that some thousand Liverpool fans stormed
      gates at Wembley trying to force their way in without
      tickets.  Evidence of that fact was available (from a senior
      Home Office source and corroborated by a senior Metropolitan
      Police Commander) to the Taylor enquiry but was suppressed
      as being probably too prejudicial.  If we are speculating as
      to whether a small number of police could have controlled
      the crowd on the day of the disaster, I have no hesitation
      in saying that they could not have controlled them because
      such a crowd can only be policed with its consent.  I saw
      enough with my own eyes to know that that crowd had clearly
      rejected the measures which were in place to facilitate
      entrance to the stadium.

       (b)There is a ~fundamental misunderstanding by many people as
       to the function of the police at large gatherings of people.
       The police can only do certain tasks such as searching for
       weapons (the necessity for which is itself a commentary on
       the difficulties which some do not appear to appreciate) and
       to act as traffic directors etc.   Once a crowd of any size
       takes it upon itself to go out of control, there is very
       little that the police can do about it^/^Tliis has been seen
       time and again and should not need t o e / mucSh stressing
      (c) As recently as Saturday 16th June, 1990, at the World Cup
       in Cagliari where there had been a total ban on alcohol
      sales (which the South Yorkshire Police were not allowed
      to impose at Hillsborough) a crowd of only 1,000 fans was
      approaching the ground at some distance.  The police
      attempted to slow them down or stop them by placing a road
      block across the road backed by large numbers of police - way
      beyond anything the police had available at Hillsborough.
      The crowd, as at Hillsborough, was alleged to be
      good-humoured.  The result was a riot with fans and police
      injured and the chasing of suspects through the streets with
      considerable disruption to the local population.

      In the event, only nine fans were found to be worthy of
      keeping in custody for identifiable offences.

50.   This leads me to my next contention, which is that no
      evidence was before the Enquiry concerning crowd behaviour
      in general and the effect on a crowd of only a small number
      influenced by drink or by some other motive leading to -a
      rejection of authority.  I have made some enquiries and
      believe that an expert will be able to show that a
      comparatively small number of persons can influence a crowd
      out of all proportion to their number.  I know from other
      evidence and from my own observations that the proportion of
      people who were in drink or for other reasons refusing to
      accept authority on that day was much higher than 'just a
      few'.  I do not quarrel with Lord Justice Taylor's
      description of them as a minority, even an unruly minority^
      but it was a very influential minority.

51.   I also refer to the Trafalgar Square riots.  I annexe, as an
      indication of how false is the hypothesis that the crowd at
      Hillsborough was good-humoured and therefore amenable to
      police direction, a statement issued on behalf of the
      defendants in Trafalgar Square claiming that they too were
      lively and good-humoured.  We all know what the results
      were when the police tried to control that crowd.

 52. I said, time and again in my evidence, that although the
     crowd had apparently been good-humoured up to about 2.35 pm,
     the mood then changed or developed and deteriorated
     dramatically.         I knew from my own observations at the time
     and from the evidence related to me by many other persons
     that one factor in the crowd's behaviour was the considerable
     quantity of alcohol which had been consumed by many of them.
     I said then - and I repeat          now - that the crowd as a whole
     was determined to get into         the ground and showed no restraint
     whatever, even when it was obvious that people in front were
     in distress.         I realized that it was not the sort of crowd
     a d v a n c e .that we see regularly when there is a pitch invasion
     or a confrontation between          two rival groups^but it was an
     advance of an army which could not be stopped.            There was
     plenty of available space behind them an<y at/ the sides for
     them to have relieved the pressure, but they just kept coming
     on, despite tannoy warnings and all the /ef'fortsk of the foot A
     police and mounted police.'"'’                   //      \       »  M
If physical barriers could have stopped them, they would have
stopped at the perimeter gates or at the turnstiles.  In
fact, they forced the perimeter gates open, carrying a police
horse and several policemen with them, when we tried to close
them to relieve the pressure.  The large inner steel gate
(Gate A) was being shaken deliberately - not just moving
under the pressure of the crowd.  The gate was being shaken
in a deliberate attempt to force it open.

On the suggestion that has been made that we could have
filtered the crowd in some way further away from the
turnstile area:

(a) To my knowledge no such filtering had been carried out
    the previous year, 1988, despite suggestions to the
    contrary by some people.   The video clearly shows buses
    and cars moving freely along Leppings Lane right up to
    the time of kick-off in 1988.   There was no filtering or
    holding-up of the crowd on that occasion.   The crowd
    merely came earlier and in a more orderly fashion.
    Furthermore, any interference with the free passage of
    people along Leppings Lane, at either end, would have
    aroused considerable resentment from the local residents
    and business population, who use this road in
    considerable numbers to and from their homes, shops etc.
    Leppings Lane is a main thoroughfare in the city, the
    closure o f which entails a substantial detour for
    vehicles and pedestrians.   The practical difficulties are
    considerable.   There are so many side-streets and other
    entrances to Leppings Lane, which the fans would have
    sought out if they had seen a road block at the ends.

(b) It would have needed an enormous body of men, far more
    than we had available on the day to cover both ends of
    Leppings Lane - not just a few more men but enough men to
    control a riot situation, including dealing with
    prisoners.   We had no way of knowing that we would be
    faced with such a situation and had planned only for an
    ordinary sporting occasion - as we had done many times
    before.   That was not complacency.  We have a system of
    obtaining 'intelligence' reports from the Liverpool
    Police.   We received no reports whatever that there was
    any reason to believe that the crowd would be any
    different from the previous year.   The teams were exactly
    the same.   They were allocated the same ends of the
    ground and the same proportion of tickets.   The game was
    a sell-out on both occasions, so the numbers with tickets
    must have been the same.

(c) I tried to prevent vehicles from passing along Leppings
    Lane when the crowd was so great that—I feared a road
    accident involving fans.  The exact/time is in dispute.
    I still think it was later than the Enquiry accepted
    (2.17 pm).  In any event the attempt /was unsuccessful -
    we hadn't enough men to control v^h^cles, let alone
    pedestrians and supporters.
54.      I believe there must have been many more without tickets
         on the day of the disaster.     When I was approached by
         Inspector Purdy who asked me to consider opening the exit
         gates to allow speedier access into the stadium there were
         still thousands outside the ground in Leppings Lane, as
         the video shows.     I was worried about the build-up outside
         the ground and the numbers were so great that I thought
         the terraces must be nearly empty - there were so many
         outside.     I had no information from inside the ground as
         to the numbers that had been admitted.     It was a
         reasonable assumption for me to make at the time.
         However, with the benefit of hindsight, although there was
         some room in the side pens, I believe that an overall
         assessment should show that it would have been impossible
         to accommodate all those outside the ground, even if they
         had been packed in an orderly fashion, and it therefore
         follows that there must have been a substantial number of
         fans outside the ground without tickets.     They would have
         had no prospect of gaining entrance in the ordinary way.
         One way they could have gained entrance was by causing a
         situation in which the police had no option but to open
         the gates.     Although there is a great deal of speculation -
         about this whole matter, this is precisely what
         h ap pen ed.

      I will deal with the complaints individually, although many
      matters are covered by the notes I have already made.  2
      apologize for any repetition but it is inevitable in such a
      complex matter.  The enquiry itself went over the same     '\
      matters time and again.  The allegations are too important to
      me for me to take any chance of missing any point which tends
      to discount the sweeping allegations which have been made.

        Complaint by Mr Hicks -

      Failed to prevent a dangerous build-up of supporters outside
      of the gates.

55.    There was a lack of equity in the allocation of turnstiles.
        Nottingham Forest had 60 turnstiles available for their
        fans, Liverpool ha-d 23. I had no control over this    _
        allocation.  The need for segregation of fans,- of course,
        arose from their previous behaviour.

56.    The turnstiles allocated to Liverpool were inadequate to
        allow the ingress of the number of fans outside the ground
        at 2.35 pm in time for the kick-off at 3.0 pm - even if
        they had been well-behaved.  It is understood that the
        Health & Safety Executive estimated that at the rate which
        the turnstiles could accommodate, many of the fans would
        not have gained access by 3.30 pm but for the opening of
        the g a t e s .


57.    It is arguable that if all those without/tidKers had stayed
       away, the number would hav^ been so muc n le4s tihat the
       turnstiles could have coped.             j / ____ ^ _____ \ _______ Li_




                                         Page - 14
58.   No intelligence was received from Merseyside police that
      the crowd would be unusual.

59.   The police planning and manpower were based on the 1988
      game which was u n e v e n t f u l .

60.   In the event, the numbers that arrived between 2.35 pm and
       3.0 pm could not have been controlled by the manpower
      available without the crowd's full co-operation - which was
       not forthcoming.

61.   There was no co-operation from the fans because those fans
      who were prepared to co-operate were unable to do so
      because of a significant element whose reason was coloured
      by the amount of alcohol t h e y h a d taken combined with their
      determination to gain entrance to the stadium.       The
      presence of this significant element and the sheer size of
      the crowd thwarted the efforts of the police officers to
      control them.  The crowd could easily see the injuries and
      crushing which was being caused to those in front near the
      turnstiles but it was still unable to control itself and
      hold back.

62.   All officers were correctly briefed and deployed - for a
       sporting occasion.  The excessive drinking and the sense of
       grievance of those who had not been allocated tickets were
      unusual and created a climate which would have led to
       serious disorder and inevitable confrontation if extra
      police had tried to prevent them from gaining access to the
       ground.  Any attempt to separate such fans from the
       genuine, sober fans with tickets would have been bound to
       lead to a riotous situation.  Arguing with a drunken man
       needs no explanation of its futility.  Arguing with a man
       with no ticket is equally futile because he always has an
       explanation - his brother or his mate waiting for him at
       the turnstiles with his ticket, for example.  The inability
      of the fans themselves, as well as the police, to be able
       to differentiate successfully between the genuine fan and
       the trouble-maker is what leads to the common riot
       situation when each side (police and spectators) blames the
       other and protests its own innocence.

63.   Control of the Leppings Lane turnstile area was vested in
      the hands of very experienced senior police officers who
      along with the sergeants and constables had been
      hand-picked by Chief Inspector Beale and Inspector Sewell
      because of their enormous experience of controlling
      football crowds.  South Yorkshire had even gone to the
      extent of obtaining mutual aid from Merseyside Police who
      supplied mounted officers whose task was to police the
      approach to the turnstiles.  These offic^ri were used to
      policing Liverpool fans at Anfield Stadiun/ and they too
      expressed to me the view that the behaviour of the crowd in
      Leppings Lane was unprecedented.  If .they couldn't contjro
      the crowd, no-one could.




                                                              /
                                      Paae - i-
64.     Equipment failures undoubtedly contributed to the confusion
        but I was able to communicate my views by alternative
        means.  Any suggestion that the crowd could have been
        controlled by overwhelming force, even if it had been
        available, is pure speculation.  All evidence available
        tends to show that a crowd in this condition of a
        combination of excitement, alcohol and unswerveable
        intention to get into the ground could not have been
        controlled by any means which would be acceptable to the
        British public.

Complaint by Mr. Hicks - continued

Failed to control movement of supporters after the opening
of Gate 'C *

65.   The opening of Gate 'C' did relieve the pressure outside the
      turnstiles.      To that extent, it was a safety measure which
      succeeded.     When the gate was closed again, the pressure
      outside was reduced so much that it was controlled.        Even
      the fans who went through the gate did not pose any
      immediate threat to safety.        If they had continued at a
      walking pace (as the video shows they started off) and had
      had adequate signposting or other direction to the emptier
      parts of the stand, there might still have been no
      difficulties.        It has been assumed that fans went into the
      centre stand behind the goal because of sheer accident or
      lack of c o n t r o l . That is not necessarily the case.  Many
      fans consider that the premier viewing position is behind^
      the goal and may well have continued to crush into the
      centre stand even though they could see that there was space
      at each side.        Even then, there might have been no tragedy
      if the corroded barrier had not collapsed.        Most of the
      deaths were in front of that barrier and it seems obvious
      that that was the final cause of the tragedy coupled,
      probably, with the desire of many fans to get behind the
      goal come what may.        It must be remembered that almost 25%
      (21 out of 88) of the dead male fans had in excess of 80
      milligrams per cent of alcohol in their blood and it is
      understood that these persons entered the stadium through
      gate 'C' and then found their way to the front of pen 3.

66.   Without trying to evade responsibility by saying that it was
       someone else's job, I must say that once the fans were
       inside the ground, they were out of my jurisdiction.      I
       must make it clear again that I believed on reasonable
      evidence that the Liverpool area of the ground must have
      been fairly empty when there were so many fans still outside
      the ground.     They did not rush in through the gate in a
      disorderly fashion and I had no reason to anticipate that
      they would crush into the central pen
      It highlights the difficulties when ii
      Inspector White, who might have been ;
      considerable experience, to influence
      ground, was absent at the relevant ti:                       \
      pr is o n e r .
Complaint by Mr. Hicks - continued

Failed to respond to the developing tragedy and were slow to
effect a rescue operation

67.   This is a very vague allegation which is almost impossible
       to answer factually.   All I can say is that I did everything
      within my power as quickly as I could and as soon as the
      full extent of this disaster became apparent.     It was like
       Hell on earth.   I was personally in a state of shock and was
       surrounded by white-faced, shaken, police officers who were
       doing their best.    It took a great deal of effort on my part
       to get a grip on myself and start giving what orders I could
       to alleviate the situation.    I have told the Enquiry that at
       that time I felt that the whole disaster was my personal
       responsibility and that I had killed all those people.    Once
      again, the fans cannot stand outside this matter as if they
       played no part in it.    During these terrible moments some
      fans responded with decency and altruism.     Others, sadly,
      acted very badly during the rescue attempts, vilifying my
      officers and making their job even harder to d o . I can only
       forgive Mr. Hicks for making such an outrageous allegation
      against me and my men by reason of his own extreme distress
       at the time the complaint was made.    I would hope that now
       that he knows more about it, he would withdraw this
       allegation.

Complaint by Mrs McBrien -
                                                               "\■
                                                                 ’
You failed to prevent a build-up of Liverpool supporters at the
turnstiles in Leppinqs Lane by inadequate policing arrangements.

68.   This is the same as the allegation by Mr. Hicks and I have
      already dealt with it fully.

Complaint by Mrs McBrien - continued

You should not have requested Chief Superintendent Duckenfield to
open the gates under any circumstances and thereby giving
unlimited and uncontrolled access to the football ground by
s u p p or te rs .

69.   I am sorry for Mrs McBrien and can readily understand her
      feeling that the fans causing the crush should have been
      allowed to suffer the consequences of their own misconduct
      rather than be allowed to continue their actions inside the
      ground with the consequences we all now know, including the
      death of Mrs. McBrien's son.  Unfortunately, I had no means
      of knowing what would happen inside the ground.       I believed
      that there was adequate room for all the fans - there had
      certainly been enough room on previous occasions.       I could
      not anticipate that a corroded barrier would bjreak, causing
      extra crushing at the front of the pen.     Although I complain
      about the findings of the Taylor Enquiry iii inany ways, the
      judge and counsel for all parties did a s s u r e me that in thi
      circumstances I had no alternative but tq/ a(sk 4 p r the gate;
      to be opened.            ^




                                       Page - 17
      It was another part of the chapter of accidents, which had
      many parts, that Gate 'C' was opened first.   If one of the
      other gates had been opened, there is at least a chance that
      many of the fans would have gone to other parts of the
      stadium instead of the centre pen.   Even then however, it
      cannot be ruled out that the choice of the centre pen by
      many fans was deliberate and was bound to lead to crushing,
      which the barriers ought to have contained.

Complaint by Mr   Jones -

You failed to control and filter the crowds away from the
immediate vicinity of the turnstiles even after 14.17 hours when
it was obvious you had lost control of the turnstile area.  In any
event, you should have acted by 14.30 hours at the latest.

You qave no actual order to restrict the approach of those fans or
after 14.30 hours to actually stop fans entering Leppinqs L a n e .

70.   I do not agree that we had lost control of the area by 14.17
      hours (2.17 pm).   Even at 2.30 pm it was not unduly
       alarming.  The real problems arose from about 2.35 pm.

71.   However, it d o e s n ’t make much difference because, as I have
       said at length earlier, it would not have been practical to
       try to control the crowd at a greater distance from the
       ground.  The numbers involved from 2.35 pm were so great
      that they would have overwhelmed any filters or barriers at
       the ends of Leppings Lane in exactly the same way that fci^ey
      overwhelmed the officers in the immediate vicinity of the
       turnstiles.  The most likely result would have been an angry
      break-through of thousands of fans, which would have
       resulted in them arriving at the turnstiles at a run and in
      a greater state of excitement, with even worse results.       As
       it was, the crowd could not be contained by a wrought-iron
      perimeter gate which was much stronger than any temporary
       barrier we could have placed at the ends of Leppings Lane.
      The crowd brushed aside the perimeter gates, when we tried
       to close them, taking a mounted policeman and his horse
      along with them.

72.    This crowd was unstoppable without hundreds more policeman
       with access to riot gear and other equipment and would have
       totally altered the nature of the occasion which should
       have been a pleasant afternoon of football.  Numerous
       occasions since then at home and abroad have shown how
       difficult it is to stop any crowd which is determined to
       get through.
V




    73.   I did not give an order to my men to try to do the
          impossible simply because it was impossible.  We tried to
          restrain them as best we could.  In the end, the only way
          was to do what the police in Sweden did only a week or so
          afterwards, despite having said in advance that they
          wouldn't do so, i.e. to open the gates and risk the fans
          without tickets getting inT in the hope of avoiding trouble
          outside the ground.  As I have said before, what happened
          next was the result of many accidents coming together.   On
          many other occasions, the only result would have been that
          fans without tickets would have had their way once again.
          The breaking of the barrier was the final event which caused
          so many deaths.  I had no means of anticipating that event.

    I have read through the above before signing it.     It is a true
    record of my answers to the allegations brought against me and I
    understand that it may be used in evidence in respect of the
    complaints         against me by the complainants and in any criminal
    proceedings/wh/ich may be instituted against me in respect of the
    events at rfillsbo^ough on 15th April, 1989
           *    /
    Dated ^rfPth1 /une, 1


    Signed,

    Superinte          r Marshall




                                         Page - 19
