                FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                445

3 Young Children’s Sub-Committee (Education and Family and Community Services Programme)
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes be approved so far as this Committee is concerned.

( n o t e : A copy of these minutes is printed under the Education Programme Committee.)

4 Adoptions Panel
  The Committee received and noted a summary of decisions taken by the Director of Social
Services based on recommendations made at the meetings of the Adoptions Panel held on 15th July
and 19th August, 1993.

5 Joint Consultative Committee (Sheffield City Council, Sheffield Health Authority and Sheffield
Family Health Services Authority)
  The Committee received and noted the minutes of the meeting of the Joint Consultative
Committee (Sheffield City Council, Sheffield Health Authority and Sheffield Family Health
Services Authority) held on 23rd June, 1993.

6 South Yorkshire Guardians Ad Litem and Reporting Officers Annual Report 1992/93
  The Committee received and noted a report of the Director of Social Services containing the
South Yorkshire Guardians Ad Litem and Reporting Officers Annual Report for 1992/93 as
required under the Children Act 1989 Guidance and Regulations Volume 7.

7 Revenue Budget Monitoring Position Statement as at 31st July, 1993
  The Committee considered a report of the Director of Social Services containing details of the
position of the Family and Community Services Department Revenue Budget as at 31st July, 1993.
   The report indicated that there were a number of areas which were currently showing an
overspend against the profiled estimate of expenditure and that these areas related to employees,
transport, grants, contributions and insurance, fostering/out-of-City placements, community care
fees and Sharrow Industries.
  The Director reported that (a) action was being undertaken to address the overspendings referred
to in the report and in particular referred to discussions to be undertaken with appropriate Chief
Officers concerning the operation of Sharrow Industries (b) there was a significant projected
shortfall in income from maintenance contributions and charges for homecare services and (c)
regular monitoring reports on the revenue budget would be submitted to future meetings of this
Committee.
          : That (i) the report now submitted containing details of the level of income and
re s o lv e d
expenditure for the Family and Community Services Department Revenue Budget for 1993/94 and
the proposed action to reduce expenditure and properly quantify out-turn income be noted; and
  (ii) the Director of Social Services be requested to (A) take action to reduce expenditure to
achieve a balanced budget as set out in the report and (B) prepare a detailed revenue budget
monitoring report for submission to the next meeting of this Committee.

8 Residential Accommodation for the Elderly—Review of Full Charge
  The Director of Social Services submitted a report outlining a proposal to review the full charge
for accommodation provided under Part III of the National Assistance Act 1948.
          : That (a) in accordance with Part III of the National Assistance Act 1948 approval be
re s o lv e d
given to an increase in the full charge for residential accommodation for the elderly from £264.20
per week to £271.07 per week as detailed in the report now submitted;
   (b) the revised full charge be applicable to Sheffield residents from 1st August, 1993; and
  (c) the revised full charge be applicable to other local authorities financially responsible for
residents in Sheffield’s Part III accommodation from 1st April, 1993.

9 Funding for Sheffield Hallam University Research into Facilities for Alcohol Related Problems in
Sheffield
  The Director of Social Services submitted a report which made reference to a request received
from the Assistant Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police requesting a donation of £200 towards
the cost of funding a research project into the options for improving local facilities for alcohol
related problems in Sheffield which was to be carried out by the Sheffield Hallam University.
446             FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

            : That approval be given for a contribution of £200 to be made towards a research project
re s o lv e d
into facilities for alcohol related problems in Sheffield to be carried out by the Sheffield Hallam
University as detailed in the report now submitted.

10 Value Added Tax (VAT) on Domestic Fuel
  The Director of Social Services submitted a report referring to the proposed imposition of Value
Added Tax (VAT) on domestic fuel and referring to a decision of this Committee at its meeting held
on 5th May, 1993 (page 47 of the printed minutes) to write to the Chancellor of the Exchequer
expressing this Committeee’s extreme concern at the imposition of VAT.
  The report contained a letter from the Paymaster General responding to this Committee’s
concern.
   The Chair expressed the view that the response did not address the concerns of this Committee in
its original letter and did not adequately address the issue of compensation for elderly persons and
families on low incomes.
           : That this Committee confirms its extreme concern at the Government’s proposed
re s o lv e d
imposition of VAT on domestic fuel and authorises the Director of Social Services to seek the help
of all Sheffield Members of Parliament to make further representations to the Chancellor of the
Exchequer including seeking a meeting with the Chancellor to urge him to abandon the proposed
imposition of VAT on domestic fuel.

11 Proposed Move of Psalter Lane Day Service from 57 Psalter Lane to a New Service Base
  The Committee considered a report of the Director of Social Services referring to previous
decisions of this Committee in respect of proposals to relocate the Psalter Lane Day Service from 57
Psalter Lane to a new base in the South West Division.
  The report set out the progress of user and carer consultations in respect of the proposed move,
        discussions with staff based at 57 Psalter Lane prior to the preparation of a Responding to
in form al
Change document and details of the arrangements for the new base to be located at Green Oak
View Elderly Persons Residential Unit.
re s o lv e d   : That (a) the report now submitted be noted; and
   (b) approval be given to the proposed relocation of the South West Day Service base as outlined
in the report.

12 Major Incident Response Plan
  The Director of Social Services submitted a report setting out the Family and Community
Services Departm ent’s proposed m ajor incident response plan.
  The report contained a copy of the Plan which outlined details of objectives, procedures,
volunteers and further activity required to ensure that the plan will operate effectively in the event
of a m ajor incident.
        : That (a) approval be given to the M ajor Incident Response Plan for the Family and
re s o lv e d
Community Services Department as outlined in the report now submitted; and
  (b) approval in principle be given to the funding for a service in the event of a disaster that
requires the organisation and co-ordination of psychological support services beyond the first 72
hours of the disaster.

13 Changes in the Division of Service Development and Planning, Family and Community Services
Department
  The Committee considered a report setting out proposals for the restructuring of the Family and
Community Services Departm ent’s Service Development and Planning Division including the
creation of the new posts of Information and Public Relations Officer and Senior Contracts Officer.
  The report attached as an appendix the proposed new structure for the Service Development and
Planning Division.
r e s o l v e d : That approval be given to the restructuring of the Family and Community Services
Departm ent’s Service Development and Planning Division including the redesignation and
regrading of posts and creation of new posts of Information and Public Relations Officer and Senior
Contracts Officer as outlined in the report now submitted.
