                            - City of Sheffield — •
                     Administration and Legal Department-




REPORT TO:            A1EGS



DATE OF COMMITTEE:    i8th SEPTEMBER 1989



SUBJECT:
                SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS



ORIGINATING OFFICER: MARK WEBSTER, ACTING HEAD OF DEPARTMENT


LIST OF 3ACKGRPUi»T PAPERS (As applicable and unless confidential/exempt*):




              INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                * Full details of wnat constitutes confidential-
                   exerr.pt infornatior. are available on request
      REPORT OF ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL DEPARTMENT CONCERNING
      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS TO SPECIAL MEETING OF THE MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE
      AND GENERAL SERVICES COMMITTEE

1.    Purpose of Report

      To update members upon the action taken as a result of the Inquiry of Lord
      Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Disaster and to enable members to
      give consideration to further action which is required.  This report
      contains a summary of the action which has been taken so far and
      enumerates a number of issues which require views from members.

2.,   Summary of Action Taken

2.1   Following the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report on the
       4th August, 1989, copies of the Report were made available in the Members
      Library.

2.2   A copy of the Interim recommendations contained in the Report is attached
       at Appendix A. The items marked with an asterisk required implementation
       prior to commencement of the football season.

2.3   Immediately after publication of the Report, the Acting Head of the
      Administration & Legal Department wrote to Sheffield Wednesday Football
      Club, Sheffield United Football Club and Sheffield Sports Stadium asking
       for confirmation of the action they had taken to activate those
       recommendations.

2.4   The Acting Head of the Administration & Legal Department also wrote to the
      Police, the Fire Service, the Building Surveyor and the Director of Health
      & Consumer Services for their views upon the interim recommendations and
      the action which needed to be taken as a matter of urgency.

2.5   On the 9th August, it became known that a pre-season match was taking
      place at Sheffield United Club.  To regulate the position, the Chief
      Executive, in the absence of the Acting Head of the Administration and
      Legal Department, issued an interim Safety Certificate to the Club.   This
      contained basic safety provisions and also made specific reference to the
      interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor, which required
      implementation forthwith.

2.6   The Chief Executive also issued a Notice of Amendment in respect of the
       certificate issued to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to reflect the
       items which needed immediate implementation pursuant to Lord Justice
      Taylor's interim recommendations.

2.7   The action of the Chief Executive was approved by the General Purposes
      Panel on the 17th August.  The General Purposes Panel also approved
      further amendments relating to the use of the North Stand at Sheffield
      Wednesday Football Club and the use of the North West Terrace at Sheffield
      Wednesday Football Club.  A copy of the resolution of the General Purposes
      Panel is attached at Appendix 2.

2.8   Most of the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor have been
       implemented. The following paragraph provides more detail about this.

3.    Implementation of Recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor

      Revised capacities have been calculated and the appropriate
      reduction made.  Arrangements have been made to count the number of
      spectators entering each self-contained area.  Written agreements have
been entered into with both the Football Clubs and the Police setting out
responsibilities for crowd safety and control and the filling of terraces.
Stewarding arrangements have been improved in accordance with Lord Justice
Taylor's interim recommendations.  Gates in radial or perimeter fences
have been painted in a distinctive colour.  The Football Clubs have
confirmed that gates to the pitch will be kept open during specified
activities.  Police Officers have been allocated in respect of each
perimeter fence.  Cutting equipment has been made available.   Inspections
of crush barriers have taken place and arrangements are in hand for
replacement of those affected by corrosion.  The question of layout of
barriers has also been addressed.  The Clubs have also inspected
turnstiles.  Signposting has been reviewed and also the information
printed on tickets.  Police planning has also been revised and the
co-ordination of emergency facilities.  The first aid and medical
facilities as required in recommendations 39 to 42 of Lord Justice Taylor
have also been effected.  Members should, however, note that a
satisfactory response has not been received from Sheffield Sports Stadium
concerning these general safety issues.

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
(a)    Revised capacities for calculation have been made in accordance
       with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide and a deduction of 15? made to
       improve the safety margin.  The revised capacity is reflected in
       the notice of amendment of the Safety Certificate.  Thus,
       recommendations 1 and 2 of Lord Justice Taylor have been
       implemented.

(b)   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club have indicated that they propose
       to limit the number of spectators entering each self contained pen
      or area using a computer system.   The detail of this is provided in
      the agreement they have entered into with the Police in accordance
      with recommendation 4 of Lord Justice Taylor.   It is not clear from
      this how they propose to achieve a closing of access to the pen or
      area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.   The Acting
      Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to the Club on
      the 16th August for clarification of this matter.   Response has not
      yet been received.

(c)   A copy of the agreement between the Club and the   Police, as required
       by recommendation 4 is attached.

(d)   In accordance with recommendation 5, the Club have agreed to
      appoint stewards on the perimeter track for the purpose of checking
      crowd conditions for possible overcrowding or distress.  There will
      be a need to revise the Safety Certificate to reflect the new
      levels of stewarding.

(e)   Discussions between the Football Club and Police are taking place
      and training sessions to ensure that officers and stewards are
      fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd
      densities, signs of distress and crowd dynamics. There is a need
      for enquiry to be made as to the full details of this.

(f)   In accordance with recommendation 7, the gates and perimeter fences
      have been painted in a different colour from the rest of the fence
      and marked "emergency exit''.

(g)   In accordance with recommendation 8, the requirement for perimeter
      fence gates to remain open during specified activities has been
      made a condition of the Safety Certificate.  Sheffield Wednesday
      Football Club have also confirmed that this will be done.
(h)   In accordance with recommendation 9, the   Club have confirmed that a
      Police Officer will be stationed at each   gate in the fence and will
      be easily identifiable by the stewards.    He will be able to make
      contact with the Police Control Room and   will be in control of that
      gate.

(i)   In accordance with recommendation 10, the provision of cutting
      equipment has been made a condition of the Safety Certificate.   The
      Club have also indicated that they have provided four sets of bolt
      cutters.  Two sets will be dispersed at each fence area, stored in
      boxes, clearly marked "emergency equipment".  The stewards for each
      area will be trained in the use of this equipment and it will be
      the policy of the Club to ensure each steward is regularly deployed
      in the same area with the same responsibilities.

(j)   In accordance with recommendation 11, the Club have confirmed that
      crush barriers have been inspected and that those showing signs of
      corrosion will be repaired or replaced.  The Acting Head of
      Administration and Legal Department has written to the Club asking
      for the details of inspections and details of which barriers have
      been repaired or replaced.  Site meetings have been arranged with
      the Building Surveyors, the Fire Service and Environmental Health
      Officers in order that further progress can be made in this area.

(k)   In accordance with recommendation 12, site meetings have been
      arranged with all interested parties to discuss this complex
      matter.

(1)   In accordance with recommendation 18, the turnstiles have been
       inspected.   The Club has provided a report of the examination.
       This is attached.   The Club have also provided statistics assessed
       by the Health and Safety Executive which assess the potential rate
       of flow.   It must be appreciated that this is purely speculative
       and further steps will have to be taken to undertake further tests.
       This will be essential to ensure compliance with recommendation 19.
       The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to the
       Club on the 17th August asking for this information for the third
       time.  It has not yet been supplied.

(m)   No action has* been taken, as far the Acting Head of Administration
       and Legal Department is aware to install closed circuit
       television.

(n)   In accordance with recommendation 22, the signposting has been
       reviewed.  An inspection has been undertaken by the Chief Licensing
       Officer who confirmed that it complied with recommendation 22.

(o)   In accordance with recommendation 23, the Club have confirmed that
      the printing of tickets has been reviewed and styled in accordance
      with the recommendation.  A copy has not yet been supplied.

(p)   In accordance with recommendation 24, the Club have confirmed that
      tickets will be printed with the request that spectators should be
      in position not later than 45 minutes before commencement of the
      game.

(q)   Recommendation 25 has not yet been addressed from the point of view
      of the Local Authority.

(r)   In accordance with recommendation 26, Mr. P. Hayes, Deputy Chief
      Constable has been designated as the Senior Officer.
(s)   With reference to recommendation 35, the Police and Ambulance
       Services have nominated senior officers.  Enquiries will need to be
       made to establish the proposed liaison.  Essentially, the
       co-ordination of emergency services is a matter for those
       Authorities.

(t)   The requirements of recommendation 39 have been incorporated in the
       amended Safety Certificate.  The requirement to employ a medical
       practitioner in accordance with recommendation 41 has also been
       made a condition of the Certificate.  The Club have confirmed that
       both these recommendations will be implemented.  Similarly, it has
       been made a condition of the revised Safety Certificate that one
       fully equipped ambulance where a crowd of 5,000 or more is
       anticipated shall be in attendance.  Again, this has been confirmed
       by the Club.  It will be necessary for the Local Authority to take
       the advice of the Ambulance and Emergency Services to ensure that
       compliance with recommendations 40 and 43 is achieved.

Sheffield United Football Club

(a)   A revised calculation of the capacity in accordance with
       recommendations 1 and 2 have been made by the Building Surveyor and
       incorporated in the interim Safety Certificate issued to the Club.

(b)   The Club proposes to use the computerised counting system to limit
       the number of spectators entering each terraced area to comply with
      recommendation 3. When the number of spectators admitted to any of
       the terraced area reaches within 10? of the capacity figure, the
      computer monitor operator will inform Police Control who will take
      the appropriate action to close down the necessary turnstiles.    The
      Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department has written to
      the Club seeking exact details of the procedures to be followed.
      They responded on the 21st August indicating that the computer
      monitor operator will inform Police Control by telephone and Police
      Officers will then be given instructions to instruct the turnstile
      operator to close down the necessary turnstiles.   Consideration
      will need to be given as to whether or not this is the best
      practical means of ensuring that the terrace is closed off before
      its maximum capacity is reached.

(c)   In accordance with recommendation 4, the Club has supplied a   copy
       of the written agreement with the Police setting out
       responsibilities for crowd safety and control.

(d)   In accordance with recommendation 5, the Club have indicated that
       they propose to deploy six crowd safety stewards on the perimeter
       track to monitor specific areas for possible overcrowding and
       distress.  It will be necessary to revise the stewarding figures in
       the Safety Certificate to reflect this fact.

(e)   With reference to recommendation 6 that Police Officers and
       stewards are briefed and trained with regard to recognition of
       crowd densities and signs of distress, I have not had any
       information to the effect that action has been taken to implement
       this recommendation.

(f)   With reference to recommendation 7, the perimeter fence gates have
       been removed at Sheffield United Football Club.  The Club have
       painted the frame of the gate in a different colour and erected
       emergency exit signs above each gate.  The Chief Licensing Officer
       has inspected this.
To comply with recommendation 9, the Club have confirmed that
Police Officers will be provided as required and their identity
known to stewards and other officers in the vicinity.  The Police
Officers will have radios to make contact with the Control Room.
It should be noted that the agreement entered into with the Police
also deals with stewarding aspects.

To comply with recommendation 10, the Club have confirmed that they
will provide four bolt croppers.  These will be used by stewards of
the Club.  The Club have asked the Fire Service to provide
instructions for stewards in their use.

In accordance with recommendations 11 and 12, the Club have
supplied a letter from their Consultant Engineer, Messrs. Eastwood
and Partners who have confirmed that a visual inspection of the
barriers has been carried out.  The letter confirms that some
rusting has occurred but that none of the barriers is sufficiently
infected by rust for it to be necessary to carry out emergency
strengthening or replacement before commencement of the football
season.  They also confirmed that a review of barriers has revealed
that in some places they do not comply fully with the criteria in
the Green Guide and that drawings are being prepared showing the
extra barriers which will be required so that tenders can be
invited.  This matter will need to be given full consideration by
the Building Surveyor and Fire Service and a further report
supplied to members in due course.

With reference to recommendation 18, the Club have instructed an
independent turnstile servicing company to carry out an inspection.
A copy of their report has not been supplied.

In considering recommendation 19, the Club have responded as
follows: "I can confirm that the correlation between the viewing
areas of the Spion Kop (southern end), New South Stand, John Street
Stand and Terraces and the turnstiles serving those areas is such
that all spectators intended to be admitted to those areas can pass
through within one hour.  In the Bramall Lane End Stand and Terrace
areas on the Spion Kop (main area) servicing is necessary to some
turnstiles before this criteria can be met.  We hope to complete
the work prior to the start of the season on the 22nd August but if
this is not possible, will reduce the capacity in those areas
accordingly and inform you prior to the game taking place” . This
matter has been referred to the Building Surveyor and the Fire
Service for their comment for independent checks to be made.

I have no information that closed circuit television has been
installed.

The Club have confirmed that the signposting has been reviewed in
accordance with recommendation 22.  The Chief Licensing Officer has
also inspected the ground and confirmed that this is the case.

The Club has supplied a copy of their current tickets which seem to
conform with recommendation 23.

The Club do not request supporters to be in-their places by a
specified time.

The comments made in relation to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
are equally pertinent to Sheffield United.  This is also the case
concerning the recommendations pertinent to co-ordination of
               emergency services.

      (q)      To comply with recommendation 39, the Club have confirmed that they
               have made arrangements with the St. John Ambulance Brigade to
               ensure at least one trained First Aider for 1,000 spectators is in
               attendance.  This has been made a condition of the interim safety
               certificate.

      (r)      With reference to recommendation 40, consultation with need   to take
               place with the Ambulance Service and other appropriate
               professionals to discuss this recommendation.

      (s)      The Club have confirmed that they will employ a medical
               practitioner in accordance with the provisions of recommendation
                41. This is also a condition of the Safety Certificate.   The Club
               have not confirmed that he is trained and competent in advanced
                First Aid.  Again, this is a matter which needs to be taken up with
                the appropriate professionals.

      (t)      With reference to recommendation 42, the Club have confirmed that
               they have made arrangements with the Ambulance Authority for the
               necessary ambulance cover.   Again, this is a provision in the
               interim Safety Certificate.

      (u)      With reference to recommendation 43, this is a matter which will
                require consultation by the Local Authority with the appropriate
               professional bodies.

3.3   Sheffield Sports Stadium

      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to Sheffield
      Sports Stadium asking for the proposals on the implementation of the
      interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor.   The Club have not
      provided the necessary details.   The Building Surveyor, the Fire Service
      and Environmental Health Officers are to visit the Sports Stadium to
      undertake a detailed inspection of the Ground with a view to establishing
      whether or not it is safe for the admission of spectators.   The Acting
      Head of Administration and Legal Department has written to the Sports
      Stadium indicating that unless a satisfactory response is received to our
      letter seeking their -proposals for implementation of the interim
      recommendations, then the Council have no choice but to consider issuing a
      prohibition notice relating to the premises.   It is anticipated that a
      full report will be made to the General Purposes Panel at the end of
      September once the members of the Advisory Group have reported back
      following their inspections.

4.    Matters for Consideration

4.1   Visits

      At its meetings on the 17th August, the General Purposes Panel stated an
      intention to visit all sports grounds with the City. All three Clubs have
      been notified of this request and a suitable date for a visit will be
      arranged.

4.2   The function of members in the future.

      It is clearly essential that there is a tightening up of existing
      procedures and a clarification of the terms of reference for dealing with
      the issue of Safety of Sports Grounds. At present, the General Purposes
      Panel has delegated authority to deal with Safety of Sports Grounds
      issues.  In the past, matters have been referred to the General Purposes
      Panel for decisions as and when they were necessary.  Members have
      indicated an intention to participate more fully in this area;  indeed,
      this is required by the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor.
      The function of the Advisory Group must be to advise members and assist
      them in providing enough information for members to make an informed and
      rational decision as and when required.  The Advisory Group is made up of
      the Police, the Fire Service, the Building Surveyor, a representative from,
      the Department of Health and Consumer Services and the Ambulance Service
      since the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor were published.
      Prior to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, the meetings of the Advisory Group
      were not as tightly controlled as they should have been.  This has now
      been improved.  Arrangements have already been made for the Acting Head of
      Administration and Legal Department to nominate a senior officer to Chair
      the meetings of the Advisory Group and for full detailed minutes to be
      taken. When the approved departmental structure has been completed, one
      of the new Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department (Legal) will
      undertake-the function.  It is suggested that one way of members becoming
      more involved in this issue would be for them to be supplied with agendas
      of the meetings prior to the meeting taking place and minutes of meetings
      which have taken place.  It is recommended that this is implemented.

4.3   Inspections

      There is a statutory duty upon the local authority to inspect designated
      sports grounds at least on an annual basis.  In his interim
      recommendations, Lord Justice Taylor has said that he feels more frequent
      inspections would be of benefit.  It is suggested that it may be
      appropriate to undertake quarterly inspections, once during the close
      season, once at the commencement of the season, once in the middle of the
      season and once at the end.  This would obviously require a substantial
      devotion of resources.  It is recommended that this is implemented.

4.4   Emergency Procedures

      In the normal course of events, matters will obviously be referred to a
      Sub-Committee of the Council for consideration.  The delegated authority
      in respect of these functions is vested the General Purposes Panel.
      Recent events have highlighted the need for a proper emergency system to
      be set up.  In vie* of the fact that the Licensing Department is part of
      the Administration & Legal Department, it would seem logical for this
      emergency delegation to be granted to the Acting Head of Administration &
      Legal Department in consultation with the chair of the General Purposes
      Panel.  Members are asked to comment upon this.

4.5   Resources

      The existing structure of the Licensing Section is shown in the attached
      diagram.  It consists of a Chief Licensing Officer, a Principal Licensing
      Officer, three Licensing Officers and an Administrative Assistant.  The
      Section was originally comprised of five staff which were increased to six
      by the addition of the Administrative Assistant's post in 1986 upon the
      abolition of South Yorkshire County Council.  The increase was to take
      account of the additional responsibilities taken on by the Section upon
      abolition of South Yorkshire County Council.

      The Section is responsible for the processing, issuing, monitoring and
      enforcing of numerous licences and consents;  for example hackney carriage
      licences and private hire licences, public entertainment licences, cinema
      licences, theatre licences, street collection permits, sex shop permits,
      mini bus licences and the licensing of sports grounds.  The work requires
a comprehensive knowledge of the relevant legislation and much of the work
is carried out under delegated powers.

The Effect of the Hillsborough Disaster

This has had repercussions throughout the Section since the Chief
Licensing Officer has been engaged full time since April in dealing with
the Inquiry and subsequently the interim recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor.

One of the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor is that "each Local
Authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring,
enforcing, reviewing, amending and renewing safety certificates.” It is
clear that at present, this requires a substantial devotion of officer
time and that this is likely to continue indefinitely.  Whilst the Chief
Licensing Officer is engaged full time on this task, other important
duties are neglected.

It is clear that further resources need to be devoted to the issue of
safety of sports grounds.  It is anticipated that it will require between
75? and 100? of one persons time to deal with safety of sports grounds
issues in the short term. This will entail dealing with the existing
designated sports grounds in the City, namely Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club, Sheffield United Football Club and Sheffield Sports Stadium.   It is
hoped that by next Spring, a workable and well understood administrative
system will be in effect which should mean that there will be no need to
repeat much of the work which has been done to improve the administrative
systems.  However, the World Student Games Facilities are currently under
construction and will have a significant impact in respect of the work on
safety of sports grounds.

It is anticipated that additional staff will be required to fulfill these
functions.   A proposed new structure is shown in diagram form and attached
to this report.   The proposal is that an additional post of Chief
Licensing Officer with specific responsibility for sports grounds is
created.   There is also a need for an additional Licensing Officer who
will have direct responsibility to the Chief Licensing Officer for sports
grounds.   Also attached to this report are draft job descriptions.  In
addition to their specific duties relating to sports grounds, it is
anticipated that the'se two officers will as and when necessary provide
support to the existing structure which will continue to deal with the
general licensing functions.

The benefits of the changes

The increase in staff should ensure that the Licensing Section can
continue to function efficiently and provide a reasonable level of
service.  It should enable the Licensing Section to improve its service
delivery and enable a review of licensing systems to be undertaken, and
proper enforcement of legislation to take place.   During the last two
years, it has become clear that the quantity of work carried out within
the Licensing Section has increased.  There has been an increase in the
number of private hire vehicle licences issued in particular as well as a
general increase in most areas.  The World Student Games Facilities will
also in all probability require public entertainments licences requiring
additional devotion of time from the Licensing Section.   In the light of
the Hillsborough Disaster, it is important that a proper allocation of
resources is made and consideration needs to be given to the allocation of
resources and priorities in other areas.
The cost of the proposals

Taking account of the recent pay offer, the cost of implementing the
proposals in a full year will total £26,460, taking account of salaries
and additional costs.   Clearly, some of this will be recoverable by way of
licensing fees which can be charged for the issue and amendment of safety
certificates for sports grounds.   There is statutory authority to enable
the Council to charge fees for the issue, amendment and transfer of Safety
Certificates.   The fee charged must be commensurate with the work actually
and reasonably done.   No charge has yet been made for the issue and
amendment of certificate since the first amendment and certificate which
were issued with those issued recently.   The original certificate issued
to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club was that which had been issued by the
former County Council.   The Acting Head of Administration and Legal
Department has sought the views of the various bodies which have an imput
into Safety of Sports Grounds issues to enable a full discussion to take
place about the levels of charges which should be levied.   A full report
will be made to members once further information is available in this
respect.  For the future, however, it is anticipated that in accordance
with Lord Justice Taylor’s recommendations, certificates will be issued on
an annual basis and thus a charge will be made annually.   This charge will
reflect the inspections which take place and the administrative
procedures.   There may be a need for additional devotion of resources to
cover the necessary expenditure.

Recommendations

Members are asked:-

      Tfo note the contents of this report and to authorise the creation
       of two additional posts of Chief Licensing Officer and Licensing
       Officer to deal with Safety of Sports Grounds issues subject to the
       proposals being discussed and agreed with the appropriate T r a d e r
       Unions in line with the Council's (Responding to Change) agreement.




1RPADW/JS
                                                                                                                             1

                                       CHAPTER 24 - THE RECOM M ENDATIONS

  3 15 . The recommendations which follow are the minimum necessary to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and other
information I have received. They complement the recommendations which Mr Justice Poppiewell set out
after his inquiry at Bradford.

   3 16 . Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
started forthwith and completed as soon as possible.
           **
Maximum Capacities for Terraces
*             1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained.'the Safety Certificate
            should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

            A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
            another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

*            2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green
            Guide (“th e Green Guide figure”) subject to the following qualifications:-

            (a) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure", proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
                which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
                in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide:

            (b) after assessing “the Green Guide figure”, a deduction of 15% should be made to improve the safety
                margin.

*            3. Arrangements should be made:-

            (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
                figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
                ticketing arrangement by counting or otherwise, and

        (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


Filling and Monitoring Terraces
*             4. There.should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
    •         responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
            ether terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. .Any
            variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

*       ‘
        5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
      area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the poiice are monitoring it) whose
    ~ sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
      period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other steward
      or police presence. H e should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
      below, and by radio to the control room.


Fences and Gates
               6. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
            duties under Recommendation 5 above, shouid be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
            crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
            demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
            different crowd densities.

*            7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
            different colour from the rest of the fence and marked ‘"Emergency Exit’*.
*     8. Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
     when,spectators are on the teoacs.

*       9. There should be is respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
     a police officer authorised to deride whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowding.
     The officer so authorised is respect of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so by all
     stewards and police officers in that vicinity. H e should be able to make radio contact with the control room
     either himself or via an officer dose at hand.

*    * 1 0 . Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the dub at each ground where there
     are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to reiease numbers of spectators if
     necessary. Agreement shoujd be reached as to whether the-equipment should be used by police, the fire
     brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it s hould be a decisionof a
     nominated senior police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
*’      11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
     to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

*      12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area shouid be reviewed immediately to ensure that it V
     complies with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not. the assessment of the
     maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
     reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
       13. There should be an immediate review of each Safer.' Certificate by the responsible local authorin',
     which should consult the dub in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
     ambulance service and the building authority. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
     object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
     substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
     recommendations in this report.

       14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
     which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

       15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the iocai authority at least once annually and each
     Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


        16. Each local authority shouid review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing. (
     amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
     accountable administrative structure whereby the functions-of the locai authority are regularly and-
     effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
     with the local authority’s rules.

        17. To assist the locai authoriry in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
     of appropri&te members of its own stall, represen.tatives.-of the police, of -the fire and ambulance services, of
     the building authority, of the ciub and of a recognised supporters’ club. The Advisory Group's terms of
     reference shouid encompass ail matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
     ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority,
     and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it shouid be required to produce regular
     written reports for consideration by the local authority.


Duties of each Football Club
*      18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
     inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capabie of admitting spectators at the rate
     anticipated.
*        ,19. The correlation between       viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
       as to. ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
       turnstiles within one hour. If that cannot be done.- the capacity of that viewing area shouid be reduced
       accordingly.

*       . 20. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be
       reached and arrangements shouid be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
       operators for this purpose.                              .

        ■ 21» Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
       concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

*        22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
       reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
       and dear and shouid be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
       area.

•*       23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and dear and shouid correlate absolutely with
       the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
       should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

»        24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time shouid be reviewed
      " by dubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for
        admitting spectators to the ground.

         25. Each club shouid consult with a recognised supporters’ club as to the provision of pre-match
       entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


Police Planning
-*■      26. The C h ief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
       should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football dub and local authority
       concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

*        27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of ail
       officers on duty there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and. if any
       is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

*       28. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium should enable the police to cope with
       any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
       sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

*       29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
       Crowd safety shouid be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

          30. There should be available in the police control room the results of all dosed circnit television
       monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
       at turnstiles or o f numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room shouid be skiiied
       in the interpretation and use of these data.


Communications
          31. There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
      . received, evaluated and answered. The radio system shouid be such as to give operators in the control room
        priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels shouid be
        used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
        sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.
                                                                                       v
           32. To complement radio communications, there shouid be a completely separate system of land lines
         with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

           33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
         areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
         announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
         noise in the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every
         match.

          , 34» t/se shouid be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
         Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
         the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


    Co-ordination of Emergency Services
    *     .     "^ e       ^re and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
         liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

*         36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
        ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
        spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
        concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readiiv available in the control
        rooms of each of the emergency services.

*         37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from ail three
        services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
        within the ground itself.

*         38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
        the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and whv
        they are required.


First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
*         ^ ‘ There shou,d at “ eh stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1.000 spectators. The
        club shouid have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

          40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
        equipment to be maintained-within them should be specified by the local authorin' after taking professional
        medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

*         41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
        any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be
        present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and shouid remain until naif an hour after the end of the
        match. His whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
        contactable.

*         42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambuiance authorin' should be in
        attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5.000 or more.

          43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected shouid
        be specined by the local authority after consultation with the ambuiance service and should be made a
        requirement of the Safery Certificate.
     AGREEMENT BETWEEN

SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

          AND THE

    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
 Filling and Monitoring Terraces

 The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

 terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

 terraced area.   The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

 any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

 the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding
    *•
       •»
 or distress.  The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

 showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




 The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

 group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

— dercxde whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

 overcrowding.




 All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

 at, all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

 Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

 ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




 The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

 issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

 track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

 their attention by these stewards.




 Cutting Equipment

 The Club will provide and make 'readily available suitable and sufficient

 cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

 numbers of spectators if necessary.   This cutting equipment will be operated

 by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.   The use of such

 equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who
This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

referred to as 'The   Police') and Sheffield United Football Club   (hereafter

referred to as 'The   Club').




This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

recommendation four   of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

Lord Justice Taylor   into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster   of 15 April 1989.




The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows:-




Maximum Capacities for Terraces

The Club will be responsible for limiting the number~tff~spectators entering

each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.

                                      \

The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

number of persons passing through each turnstile.     The Spion Kop is divided

into two pens.   One pen is entered via turnstiles in John Street, the other by

turnstiles in Shoreham Street.    The Club will provide stewards to prevent a

cross flow of spectators from one pen to the other.

         :                                '                                        v
The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

approaching capacity.   The Club will be responsible for closing off further

access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.        The

Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
Liaison

Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following matters:-

     i)       the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

              to the separate supporter groups;

          *




    ii)       the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




   iii)       any information in relation to crowd problems;




    iv)       the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

              to each group;




     v)       an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

              through the turnstiles;




    vi)       where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

               corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting'

               spectators to the ground.




Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

at the ground.       It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

between the referee’s room and the police control room.




The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

being called to the ground.       These include routes of access, rendezvous

points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.        The Police will

liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

ilr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any vari'afion of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED .......................   on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club




SIGNED              .......      on behalf of South Yorkshire Police




DATE
                               ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT

PRESENT

P02i                                              PRINCIPAL SOLICITOR


POIf                                              ASSISTANT SOLICITOR


POId                                        CHIEF LICENSING OFFICER




S c .6.               PRINCIPAL LICENSING
                      OFFICER.


                                              I                          I
S c . 4/5      LICENSING                 LICENSING               LICENSING
               OFFICER                   OFFICER                 OFFICER



S c . 1/3                                                                                 AOMIN.
                                                                                          ASST.

                           ASSISTANT       HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT


PROPOSED



P02i                                              PRINCIPAL SOLICITOR
                                                            I
POIf                                              ASSISTANT SOLICITOR


                                  I
POId                       CHIEF LICENSING                                        CHIEF LICENSING
                           OFFICER (GENERAL)                                     OFFICERfSPORTS GROUNDS)




S c .6.                    PRINCIPAL LICENSING
                           O f f i c e r (g e n e r a l )
                                  i

                                                  I                  I
S c . 4/5   LICENSING                    LICENSING              LICENSING               LICENSING
            OFFICER                      OFFICER                OFFICER                 OFFICER




Sc.    1.2/3                                                                 CLERICAL
                                                                             OFFICER
gS-                             City of Sheffield
                                JOB DESCRIPTION
          DEPARTMENT
                         Administration and Legal



DIVISION/SECTION
                         Licensing



            POST TITLE
                         Chief Licensing Officer    (General)




               GRADE
/
                         POId



    RESPONSIBLE TO
                         Assistant Solicitor



RESPONSIBLE FOR
                         Principal Licensing Officers
                         Licensing Officers
                         Adrian. Assistant




      * HOLIDAY AND
    SICKNESS RELIEF

                         To be covered by Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds)
                         and Assistant Solicitor
                         To provide cover for Chief Licensing Officer (Sports
                         Grounds) and Principal Licensing Officer




        PURPOSE OF JOB



                         To ensure that the statutory licensing functiqns of the
                         Council are maintained and enforced.




                                Working for
    >
 SPECIFIC DUTIES
            AND
RESPONSIBILITIES

        These duties must at all times be carried out in compliance with the
        Council's Equal Opportunities Policy.

        1.     To ensure that the licensing functions of the City Council from time
               to time allocated to the Administration and Legal Department are
               properly carried out in accordance with statutory requirements and
             fcthe Council's policies.

        2.   To assist the Assistant Solicitor in ensuring the proper supervision,
             training and discipline of all employees in the Licensing Section.

        3.   To prepare reports on licensing matters for the Assistant Solicitor
             and appropriate Committees, and to institute, maintain and operate
             proper procedures to ensure that all relevant matters are brought
             to the attention of any Committee or Officer of the Council required
             to make a decision on any of the licensing matters referred to in (1)
             above.

        4.   To liaise with Members, other departments of the Council   and outside
              bodies on all matters affecting the Licensing Section.

        5.   To maintain a service to the general public on licensing matters,
              including dealing with enquiries and correspondence.

        6.   So far as resources permit, to ensure that the requirements imposed
              upon licensees by law and by licence conditions are complied with
              and in this connection to copordinate the activities of the Council's
              Off icers and the police, fire and other relevant authorities.

        7.   To be responsible for all monies received by the Licensing Section
              and to maintain proper records to the satisfaction of the City
              Treasurer.                                               -t

        8.   To take statements and to prepare reports on any matters w her e legal
             proceedings may be contemplated and to appear in any Court proceedings
             which involve the Council's licensing function.

        9.   To assimilate and implement the increasing items of new legislation
              relevant to the Council's licensing functions, which is both varied
             and complex.

       10.   A ssistance in research of new legislation and the relevant case
              law affecting the licensing function.




       k n y other duties and responsibilities as may be determined after negotiation
       between management, the post holder, and the appropriate Trade Unions.




     ISSUE DATE
                                            iy        ot     She                | /?*4
                                                                                 u
                                      JOB DESCRIPTION
        DEPARTMENT
                            Administration and Legal




DIVISION/SECTION
                            Licensing



         POSTTiTLE
                            Principal Licensing Officer



            GRADE
                            Scale 6



  RESPONSIBLE TO
                            Chief Licensing Officer
             . .   -   ..




RESPONSIBLE “OR
                             Licensing Officers
                             Admin. Assistant




     HOLIDAY AND
  SICKNESS RELIEF           To be covered by Chief Licensing Officer

                            To provide cover for Chief Licensing Officer




   = URPOSEOF J 0 3
                             To ensure that the statutory licensing functions
                             of the Council are maintained and enforced.




R6333                                 Working for Sheffield
      ■Public Entertainments
       1.    Ensure efficient operation of the public entertainments licensing systj^ ^__
       2.    To provide information, advice and liaison to and between other office!
             and authorities.                                                   j          __
       3.    Presentation of cases and providing information relating to public
             enlertainments licensing to the General Purposes Panel.
             Monitoring and suggesting improvements to the public entertainments system.

       Other: Duties
       5.    To provide, maintain and enforce the relevant statutory licensing functions
             of the Council, including:-
             (a)     specific delegated powers in relation to licensing and preparation
                     of prosecution;files and giving evidence in Court on behalf of th$^
                     Council.   - ;                                                  ( )
                                                                                     v_y
             (b)     Preparation and presentation of reports Eo'G.P. Panel.

             (c)     An organisational role particularly in complex licensing cases
                     and prosecution files.

             (d)     Management responsibilities in particular'in relation to allocation
                     of work and guidance and supervision of staff.

             (e)     General duties e.g. setting licence fees, preparation of estimates
                     etc. inrrelation to the Council's licensing functions.




     c os w sis nsv ■’i191 22       s   s **   * * - * or* ;      z    ~   * ' - • ^*
.csr, snd "tjis srorcjrists Tr*scs «ni,cns.


   O r z i s s         Pc* ^cv.




    iS 3 ’J 5 DATS




                                  Working for Sheffield
                                  JOB DESCRIPTION
    DEPARTMENT
                     Administration and Legal



DIVISION/SECTION
                     Licensing




      =OST TITLE
                     Licensing Officer



          GRADE
                     Sc.4/5



 RESPONSIBLE TO
                     Chief Licensing Officer


RESPONSIBLE FOR
                              -




     HOLIDAY AND
 SICKNESS RELIEF     To be covered by other Licensing Officers.

                     To provide cover for other Licensing Officers.




 PURPOSE O F J 0 3                       '                        .   •

                     To ensure that the statutory licensing functions of the
                     Council are maintained and enforced.




                                  Working for Sheffield
            ANO
RESPONSIBILITIES
1.           7'; provide, maintain and enforce the relevant statutory licensing functions of t\.
             C ^uncil, including:-
             ( ) receiving, checking and processing applications, references etc. which include
                 (i) dealing with the general public;
                (ii) handling cash - including receipting and paying in to City Treasurer;
               (iii) liaising with other officers, departments and authorities;
                (iv) issuing licences, permits, etc. where appropriate;
                 (v) administration of testing arrangements for vehicles and drivers
                     (e.g. m edicalsH
                (vi) the proper exercise of a personal statutory responsibility in' connection
                     with the suspension of vehicle licences;
               (vii) to properly exercise their statutory powers under the relevant legislation
                     e.g. requirement to produce -documentation;
              Cviii) maintaining accurate records.
             io) enforcement duties which includes
                (i) ensuring licencees comply with statutory standards;
               (ii) enforcement duties from interviewing individual involved and including
                    all steps up to presentation of evidence in court;
              (iii) giving statements (e.g. to the police)
               (iv) preparing prosecution files;
                (v) giving evidence in court.
         (c) dealing with general queries and complaints from the public and other
             departments.

         (d) assisting the Principal Licensing Officer and Chief Licensing Officer in
             the execution of the overall functions of the section.
     n. «t




Ti*.5 s s d ’*t lss r.ust at alX        bs           cut                   •’"is Ccunc— I s
E-ual Ocz 5***HI*i 'Z*




              ■ l SUE D A i z




                                        Working for Sheffield
                                    J 0 3 DESCRIPTION
          DEPARTMENT
                        Administration and Legal
                        .. .              .
             %”    '
              •*
    DIVISION/SECTION
                        Licensing



           POST TITLE
                        Chief Licensing Officer    (Sports Grounds)



               GRADE
                        POld




     RESPONSIBLE TO
                        Assistant Solicitor




    RESPONSIBLE FOR
                         Li censing Officer

      —




       • HOLIDAY AND
     SICKNESS RELIEF     To be covered by Chief Licensing Officer (General)
                                          Assistant Solicitor
i                        To*provide cover for Chief Licensing Officer (General)
                                              Principal Licensing Officer




                          To ensure that the statutory licensing functions relating to
                          Safety of Sports Grounds of the Council are mainta in ed and
                          enforced.




                                 Workina tor
?• :K?       igf^^'-si•;• £ „ .':"r-- n ■-.-Arr--r.//L;^ ^ ^ I ^ j ^ ^r^^.^.^>C^^;..:;^■/X-V■^'■•4'^5^^.'-v^'V'^-'
             i-^rn. Ifcf." '     * •■-^i        *> •          '' ’~''*'*
?
          rlC DUTIES           • .--          . . „   :..T *; > :   .*                               .
               *. AND                          *'"         ;                                             — .
         JNSJBJUTIES

            These duties must at all times be carried out in compliance with the
            Council’s Equal Opportunities Policy.
                <%
            1 o fc To ensure thct the licensing functions relating to Safety of Sports Grounds
                 »and the implementation of the Safety of Sports Grounds Licensing System
                   of the City Council from time to time allocated to the Administration and
               - “L e g a l •Department are properly carried out in accordance with statutory
                   requirements and the Council's policies.

            2i       To liaise as required with personnel at a senior level in other
                     departments of the City Council and Public Service Bodies.

            3.       To assist the Assistant Solicitor in ensuring the proper supervision,                     training
                     and discipline of all employees in the Licensing Section.

           4. To prepare reports on licensing matters for the Assistant Solicitor and
               appropriate Committees, and to institute, maintain and operate proper
               procedures to ensure that all relevant matters ore brought to the attention
               of any Committee of Officer of the Council require to mak« c decision on any
               of the licensing matters referred to in.(l) above.

           5. To   liaise with Members, other departments of the Council and outside
               bodies on all matters relating to Safety of Sports Grounds affecting the
               Licensing Section;

           6.        To   maintain a service to the general public on licensing matters relating
                     to   Safety of Sports Grounds including dealing with enquiries end cor responder

           7.        ao   far as resources permit, to ensure that the -r_squiremerts imposed upon
                      licensees by law and by Licence conditions are comolied with, and in this
                      connection to co-ordinate the activities of the Council's Officers and
                      the police, fire and other relevant authorities.

           8.        To be responsible far all monies received by the Licensing Section and to
                      maintain proper recrods to the satisfaction of the City Treasurer.

           9.        To take statements and to preoore reports on any matters where legal oroct
                      may be contemplated and to appear in any Court proceedinas which involve
                      the Council's licensing function referred to 11) above.

          * >-.       To cssimi 1 ote and implement the increasing items of new ieaisiction r e i e v c n t
                     to the Council's licensing functions referred to in (1) c D O v e wnich is b o t h
                     varied and complex.

          ii.        Assistancein research of new legislation and the relevant case                 law affecting
                     the licensing function referred to (1) above.




           kr,y otn.er curies z r.z responsibilities as r.ay be d5terr.ir.ed -f'er r.ec*t;
           between nianageaer.t, -he cost holssr, anr the appropriate Z r aa= Union;,.




         ISSUE DATE
                                  City of Sheffield
                                  JOB DESCRIPTION
    DEPARTMENT
                   Administration and Legal



DIVISION/SECTION

                   Licensi ng


      POST TITLE
                   Licensing Officer




          GRADE
                   S c . 4/5



 RESPONSIBLE TO
                   Chief Licensing Officer       (Sports Grounds)




RESPONSIBLE FOR


                   -




     HOLIDAY AND
 SICKNESS RELIEF
                   To          covered by other Licensing Officers

                   To provide cover for other Licensing Officers




 PJ=v?OS=.OF JOB

                   To ensure that the statutory licensing functions   of the
                   Council are m a i n t a i n e d and enforced.




                                  Workina for o?
 SPECIFIC DUTIES
            AND
RESPONSIBILITIES

                  :ies must at all tines be carried out in compliance with tn
                  j Ecual Opportunities Policy.


             To provide, m aintain and enforc e the relevant statutory licensing
             functions relating to Safety of Sports Grounds Of the Council,
           „ i ncludi ng :-

            (ai     receiving, ch eck i n g and processing applications,   references etc.
                    wh ic h i n c l u d e s :

                    (i)  dealing w i t h •the general public,-
                   (i i )handling cash - including receipting gnd payin g in to City Trecsu'
                  (iii)  liaising with other officers, departments ana authorities,-
                   (iv)  issuing licences, permits, etc. where appropriate;
                    (v)  to properly ex ercise their statutory powers under the relevant
                         legislation e.g. requirement to produce documentatipn;
                   (vi ) ma int a i n i n g ac curate records.

            (b)     enforcement duties w hich includes.-'-

                    (i) ensuring licensees comply with statutory standards;
                   (ii) enforcement duties from interviewing individual involved and
                        including all steps up to presentation < j f evi den ce in court;
                  (iii) giving statements (e.g. to the police)
                   (iv) preparing p r os ecu ti on files:
                    (v) giving evid en ce in court.

            (c)     dealing with general   queries and complaints from the public and
                    other departments.

            (d)     a ss isting the Chief Licensing Officers   in the execution   of the
                    overall functions of the section.




       Any other duties and responsibilities as nay be determined a f t e r .negotiation
       between management, the cost holder, and the appropriate Trade Unions.
           UPDATING REPORT TO MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES COMMITTEE
                               SUBJECT: SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS


         PURPOSE OF REPORT:

         This report is an appendage to the general report upon this issue.   That
         report gives details of the responses which have been received from the
         respective football clubs within the City to the proposals of Lord Justice
         Taylor in his interim recommendations pursuant to the enquiries into the
         Hillsborough Disaster.  There were a number of oustanding issues referred
         to in the general report.   The Acting Head of Administration and Legal
         Department has taken these matters up with the various clubs and this
         report updates that position.

1.       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

         The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to Sheffield
         Wednesday Football Club on 5th September, 1989 in respect of the matter
         which did not seem to have been dealt within accordance with the interim
         recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor.  Copies of the letter of 5th
         September and the response of the Club are attached.  The matter was
         referred to the General Purposes Panel on 8th September who confirmed that
         they were satisfied that the Club had responded appropriately and that it
         was not therefore appropriate to consider the issue of a prohibition
         notice.  There is now a need to consider in detail via the Advisory Group
         the responses of the Club.

2.       SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

         The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to Sheffield
         United Football Club on 6th September.    A copy of that letter and the
         Club's responses are attached.   The matter was referred to the General
         Purposes Panel on 8th September who confirmed that since the Club had
         responded in accordance with the interim recommendations of Lord Justice
         Taylor, it was not appropriate to consider the issue of a prohibition
         notice at this stage.. Again, the matter will need to be considered in
         detail through the Advisory    Group and matters referred to members in due
         course.

3.   SHEFFIELD SPORTS STADIUM

         Owlerton Stadium have now responded in accordance with the interim
         recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor.   The Advisory Group is meeting on
         14th September to consider whether or not the ground is safe.     The General
         Purposes Panel will meet on15th September to    consider whether or noc to
         issue a prohibition notice.    This will depend upon the content of the
         report it receives from the Advisory Group. Copies of the relevant
         correspondence are attached for members information.

4.   RECOMMENDATION

         Members are asked to note the contents of this report.

HB7AAR
                                                                        U3£,vC <=^7                       .




                                                                             ■*




                              JHii/JB/D34
                              5th September, 1989



    ;.r. ;iaca.rtiAi,
    ^heii'iexvi Wednesday Footuall Club PLC,
     slilsborougn,
    5 . IL.S »• X.+*-UtU.•
        . . L ' - j r , : '


    So i;*W



    joar iir. ‘iacKreii,

               Safety of          ts ^rounds

    I refer to previous correspondence in connection with this setter and your
    letter of 24th August.  The General Purposes Panel of the City Council met on
    the 4th September lSd* to discuss the outstanding iteias of the interia
    recommendations c£ Lora Justice Taylor.

    As far as the scatters which required icpleEentation before the coataencetaent of
    tne football season are concerned, there are three outstanding aatters:-

    (ii) Ale hough j oa nave confiraea that the Police are satisfied that the
         information on ticKets is urutaoi^uous and correlates with infonaation
         providrii. inai^e and outside the ground, you have not yet supplied a copy of
         tne reviseu tickets to enable the Local Authority to satisfy itself that
         tiiiS     1.Xi ItiC'C tiO

    (b) You have not confirmed that tne nedical practitioner you propose to eaploy
        is trained ass: competent in advanced first aid*

    Please al3o supply, as requested, a copy of the "stewarding plan" showing the
    location of tu rn stauards.

    I look, forward to hearing froic you with a response to these particular matters
    and also a substantive response to ay letter of 17th August.    The niembers of th®
    General Purposes Panel indicated that unless a satisfactory response is received
    by the close of Business on the 7th September, 1989, they feel they have no
    option but to consider the issue of a Prohibition Notice in respect of the



j\ !\ iouzj& aln ciV




                                                             L i.   A1iU *        ctt* 6
    Acting EeaePof Department
                                                                    t               fy l/r r t   i   (y



    pa/ 61                                          7340U4 ” Mrs. Uoodhead
 our Ref:         GHM/JB/D34

 7th September 1989


 Mr. M. Webster,
 Acting Head of Department,
 City of Sheffield >
 Administration and Legal Department,
 Town Hall,
 Sheffield.
 SI 2HH


 Dear Sir,

 Re:       Safety of Sports Grounds Act

 I am in receipt of your letter dated 5th September 1989.

 In respect of the points raised please find enclosed a copy of our matchday
 tickets for the current season. The wording on the tickets for visiting
 supporters was printed at the request of the police.

 In additioij I am able to confirm that the additional medical practitioner is
 trained and competent in advanced First Aid.

 The stewarding plan has been completed but at present it is still in draft form
 as the Police and ourselves have been making     minor amendments at each ofour two
 heme matches. Once the plan has been finalised I will have it typed and forward
 a copy.

 Withrregard to your letter dated 17th August     1989, containing         Officers comments,
 I will deal with the points that were raisedin order:

 pg 1 1(a)(i)           Work completed.
. pg 1 l(a))ii)         In hand, we are awaiting however for the relevant Fire Officer,
                        who is at present on holiday, to return to duty for
                        clarification.
 pg    1   1(b)         Work completed by service engineer.
 pg    1   K c)         Completed.
 pg    1   1(d)         Noted. Relevant staff informed.
 pg    1   1(e)         The subject of negotiations between Fire Service and Eastwood
                        and Partners re re-siting.
 pg 1 1(f)              In hand. Awaiting exact specifications frcm Fire Service and
                        Building Surveyors Dept.
 pg 1 1(g)              As 1(f) above.
 pg 1 1(h)              Work in progress, not yet completed.

                                                   continued
                                                                Sheffield Wednesday FO

SBMTO            >4LW              M-W
SOW                      HOW     i 19    ’ *)WLS ^V-^XORWIOI                                CITY
SEAT                     SEAT       ;1'3   19TH AUSUST 4969                                 >
                                    - .•   Kick Qf^F-3 .0 0 p m
'ENTRANCE               ft ENTRANCE ft    NTH. LEPP.INQS WING
GANGWAY                 ft GANGWAY             ft            GANGVWYft                                 ROW:         19
 . AOULT                     JUV tf OAP                  JUV & OAP             ADULT                   SEAT:          13
£        7,00            *      a    . oo                *      4.00         * 7 .0 0




                                                         YOU ARE REQUESTED TO TAKE UP YOUR
                                                         POSITION 45 MINS. BEFORE KICK-OFF

STAND           WS2      STAND        WS2                 BARCLAYS LEAGUE DIVISION ONE
ROW                      ROW          27                  OWLS -V- EVERTON
SEAT                     SEAT          58                 30TH AUGUST 1989
                                                          Kick Off 7.30pm
ENTRANCE              C ENTRANCE C                       WEST STAND VISITOR

GANGWAY               W GANGWAY               W          GANGWAY^                                      ROW:         27

                             JUV & OAP                   JUV ft OAP           ADULT                    SEAT:          58
    ADULT
« 7.00                   £ 4.00                          « 4.00              £ 7.00
TO BE GIVEN U P          TO B E GIVEN U P                                THIS PORTION TO BEHE7AINEQ




                Sheffield Wednesday F.C. pic
                  HlllSbdrough Sheffield
          5

    i'    I                                                                                                         UJ
                                                                                        f® lo                  iu   oc
                                                                                        En       <o                 UJ
                                                                                        SJ       C/3           £  -J
                                                                                                               OE - J
                                                                                        2.X      0}               UJ
 X i                                                                                             S                  to
                                                                                        215 £ £                u . UJ
                                                                                        a >22                  o s
      H i3                                                                              1 c      S’            uj 2
    viTt*                                                Z «*                           .a °     i             = 3
    ■i                                                                                  s a>     _             < c
    <if   >
     92 - i                                                                             O .o     to
     Sll =                                                                              ^   Co
                                                                                            C
                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                 £             2 O
     ;x !j                                                                              O
                                                                                                               00 oc
     *2* j
    ■»   <-=s                                                                           £ §      o                  &
                                      HOMt f A1IS OMIT
                                                                                           o
          9



                             To&ty     PfNISTONf ROAO 4.61.
City of Sheffield             M etropolitan District

Roger Pensam, FCIS. MBIM. Solicitor                                                      Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department                                                                       Town Hall,
                                                                                         Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference        FW

Your reference       __
                      DC/DMF
Data                  6th September, 1989


Sheffield United Football Club,
Bramall Lane,
SHEFFIELD.
S2 4SU


Dear Sirs,

Re: Safety of Sports Grounds

I refer to previous correspondence in connection with this matter.  I refer
particularly to the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor which
required implementation prior to commencement of the football season.  The
General Purposes Panel of the City Council recently gave consideration to those
matters which required implementation prior to commencement of the football
season and remained outstanding.  These -appear to be as follows:-

(a)     With reference to recommendation 41, I have not received confirmation from
        you that the medical practitioner you propose to employ is qualified in
        advanced first aid.

(b)     I refer to your letter of 16th August in which you indicated servicing was
        necessary to some turnstiles in the Bramall Lane stand and terrace areas
        and the Spion Kop area. I look forward to hearing from you with some
        indication as to whether or not this servicing has been completed and the
        effect upon capacity in those areas.

(c)     The final point is a minor one, but please would you confirm that stewards
        have now been trained in the use of bnut croppers.  You indicated that
        there was a proposal for the Fire Service to undertake such training.

The members of the General Purposes Panel indicated that unless a satisfactory
response is received to these items by the close of business on 7th September
1989, they felt they had no option but to consider the issue of a Pror.ibition
Notice in respect of the Sports Ground.  I therefore look forward to hearing
from you.

Yours faithfully,                __________




                                                                                                               > r.




PL/61                                                                      734004 -                  Woodnead            'i iii
                          For telephone enquiries on this matter pieaS9 ring......................   ..(STD Code 0742)       R.
                                                    Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
                               'T h e F a n tiy C h A "
            Bramali Lane. Sheffield 32 4SU Tel: 0742 738988 Fax; 0742 723030

           DC/EMF


           7 September 1989


           Mr. M. WebstBr,
           Acting-HBatf of Department,
           Administration and Legal Department,
           Town llall,
           Sheffield,
           SI 2HH


           Dear Sir,

           Re: Safety of Sports Ground

           Further to your letter date 6 September, I set out below our replies
           to the points therein:-

            a)   I confirm that our medical practitioner is competent in advanced
                 first aid.

            b)   I confirm that thB necessary turnstile servicing has been completed.

            c)   The stewards who wilb.be operating the bolt croppers have been
                 trained in their use. In addition the fire service is organising
                 a half day course to incorporate fire extinguisher and cutting
                 equipment use which will serve as a useful refresher course.

            Yours faithfully,



            DAVID CAPPER,
            Company Secretary




Director*: R.J.Braalay (Chairman), D.Dooley (Managing Director )■ A.H. Layer, M.A. Wragg, R. Wragg, P.O. WooUioum
            Company Secretary: D. Capper,       Team Manager: D.T. Basaett,        England Rag. No. 61364
^le: Safety at Sports Grounds ~ Qvlerton Stadiua

I refer to previous correspondence in connection with this matter.         The General
Purposes Panel of the City Council net on 4th September V i f i ' ) to discuss the

coaaencement or the football season pursuant Co the rccosaaeRdatlans of Lord




        I nave not receiveu   /our

(o)     fou nave woe supplied a copy of
        the Police.

(c)   You have not supplied details or the checks you have aiui cor.c*r*r.ir. j th«
       layout of barriers.

(d)   You have not supplied details of. the checks you have aace upon tns flow
       rate of turnstiles in accordance wits cnc interia recosaiaeji«Jati»>ns.

(e)   You have not supplied details of the nutaber of first aidars in relation 6©
       the nuabers of spectators you propose to eaploy.

(f)   You have not contirnec that the medical practitioner you propose to eapley
       is trainee in advanced first aid.  ftor have you supplied inforaatiaa mm t©
       his proposes location at tne ground or confirmed that means have beea
       estabiisned to ensure that he is icuaediately contactaole.




                                                                                !4 * D

FS/61                                             734004 - H r 3. Woodhead
Inese items ail required impleoentatioa prior co comaenceisent of th« football
season on 22nd August 1989.   The General Purposes Panel stated that unless a
full satisfactory response is received by the close of business on 7th September :
!9cJ9, tney will consider the issue of a Prohibition Notice in respect of the
Sports Groun d. I look forward to hearing froa you.

'fours faithfully,                                       ^




.iCwlU^      Ul‘      i'lt
 S heffield S p o r t s S tadium
 ______________________ (OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM L T D .)—____________________


                      THE STADIUM             .   OWLERTON             .   SHEFFIELD S6 2DE                                                        Tel. Sheffield
                                                                                                                                                (0742) • 343074

G ut'sra! M anager:   J. S. CARTER


                                                                                                                               7th September, 1^89.
Mrf;. Woodhead,
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
Administration & Legal Department,
Town Hall,
Sheffield,
S1.2HH.


D ear Si r s ,

                                   Re: Safety at Sports Grounds - Owlerton Stadium


     We hereby acknowledge your letter of 5th September that arrived this morning.
We would like to make the point that if Mr. Bownes had not kindly faxed a copy of
the letter through to us yesterday that it would have been impossible to give you a
reply by the deadline set (7th September, 1989. i.e. tonight).


        a)        Ground Capacities as advised by-Eastwood & Partners

                  1)        The Sportsmans' Tavern..                                                                                         600
                  2)        The Sportsmans' Tavern Terrace - 3,078 Less 15$                                                            2,616

                  3)       Panorama Room.                                                                                                    601

                  M        Main Stand Seating;                                                                                               667
                  5)       Greyhound Terrace - 1,615 Less 1555                                                                        1,372
                  6)       Greyhound Bar".                                                                                                   220
                  7)        East Terrace - 2,592 Less 15$                                                                             2,203


                                                                                           TOTAL.                                     8,279



                  N.B.       Imposed Limit 4,000.

        b)       We have been in touch with Chief Inspector Beal who advises us that policing
                 is not required for greyhound racing, stock car racing and speedway.
                 Policing however is required for Rugby matches and they will only provide
                 such policing if the Stadium is issued with a Safety Certificate.




                        Diairman 31id Managing Director- K. S HUNT Directors: P. 0. 8RA0I0HD. H \A . T CtJRUFN, J S. CAHIfcR. A G MARRIOTT
             R e g is te re d in E n g la n d No. 707406   R eg. O ffic e : TH E S T A D IU M .   P E N IS T O N E R O A D , S H E F F IE LD S 6 2D E .
 ____________________(OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM LTD.)

                                                                                                                                          Tel. Sheffield
                 THE STADIUM              .   OWLERTON            .   SHEFFIELD S6 2DE
                                                                                                                                         (0742) - 343074

>.irnt-Mi Manager- J. S. CARTER


                                                                         -   2>
Mrsi. Woodhead.                                                                                                           7th September, 1989 •



       c)      A random sample of the barriers and perimeter walls on the-back straight
               terrace have been load tested. Stress tests indicate that the barriers
               and walls’will safely withstand Category 'B* loading. The general condition
               of the barrier is good.                                                  ^

               The opening between the perimeter wall and rows of barriers satisfies _
               the requirement of l:he Green Guide in respect of the slope of the terrace.
               However, the spacing of the individual barriers, along the rows does
               not strictly comply with the suggested arrangement shown in Figure 3 of the
               Green Guide. We would therefore expect the capacity of that particular
               area of terrace to be reduced accordingly.

       d)     We have checked the turnstiles which are in use three nights a week and we
              can average ten people per minute per turnstile.  On this calculation with
              ten turnstiles operating at the main entrance we would easily accommodate
              the imposed limit within the Statutory Hour.  For sports other than Rugby
              League we can accommodate expected crowds within thirty minutes.

               The turnstiles themselves are awaiting mechanical checks by Mayer Turnstiles,

       e)     The Interim Report requires us to have 1 first aid member per 1,000                                                                   of crowd,
               and we usually have at least double this for stock car racing.

       f)     Our medical prac-titioner for motor sports is:-
               Dr\ Colin Shawcross,
               *100 Firth Park Road,
               Sheffield, 5.
               (Tel.No. 425908 )

               He is retained and approved by the R.A.C. and is qualified to the highest
               degree in advanced first aid.

               He is located in the Private Box with the Duty Safety Officer throughout
               the evening where he can observe the racing and where he can reach the
               First Aid Room.  He is contactable by telephone and the Duty Officer's radicj
                                                                                            J
               As far as the 156 greyhound racing days are concerned we have been unable    i
               to obtain the services of a Doctor as yet as racing clashes with surgery
               hours. We are arranging with Para Medical Organisations that a member of
               their staff is present at the First Aid Room at every meeting and would
               ask the General Purposes Panel to consider our request that this measure
               would suffice for the time being.




                       Chairman and Manasmq Oaector 1 S HUN’    Directors P 0 fflWWOHu ' U ,   ’ CORulN.   j   S UAmIcH, A G MAHHiy’ ’
            R e g is te re d in E n g la n d No. 707406   Reg, O ffic e : THE S T A D IU M ,   P E N IS '!O N E H O AD , S H E F F IE LD S 6 2DE,
                              (OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM L T D .)----------

                                                                                                                                                             Tel. Sheflield
                THE STADIUM                  .    OWLERTON                  ,    SHEFFIELD S6 2DE
                                                                                                                                                            (0742) - 343074

   • .il Manager:   J. S. CARTER



                                                                                                                                           7tli September, 1989-




       In view of the pressures caused by the Hi HlKborouKh Tragedy and Lord Cliiel
Justice Toy3o r 'w Interim Report on the Officer Working Party Lhe General Purposes Pnncl,
together with the support fiervicess roqu.1 red for the staging of Hugby League and
root.ball, wc fce.1 that we have no alternative L° abandon p.lom,! for the opening of the
Ki.ncfcium to the paying public, for both Football and Rugby League for the coming
ijeason. This would not preclude the Stadium being used for training,schooling and
practice.     We hove asked our legal advisors to write to you separately on this point
at; they are in the process of applying to the Home Office for the de-designate on
of the Stadium under The Safety and Sports Grounds Act 1975.




                                                                                     Ycurn fuithfully,




                      □ t f tif r w m iinU War:SJifl(! ' Jtri*ru»r-K Is MUNI D iH JPtow P £) BHAtJIUHU, ! LA   ’ C'CIHEMN, -I S CAMlLH, A I M A R R iU ll
           Registered m fcngland No, 70740b Meg. Office : THE STADIUM, PLNISTONF ROAD, SHEWILLD S6 20E.
