     REPORT OF THE ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
     __________________ TO THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL - / 7 - g - -S'9


SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - ISSUE AND AMENDMENT OF SAFETY
CERTIFICATES


PURPOSE 07 REPORT
      To advise members of interim   action which has been taken in
respect of the issue of a general Safety Certificate to Sheffield United
Football Club pic., and in respect of the amendment of the general Safety
Certificate issued by South Yorkshire County Council to Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club pic.


INTRODUCTION
      Members have already been made aware of the fact that Lord Justice
Taylor published his interim report upon the Hillsborough Disaster on 4th
August, 1989. A copy of the interim recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor are attached at Appendix A. A number of the interim
recommendations are specified as requiring implementation before
commencement of the 1989/90 Season. These items are asterisked' in the
interim recommendations. The official date for commencement of the
1989/90 Season is the 19th August, 1989. However, it was drawn to the
attention of the Council that a football match was to take place at
Sheffield United Football Club on Saturday, 12th August, 1989. In view of
the fact that a Safety Certificate had not been issued to Sheffield United
Football Club, urgent consideration was therefore given to the matter on
Friday, 11th August, 1989. Additionally, consideration was given to the
serving of a notice of amendment of certificate in respect of Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club.

SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB
      When it came to the attention of officers that a pre-season football
match was to take place at Sheffield United Football Club on 12th August,
consideration was given to whether an interim safety certificate should be
issued to the Club prior to a match taking place. Members are referred to
recommendation 14 of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations which states
that where a sports stadium has been designated under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 and "a safety certificate has not yet been issued, the
Local Authority should proceed forthwith to issue a certificate.   In the
light of this recommendation, a general safety certificate was issued by
the Chief Executive on 11th August, 1989. A copy of the certificate
issued is attached at Appendix B. This contains what can be best
described as basic safety provisions and particularly incorporates those
recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor which he considered should be
implemented immediately.
      Condition 7 specifies the number of first-aid attendants which are
considered necessary taking into account Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations in this respect.
      Condition 7(c) also requires the attendance of the medical
practitioner as recommended by Lord Justice Taylor.
      Coi.uv.   .   ^   j   c.iu u              ioi dkceadattce of'the
imbul'llfel'Service wfelre a|£propriate, *%gain?as recommended by Lord Justice
Taylor.
       Conditions 22-28 also take account of Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations. The capacity levels have also been amended. Members
will appreciate that this is one of the key issues considered.
             SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
                   There is already ia force a Safety Certificate in respect of
             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. This certificate was issued by South
             Yorkshire County Council. A notice of amendment of the Safety Certificate
             has therefore been served. The Notice of Amendment was served as a matter
             of urgency to give the Club the maximum available time to comply with its
             requirements. This was served upon the Club on 11th August, 1989. The
             first football match is to take place at Sheffield Wednesday Club on 19th
             August, 1989. The amendments and additions reflect the recommendations of
             Lord Justice Taylor which he required to be implemented before the
             commencement of the new football season. A copy of the notice of
             amendment is attached at Appendix C. The amendments relate to first-aid
             provisions and capacities at the ground. The additional conditions
             incorporate the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor.
                   Members of the Advisory Group and representatives from Sheffield
             Wednesday Football Club have-had lengthy discussions about the use of the
             north west terrace at the Sports Ground. The terrace is divided into an
             upper and lower area. It is considered that it is reasonably safe to use "
             the upper area but no use should be made of the lower area at the moment.
             One option would be to prohibit the use of the entire north west terrace.
             However, the upper portion is considered to be reasonably safe and the
             police have indicated that for operational purposes they would like to be
             able to utilise a part of the upper portion of the terrace. The
             suggestion has been made by them as a result of the interim
             recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor sinpe it is suggested in the
             interim report that the police should have contingency plans todeal with
             the problem of large numbers of ticketless fans arriving at football
             grounds. If use is made of that portion of the ground, fans will gain
             access by turnstiles servicing only that area and the perimeter gate at
             the back of the area will remain open during the match.- There is no
             access to the pitch area from the portion of the stand which is proposed
             to be in use.
                   The amended Safety Certificate envisages that use will be made of
             both the upper and lower areas of the north west terrace.  It is therefore
             necessary to issue a further notice of amendment either specifying that no
             use of the west terrace should be made or amending the capacity and
             Condition 10 to reflect the fact that only the upper area should be used.
                   A copy of the Sheffield Wednesday General Safety Certificate is to
             be found at Appendix 4).

              GENERAL ISSUES
                   The whole issue of Safety of Sports Grounds will be the subject of a
             detailed report to the Policy Committee at its meeting in September,
             1989.

             RECOMMENDATIONS
                   The Panel is recommended

             1.   To confirm the action of the Chief Executive in issuing an interim
                  Safety Certificate to Sheffield United Football Club.

             2.   To confirm the action of the Chief Executive in amending the'current
                  certificate for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

             3.   To authorise the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
                  to issue a further notice of amendment in respect of the certificate
                  issued to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (as amended) as
                  follows:-


MS1ABR/PGT
(i)     Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further
        amended to state that the maximum capacity for the upper area
        of the north west terrace shall be 2,300.

(ii)    Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further
        amended to specify that the ma.ximum total capacity for the
        Sports Ground shall be 43,724.

(iii)   For the sake of clarity, additional Condition 10 of the
        amended Certificate shall be amended to reflect the fact that
        only the upper part of the terracing of the north west
        terrace shall be used.



        August, 1989              MARK WEBSTER
                                  Acting Head of Administration and
                                  Legal Department, Town Hall,
                                  SHEFFIELD    SI 2HH




MS1ABR/PGT
                                CH APTER 24 - THE RECOMMENDATIONS

   315. The recommendations which follow are the minimum necessary to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and other
information I have received. They complement the recommendations which Mr lastiee Popplewell set out
after his inquiry at Bradford.

   316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
started forthwith and completed as soon as possible.

Maximum Capacities for Teitaces
★     1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
    should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

    A pen or area i.s to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
    another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

★    2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green
    Guide (“the Green Guide figure”) subject to the following qualifications:-

    (a) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure”, proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
        which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
        in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide:

    (b) after assessing “the Green Guide figure”, a deduction of 15% should be made to improve the safety
        margin.

★     3. Arrangements should be made:-

    (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
        figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
        ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

    (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


Filling and Monitoring Terraces
★     4. There should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
    responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
    other terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
    variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

★     S. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
    area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
    sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
    period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition'to any other steward
    or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
    below, and by radio to the control room.


Fences and Gates
      6. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terracedareas and especially those with
    duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
    crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
                                                        desiiiS(fe^;W:enaMte«ste»a*ds«iandi»officers;:to recognise
    diiferent crowuaensuies.

★     7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
    different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “Emergency Exit”.



                                                        57
★    8. Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
    when spectators are on the terrace.

★     9. There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
    a police officer authorised todecide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieveovercTOwding.
    The officer so authorised in respectof each gate should be identified foreach match and known to be so by all
    stewards and police officers in that vicinity. He should be able to make radio contact with the control room
    either himself or via an officer close at hand.

★     10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there
    are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
    necessary* Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by poiice. the fire
    brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a decision of a
    nominated senior police officer.at the ground.


Crush Barriers
★      11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
    to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

★     12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
    complies with the criteria-contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not. the assessment of the
    maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
    reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
      13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible local authority',
    which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
    ambulance service and the building authority. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
    object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
    substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
    recommendations in this report.

      14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
    which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

      15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
    Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


       16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
    amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
    accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
    effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
    with the local authority’s rules.

       17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
    of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services, of
    the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters' club. The Advisory Group's terms of
    reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
    ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority,
    and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
    written reports for consideration by the local authority.


Dirties o f fcach Football Club
★     18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
    inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
    anticipated.


                                                        58
                                                                             -




        ★ •      ML' Tiie.correlatioa betweeneach viewtits -area in the.staiiaja sad the turnstiles serving it should be such




                                                                        __r~—y of the area se r w l b y them Is sOwot to be




        ★      ■ 22. AM signposting far spectator both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
                reviewed. I t should, ia relation to die arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple




i           ■— the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
;              should contain information necessary toguide spectators once inside the ground.
                                         ,                               .          . . .
    •
;              by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arranges
;              admitting spectators to the ground.




        P olice P la n n in g




        ★         27. The <



                         8C[



        ★
               Crowd safety should be the pmzmmmt consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

                  30.

                                                                                            e control room should be skilled
                in the interpretation and use of these data.




                                                                                                            the control room
                                                                                 l#ffl
                                                                          e airwaves. Consideration should be given to
                                                                         noise.




                                                                  59
      32. To complement radio communications. there should be a completely separate system of land lines
    with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

      33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
    areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
    announcements should beprecededby a toedsignal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
    noise in the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every
    match.

      34. Use should be Bade where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
    Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
    the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services
★     35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
    liaison concerning crowd safety at each s<adium.

★     36. Before each match at a designa&d stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
    ambulance service are fives fall detaii& abaut the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
    spectators expected, tkasr likely mates af entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
    concerning the control or movement of t&e crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
    rooms of each of the emsnsency serricsa.

★     37. Contingency plaas for the arrival a i each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
    services should be reviewed. They shoeM include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
    within the ground itself.

★     38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
    the arrival of emergency services and shcaid be informed when such services are called as to where and why
    they are required.
                                   •*
First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
★     39. Thereshouldbeateachstadiamateachmatchatleastonetrainedfirstaiderper 1.000spectators.The
    club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

      40. There should be ax each stadium soe or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
    equipment to be maintained-within them should be specified by the local authority' after taking professional
    medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

★     41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
    any medical exigency at the ground. H e should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be
    present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
    match. His whereabouts should be known w those in the police control room and he should be immediately
    contactable.

★     42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
    attendance at all matches with an expected crowd o f5.000 or more.

      43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
    be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
    requirement of the Safety Certificate.
                        Metropolitan District




Ourreference                                             Chi«fExecutiv«
                     FW/BJ®                              Ian L Podmore

Your reference                                           Town Hall.
                     DC/A BP
                                                         Sheffield S1.2HH
Date                                                     Telephone 73 40 00
                     lltfa August, 1989



       Sheffield United Football Club Pic,
       Bramall Lane,
       SHEFFIELD.
       S2 4FU


       Dear Sirs,

       Re: Safety of Sports Grounds - Hillsborough Inquiry

       The City Council has decided that in view of the recommendations.of Lord
       Justice Taylor pursuant to the Inquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster, it is
       appropriate for an interim Safety Certificate to be issued to Sheffield
       United Football Club.

       I, therefore, enclose for your attention, a copy of the Safety Certificate
       which has been issued. You will note that it contains basic safety
       provisions and also incorporates the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor
       which he considered should be implemented immediately.

       The Council is in the process of reviewing the conditions which should be
       attached to the Safety Certificate and it is likely that this will be
       concluded in the near future and you will be issued with a new final Safety
       Certificate.

       I should also say that in the intervening period, it is likely that
       amendments will be made to the Certificate you have been issued with today
       and you should, therefore, regard the Certificate as temporary.

        Please acknowledge receipt of the Certificate.

       Yours faithfully,




        Chief Executive




        HB6AAR/JJJ
                          SHh'PFTRTJD CITY COUNCIL


                    SAFETY OF SPORTS C T C M S ACT, 1975
                        GENERAL SaFET? CERTIFICATE


Address of premises for which            Sheffield United Sports Ground,
this Certificate is issued               R-ramal 1. Lane, Sheffield

Occupier of the premises                 Sheffield United Football Club
and Holder of this Certificate           Limited

Use of the premises in respect           Football Matches.
of which this Certificate is issued      Religious Conventions.


1.     This Certificate is issued by Sheffield City Council in ^respect of
       the premises described above, being a Sports Ground designated by
       Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as a
       ground requiring a Safety Certificate.

2.      The terms and conditions set out in the Schedules attached hereto are
       hereby imposed.

3.      The tprms and conditions hereby imposed are those which the Sheffield
       City Council consider necessary or expedient to secure reasonable
       safety at the Sports Ground when it is in use for an activity in
       respect of which this Certificate is issued.

4.      The words used in this Certificate and the Schedules attached hereto
       have the meaning assigned to than by Schedule 1 to this Certificate
       and Section 17 of the Act.

5.     The Schedules and Plan attached hereto all form part of this
       Certificate.

6.     This Certificate commences on the    12th    _ day of   August       One
       thousand nine hundred and eighty nine for an indefinite period.




       Date                 9 . A? ? 9   Signed

                                                  Chief Executive on behalf
                                                  of and duly authorised by
                                                  the Sheffield City Council.
                             SCHEDULE 1

                          SHffwrwn CITY COUNCIL


Interpretation of General Safety Certificates issued by the Council

Word/Phrase             Meaning

•Sse Art                The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 including any
       •»               modification or re-enactment thereof and any
                        subordinate legislation made thereunder.

Authorised Officer      Any police officer, any officer of the South
                        Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority, or any
                        officer of the Sheffield City Council who is
                        authorised in writing.

The Certificate          The written General Safety Certificate issued by
                         the Council under the Act to the Holder of which
                         this interpretation document forms part.

The Council              The Sheffield City Council.

The Guide                The current edition of the "Guide to Safety at
                         Sports Grounds" published by HM Government or any-
                         succeeding code or guidance produced by HM
                         Government.

The Holder               The person to whan the general safety certificate
                         has been issued.

Specified Activity       Any sporting event (including football matches) and
                         any any religious event and any public
                         entertainment for which a licence issued by the
                         Council is in force.

Spectator                Has the meaning assigned to it by the Act.

The Sports Ground        Sheffield United Sports Ground.
                                    SCHEDULE 2

                  Safety of Sports Grounds Certificate Conditions




l.Tbe Holder shall appoint in writing at least one Safety Officer who has full
  authority to (a) take responsibility for safety at the ground and (b)
  implement and supervise safety measures. A Safety Officer shall (a) be in
  charge of the Sports Ground and the Holders Employees and (b) be in
  attendance at the Sports Ground and in direct personal communication with a
  central control point during a specified activity.


2.The Holder (and the Safety Officer(s)) shall take all necessary precautions
  for the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to the Sports Ground and
  shall ensure that all responsible persons (as defined in Section 12(2) of
  the Act) are completely familiar with their duties under that Act and this
  certificate.


3.Where for reasons of safety the Council gives notice to the Holder that the
  Sports Ground or any section or sections of it must not be used for the
  accomodation of spectators the Holder shall not permit any areas so
  indicated to be used.


4.The Holder shall provide and maintain such signs or notices of such type,
  size and design as the Council may frcm time to time require for reasons of
  public safety. The Bolder shall ensure that the signs or notices so
  required are clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all times.


5.The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no materials that
  are capable of being used as missiles are accessible to spectators.


6.Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act the Holder shall
  not cause or permit the Sports Ground or any of its installations to be
  altered (which term shall exclude minor remedial works which do not in any
  ■way affect the safety of the Sports Ground) in any manner whatsoever without
  the prior written consent of the Council. In addition, no temporary
  structure shall be installed without the prior written consent of the
  Council. The Holder shall supply the Council with copies of such plans,
  specifications and calculations as the Council may reasonably require to
  enable any application for such consent to be considered and shall comply
  with any conditions attached to that consent.


7. fa)        Holder shall provide and maintain at the Sports Ground to the
  s^is?6a#feioEr: of the "Council a suitably equipped first aid roam and shall
  axxciiiye iox attendance of such number of qualified first aid attendants as
      'Council may require but in any event there shall be in attendance at
  least one first aid attendant for every 1,000 spectators. The attendants
  duties shall only relate to the administering of first aid.

 (b) The first aid roan shall be capable of being lit by both the general
 lighting and the emergency lighting and shall be easily identified by means
 of signs.
        (c) the Holder shall employ at least one medical practitioner (in addition
      • to any medical practitioner enployed to treat players ) to be present at each
        Specified Activity and available to deal with any medical exigency at the
        Sports Ground. He/she shall be trained.and competent in advanced first aid.
        Ms/she shall be present at the Sports Ground at least one hour before kick .
        off and must remain until half an hour after the end of the Specified
        Activity. The medical practitioner must be inmediately contactable and
        his/her whereabouts knewn to the Police Control Room.
              to
        (d) The Holder shall arrange with South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
        Service for the attendance of at least one fully equipped ambulance at a
        Specified Activity where 5,000 or more spectators are expected to attend.

  8. All press personnel shall be capable of immediate identification by means of
     distinctive dress.


      9.In the event of a spectator being injured in the Sports Ground, the Holder
        shall (within 72 hours of the injury occuring) submit to the Council a full
        written report on the circumstances of the injury. The Bolder shall also
        supply such additional information as the Council may require.


10.    The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every specified activity of a
       Chief Safety Steward and such number of" Safety Stewards as are specified in
       Schedule 3.


11.    The Holder shall ensure that the Safety Stewards are:-
       (a) fit and capable to carry out their duties;

        (b) properly trained and instructed;

        (c) readily identifiable by dress;

        (d) provided with written instructions as to their tasks/duties.

       (e) aged between 18 and 65 years unless in the circumstances of a particular
       case the Council permit an older or younger person to be employed.

12.    The written instructions given to stewards must include the following tasks
       and duties. Stewards must:

       (a) Under the direction of the Safety Officer or the Chief Steward prevent
       overcrowding by ensuring the crowd limits in various parts of the Sports
       Ground are complied with.

         (b) Prevent spectators, as far as possible, from climbing fences and other
         structures (e.g. floodlight pylons), and frcm standing on seats. Where by
        virtue of the scale of the incident stewards are unable to prevent this,
         they must immediately report the matter to the nearest Authorised Officer or
       . to- t^®*CIi-ief'',SfeeKw±‘-or'thss*Safety O fficer?

        (c) Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear.

       (d) Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence among spectators
       which may affect spectator safety, reporting their findings to the Chief
       Steward or the Safety Officer.
'4   ■


               {«) Know the location of and be able to operate effectively the
               fire-fighting equipment at the Sports Ground.

               (f) Know the location of the first aid roan and any first aid equipment kept
               elsewtare.

               (g) Be fully conversant with any methods or signals used to alert staff that
               an emergency has arisen.
                     to
               (h) Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and suspect packages,
               reporting such findings inmediately to the nearest Authorised Officer or the
               Chief Steward or the Safety Officer.

               (i) Canply   promptly with any instruction given in an emergency fcy an
               Authorised   Officer, the Chief Steward or the Safety Officer.
               (j) Remain   at their allocated locations as instructed unless authorised or
               instructed   to do otherwise by an Authorised Officer, the Chief Steward or
               the Safety   Officer.

               (k) Report to the Safety Officer any damage or defect which is likely to
               pose a threat to spectator safety eg. a damaged crush barrier.

               (1) Open the exit doors/gates and secure than in the open position on the
               initiation of the emergency procedure or when instructed to do so by the
               Safety Officer, the Chief Steward or an Authorised Officer.


         13. Training exercises organised by the Safety Officer relating to the duties of
             stewards shall be held at least once every three months. A written record
             of the exercises shall be kept.

         14. All exit doors and gates for use fcy spectators in both ordinary evacuation
              and emergency evacuation situations shall be manned by Stewards in
              accordance with schedule 4. The other duties detailed in schedule 4 shall
            . be carried out try stewards.


         15.   The holder shall make arrangements with the Chief Constable of the South
               Yorkshire Police for the provision of special police services on the
               occasion of a specified event at the Sports Ground for the purposes of
               maintaining lawful and orderly behaviour amongst spectators, and the
               services shall be determined by the Chief Constable and he and his officers
               shall be allowed full access to all parts of the Sports Ground.


         16.   The holder shall notify in writing the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
               Police at least 28 days before any specified activity takes place.


         17.   The Council reserves the right to require any specified activity to be open
               only to spectators having purchased tickets in advance of the specified
               activity,, andto specify the date and. time of carmencement of the-specified
               activity.                                                             ■

               Spectator Areas

         18.   The Holder shall ensure that all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout- the
               Sports Ground are maintained in good working order at all times. Particular
f t - *.


%■

                      attention shall be paid to doors, gates and turnstiles in spectator ingress
                      and egress routes and also to pitch perimeter gates,. The Holder shall not
                      cause or permit any exit doors or gates to be altered in type, design or
                      method of operation without the prior consent of the Council in writing.


               19.    The means of ingress and egress and the gangways in the Sports Ground shall
                      at all times be kspt unobstructed.

•;         :
               20.     All floor surfaces and steps throughout the Sports Ground which are
r                     available for use by spectators shall have even and non-slip surfaces and
fi                    shall be kept unobstructed unrestricted and free fran trip hazards.
                       Adequate drainage shall also be provided where necessary.


               21.     The entrances to and exits from the Sports Ground and the means of access to
                       those entrances and exits shall be as specified in the plan which forms part
 '
ji                    of this certificate.
;3
n
               22.     The Holder shall provide and maintain suitable and sufficient cutting
                       equipment to enable perimeter fencing to be ranoved quickly if necessary in
                       the event of an emergency. The Holder shall ensure that stewards (a) are
                       properly trained in the use of this cutting equipment and (b) use the
£                     equipment when directed to do so by the South Yorkshire Police.

£
               23.    The Holder shall inspect each turnstile and measure its potential rate of
                      flow and shall ensure that each turnstile is and remains capable of
                      admitting spectators at the anticipated rate and shall provide a report to
                      the Council of the results of such inspection by 16th August, 1989.

               24.    The Holder shall enter into a written agreenent with the Chief Constable of
                      the South Yorkshire Police setting out the respective responsibilities of
                      the Club and the Police’for crowd safety and control. The agreement shall
                      specify responsibilities for the filling of all terraced areas of the Sports
                      Ground and the monitoring of spectators in such areas to avoid overcrowding.
                      A copy of the agreement shall be supplied to the Council by 16th August,
                      1989. Any variation of the agreement shall be agreed in writing in advance
                      and the Council notified of the variation.


               25.    All gates in radial or perimeter fencing shall be painted in a different
                      colour fran the rest of the fence and marked "emergency exit".


               26.    All gates giving access fran the terraces to the pitch shall be kept fully
                      open during a Specified Activity.


               27 r   (af Q«pH®ietet«»s^a41 iinMMiefcfcately visiially inspeet:all crush'barriers-for
                      signs Of corrosion. Any barrier found to be affected by a significant
                      degree of corrosion shall be repaired or replaced by 16th August, 1989.

                      (b) The Holder shall immediately review the layout of barriers in each
                      terraced area to ensure that it complies with the criteria contained in
                      Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.
      (c) The Holder shall notify the Council in writing of the results of the
      inspection and review carried out pursuant to conditions 27(a) and (b) by
      16th. August, 1989.


28.   The ifolder shall irrcrediately review the signposting for spectator both
      inside and          the Ground and any information printed on tickets. The
      ffolder shall notify the Council of the results of this revia* and of its
      proposals in this regard by 16th August, 1989.

29.   Vehicles shall not be admitted to the Sports Ground except as authorised by
      the Council and specified on the plan.


      Fire Safety

30.   The Holder shall provide and maintain a public address systan which shall be
_     audible in all parts of the Sports Ground to the satisfaction of the
      Council.
                        t
31.   The Holder shall institute and maintain a fire warning system to the
      satisfaction of the Council.


32.   The Holder shall provide and maintain at least such fire fighting equipment
      in such locations as the Council may fran time to time specify.


33.   Except with the consent of the Council in writing the Holder shall not
      permit the storage in the Sports Ground of any flanmable, explosive, toxic
      or corrosive liquid or compressed substance -(except fire extinguishing and
      drinks dispensing apparatus). The Holder shall comply with any conditions
      attached to such a consent.


34.   Except with the prior written consent of the Council the Holder shall at all
      times maintain the Sports Ground in a clean condition and shall not permit
      any accumulations of rubbish or any other materials whether combustible or
      not.


      Lighting and Electrical Installations

35.   The Holder shall ensure that all parts of the Sports Ground to which
      spectators are admitted are illuminated to a sufficient standard to enable
      such persons to enter or leave the Sports Ground safely.


36.   The Holder shall provide to the satisfaction of the Council a system of
      emergency lighting which shall, in the event of a failure of the general
      lighting be sufficient to enable spectators to leave the stadium safely.



      The emergency lighting shall (a) be powered by a source independent of the
      mains electricity supply and (b) cane into operation ■immediately on the
      failure of the mains lighting and (c) remain in operation for at least troree
      consecutive hours when activated.
     ;        .•   ■        :'   v :- •                        ’

i - .;
•      37. The electrical installation far the Sports Ground shall fee constructed and
            maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition. No alteration which
            significantly affects the installation shall take place without the prior
            written consent of the CoonciX.
                                                              I
\£       ’             ..


j            38. Throughout each specified activity the electrical installation shall be
% .               supervised by a ccncetent electrician whs shall investigate, rectify (if
                  possible) and report to Safety Gffic^-any dsfeiists .which arise in t&e
                  installation.


                   Capacity

             39. The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part of the
                  stadium at any one time shall not exceed the number specified in schedule 5.


                   Inspections, Tests, and Records

             40.   Where any condition in this certificate requires written records to be kept
                   such records shall be produced on demand to any authorised officer.


             41. The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
                 safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and/or inspections as may
                 be specified in the notice. The Holder shall comply with any requirement or
                 conditions specified in that notice.


             42.   If a significant defect is suspected or discovered pursuant to the normal
                   use of the Sports Ground or any inspection or test carried out under the
                   t-jo-rms of this certificate the Holder shall iitirediately notify the Council
                   and take steps to correct the defect.


             43.   The Holder shall arrange for the tests and inspections listed in Schedule
                   to be carried out and for records to be kept or reports to be supplied to
                   the Council in accordance with the terms of the schedule. Where reports are
                   required to be supplied to the Council, they shall be supplied as soon as
                   possible on completion of the inspections/tests.


             44.   Without prejudice to Section 6 of the Act or any regulations made thereunder
                   the Holder shall maintain written records showing

                   (a) the number of spectators admitted to each part of the Sports Ground for
                   each specified activity;

                   (b) the names and addresses of the stewards employed by the holder;

                   (c)                                             specified-'activity and details
                   of their duties;

                   (d) details of the training exercises organised by the Holder for stewards
                   in accordance with Condition 13 - the record shall show which stewards
                   attended each exercise and the content of those exercises.
 . .
                      Guidance to Holders
                       .   ■■   ■---------------------------



                45.   Hie Council may frcm tine to time issue written guidance to holders on
                      safety natters, The holder must pay .due regard to any such guidance.
':
;>
r      •-

!■          '




i;
ij
                        SCHEDULE 3 - CCM3ITICN NO .10 ^

The matter of Safety Stewards on duty at each specified activity shall not
be less than 59.

                        SCHEDULE 4 - CQOITICM NO. 14

Use Safety Stewards carry out the duties set out belcw:-

No. of Stewards         Duties
                         Manning of Final Exit Gates

     1                  '-'A' (Shoreham Street)

    11                  'B' to 'L^ (John Street)

     2                   'M' and 'N' (Bramall Lane)

     2                  '0' (Bramall Lane)

     2                  'R' and 'S' (South Stand)

                         Control and Directions of Spectators

     6                  Bramall Lane Stand

     3                  Bramall lane Terrace

     9                  John Street Stand

     2                  John Street Terrace       (TimberSection)

     2                  John Street Terrace (Concrete       Section)

     4     .             Spion Kop Main Area

     1                  Spion Kop Disabled/Childrens Area

     9                  South Stand

                         Patrolling the Sports Ground and Dealing with
                         Emergencies, etc.

     2                  John Street Stand

     1                  Bramall Lane Stand

     1                  South Stand

                        Manning Internal Gates

     4"                                            toe. (NoS;.4"-4 Johni Strset,.
                        •rerrace

    4                   Gates between John Street Timber Stand and Terrace
                         (Nos.2-5)

     1                  Gate between the two parts of the John Street
                         Timber Stand and Terrace (No.9)
                        SCHEDULE 5 - CCMDITICN NO. 39


'Em rnm»wr of spectators admitted to a specified activity shall not exceed


The* numfaar of spectators admitted to each of the sports ground/ listed
below, shall mot exceed the maximum numbers shown.

Area                     Maximum No. of Spectators

South- Stand (Seats)                7,948

Bramall Lane
   Seats                            2,958
   Terrace                          5,660

John Street
   Timber Section Seats             1,200
   Concrete Section Seats           1,490
   Bramall Lane End                 1,340
   Kop End                          2,050

Spion Kop
   Southern End                     3,700
   Main Kop Area                   10,850

                                   37,196




HB7AAB/JS
      Sheffield Wednesday
                     Football Club pic
                                  I
                                                                                                        ic o n .
-     Our Ref:            GHM/JB/D34

      16th Augugt 1989                                                                 ]   1 6AUGI9S9

      Mr. I.L. Podmore,
      Chief Executive,
      City of Sheffield,                                                                                    /
      Town Hall,
      Sheffield.
      SI 2HH


      Dear Sir,

      Re:      Safety Certificate - Hillsborough

      I am in receipt of your letter dated 11th August 1989.

     With regard to the items in Appendix 2 where a response has been requested:

     No. 3)          A copy of a report from Mayor Turnstiles is enclosed. A replacement
                     for Turnstile 50 which is situated at PenistoneRoad is on order.

     No.      4) A copy of the Agreement is enclosed.

     No.      7) A copy of the necessary letter frcm Dr. Eastwood is enclosed.

     No.      8) Amendments to the signposting of the ground and the printing of the
                  tickets have been undertaken to the satisfaction of the South
                  Yorkshire Police and Fire Service.

    _I would point out the amended ground capacity figures are, in fact, incorrect.
rr~pe area of the Lower North West Terrace is in fact Pen 6, part of the West
    "'Terrace which is excluded fran use (Appendix 2 No. 10)                       The capacity for the
      North West Terrace should therefore be 2,300.

   Finally, I would refer to the penultimate paragraph of my letter dated 28th July
   1989 to your Administration and Legal T>epartment. Last week* the Working Party
   approved the Police request that access to the North Stand should be via
   Penistone Road using turnstiles 77-88. Our concern over this policy was
   confirmed in the findings of the Interim Report (Para 290). I would therefore
-s confirm my request for a written ruling on this matter prior to Saturday's match.

     Yours faithfully.                                                                              ~




     Hillsborough. Sheffield SS 1SW. Teieonone: (0742) 343122
     Teiegrarr.s: W eanesaay Sneff!eld6. Teiex .No.547709 WEDNE3
     ra x Nc 0 7 4 2 337145 R egssterec in E ngland No. 62473

     Cr^irman - E. McGee. Secretary G .n. Macweli. F.C.C.A M anroer ft Aattnssjn
     S e c to rs : v Sneooaro. j.P FC .A (Vtce*Cna»rmanj. S.L. Soetgnt. O .S *..
     C Wooowa'd. K 7 AdOv. £. Barron. G.K Hu Hey
                                                 UJ rt Hi h                  u> rt 5s>                 0                                                   O       a !>           h- tu­




                                                                                                                  w ith
                                                                                            O    H4




                                                                                                                  C e rtif ic a te
                    list < pr •            O'
                    .fljl
                    Ify
                                        - VC     tr tr h* pr
                                                     (D H 0
                                                                     p H T2 #5
                                                                     a. rt *v (A o
                                                                                            M
                                                                                            O
                                                                                                 P     N
                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                                                                           *i
                                                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                                                                0 (o
                                                                                                                                                                (0 H o
                                                                                                                                                                                  ts
                                                                                                                                                                                  (ft o
                                           fa    H8      fO              H*     rt o        c    rt         O                                                  nd         o      *a o
                    •g           p               M hd        m           P H*         0     P          p. 0                                                S
                                                                                                                                                           P    0 •g 0            n> e
                     rt '* H               O         p if i          as 0t) P> ft *«<       IX   ft    p '0                                                 a* O                 n   x)




                                                                                                                          che r e l e v a n t
                     m           rf        P     Cf er m ft          n F 0 P m.             «    |»a   m m                                                      rt o 1           r t n*
                     ft- =■ *i             P     m           n       (0 H* O &> ft *                        n                                               rt H' C rt                 rt
                     i$b                  ♦tJ        £ 3 00          H (A m |~4. &               ft    rt ro                                                o O rt m             rt    m
                                 CD        ro    rt O H*                 CT Ui        p          H*    #-# P                                                    P.        p      pr p
                               1 S3 ■      rr            P p         m m        P rt             O     n> rt                                                n>     fU rt         fl> rr
                     S: ■ < n              ro    V> s> m o           c          ift              P                                                          P O
                                                 rt A*       M      'd *m    H*      »o                    *o                                               w Hi 0Q Xf           (0 T5




                                                                                                                                     C o n d itio n s .
                                *<         p
                    •«&                    rt    fl> p* <»~s        T» * P n> m                  o          CD                                              P      (t>           rt fi>
                            ■' . i—i             (X> H H*            M       O n *i              H>    fB H                                                 »i rt f*t*~*i        H »1
                             ' . H*       *t3        m P H*          H* pr      rt w                   O m                                                  m tr m m             C w
                           - 0Q            m     H* (A o m           CD      C
                                                                     (A ^x- CX (u S3
                                                                                      o          rt    rt o                                                     m n o            o o
                          f-'-, P‘         »i    P Cfi M IT                                       P*   H p                                                  n      fu p          rr 0
                                           to    to w a rt          ’W H H* 1—     j             (0    H*                                                   o m                  £




                                                                                                                                              S a f e ty
                                 ft
                          rr- H*           O    id       a* H*           P> P         m                D cs
                                                                                                       |u rr
                                                                                                                                                            &             (0     H «
                          '"3- p           a         m H* P              P 0Q         p*         C/i                                                       x$ o < pr             w tr
                                09          e    o ^ p m                 ft     Hi               T3    M £J |_4                                                 n H* iu          to sa
                                                 rt W 00                 Cfl    Hs P.             O                                                         H' rt (A i—*
                                                 fl> rt      m                  H ^—    4                   M                                               OJ m c M
                                                 tx CO       a                  ro                rt                                                        P      to
                           -                         0       ix                                  m                                                          o      h-4           H*
                                                     Cfl                                                                                                                         P                              52J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                H
•X3        XI    rt ’*~s“                                O                  Ir* O   ►>           (r* O                                                     (U CD    CU 03      ^■i O   p>                       M
 H4 O ^3         tr O S’* o                         K> P     rt             ro p    rt           M S   »t                                                  n *d                K> P    rt                       O
 ru ft CD H-     (U c       rt                         n                        o                    a                                                     rt       rt             O                     Cl     58
 o H- a O        P H ,'^v                           0  «>    |_wt           @ m                  0 0 H4                                                    H* o     fp O       0 fl>   H*                       m
 (D < H*             m      1— 4                    Q        CD             o       10           O                                                         < H*     n ri       O       «>                tj
     H-          (n         fl>                     p  m     (U             p a*    a*           0 ft fu                                                   H* Hi       flJ     a CO    Oi                 w
     f“T H- rr   H* p '.‘J? CA                      rt <      (0            rt <    (A           rt 4                                                      rt F*    m          rt <    to                :sas
            O    X o ■''t (0                        tr m     ■ft            tr m    rt           tr IB                                                        n>    m SU       P* »    rt                 £H    ©
                     rt                             m  h
                                                    • v-q
                                                                            W H                  t
                                                                                                 .o vh!
                                                                                                                                                              IX    o          (A
                                                                                                                                                                               « •a
     rt                                                                     • M                                                                                     p* c^.                                      H
                 o 0                                                                                                                                                                                            M
     ?r          C O                                                                                                                                                                                            .to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VT)
     H*          M n
     P           m m                                                                                                                                                                                            w
    0Q

                                                                                                                                                                        >~4
                               IB                                                                                                                                       (»                                      'G
                               m                                                                                                                                        to                       X3 O    t~ l
                                                                                                                                                                                                 C O H
                                                                                                                                                                                                 h  a H
                                                                                                                                                                                                 to b W
                                                                                                                                                                                                 rt SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                 a



                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                             t"C                    h3                                                                                                 »-<   o   w   pa aq            a.
                                                             m                      (P                                                                                                 (D    oQnjJ
                               I                             m                      m                                                                                                  m     a         w
                                                                                                                                                                                             Eat tl C3                H*
                                                                                                                                                                                             O   H                    O
                                                                                                                                                                                             H M
                                                                                                                                                                                             r1w
                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                                                                     O •xt
                                                                                                                                                                                                       o              -r
                                                                                                                                                                                                     W !*»
                                                                                                                                                                                                     M H
GENEB.U                        IN C ID EN C E     WRITTEN -   W RITTEN REPORT
                                                  RECORD      REQUIRED TO 'IE
                                                  REQUIRED    SU P PLIED TO
                                                              COUNCIL




All the fire warning           Not less than.--   Yes-
detection public address       three hours nor
and other communication        more than six
systems shall be tested        hours prior to
by a competent person.         a specified
                               activity
                               taking place.


All lighting systems           Not more           Yes.
(excluding the emergency       than twenty
lighting) shall be tested      four hours
by a competent person.         prior to a
                               specified
                               activity
                               taking place.


All doors, gates and           Not more           Yes.
turnstiles throughout the      than twenty
Stadium shall be tested        four hours
by a competent person.         prior to a
                               specified
                               activi ty
                               taking place.




25% of the crush barriers      25% in each                    Y e s report to
and handrails in the Stadium   period of 12                   include details
shall be tested by a           months.   Once                 and results.
competent person in            a barrier or
accordance with the Guide.     handrail is
The Council shall be           tested it shall
notified in advance of the     not be tested
dates of testing.              again (unless
                               specifically
                               required by the
                               Council) within
                               three and a half
                               years after first
                                testing, but shall
                               be tested again
                               within four and a
                               half years of that
                                date.


D MB l il /5 / JJ J
                  ♦•



               ■■I*M v




          QJ
          QJ
          U
         CO
         £
      fX>
     JZ
     o
     -C
     /1
     i




rO




                o ..
                %.;i
                   .»
                /K:
City of Sheffield          M etropolitan District




Our reference                                          Chtof Executive
                      F V /D M 3
                                                       Ian L Podmore
Your reference                                         Town Hall,
                      GHL/JB/D34/3630
                                                       Sheffield S1 2HH'
Date '     <•                                          Telephone 7 3 4 0 0 0
                      11th August, 1989



         URGENT

         Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Pic,
         Hillsborough,
         SHEFFIELD.
         S6 1FW                                                 F IR S T CLASS POST



         Dear Sirs,

         Re; Safety of Sports Grounds - Hillsborough

         I enclose, for your attention, Notice of Amendment of the Safety
         Certificate. The amendments are as enumerated in Appendix 1 and additional
         conditions are as enumerated in Appendix 2. The amendments and additions
         reflect the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor which he required to be
         implemented before the commencement of the new Football Season.

         You will, therefore, appreciate that the issue of this Notice should be
         regarded merely as an interim temporary measure.  It is likely that further
         amendments will be required shortly. In any event, the Council is in the
         process of drafting a completely new set of Conditions.  It is hoped that
         these will be in force in the near future.

         Please acknowledge receipt of this Notice.

         Yours faithfully,




         Chief^Executive

         Enc.




         HB6AAQ/JJJ
                            SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


                      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1 97 5

NOTICE QF AMENDMENT OF GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE ISSOED ON 21 ST DECEMBER
1979   '   “   ""   '


TAKE NOTICE THAT THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE ISSUED-TQ- SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED IN RESPECT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM, PENISTONE
ROAD, SHEFFIELD BY SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ON 21 ST DECEMBER 1979 IS
HEREBY AMENDED AND ADDED TO

The amendments are as specified in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2.'

THESE AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS ARE ISSUED BY THE SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL IN
RESPECT OF THE PREMISES DESCRIBED ABOVE BEING A SPORT GROUND DESIGNATED BY
ORDER UNDER SECTION 1 OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 AS A SPORTS
GROUND REQUIRING A SAFETY CERTIFICATE.

The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which Sheffield City
Council consider necessary or expedient is secure reasonable safety at the
Sports Ground when it is in use for an activity in respect of which this
Certificate is issued.


The amendments and additional conditions shall come into operation on the
12th day of August, 1989.



Dated the 11th day of August 1989.




                             Signed ..

                                     Mr. Ian Podmore,
                                     Chief Executive on behalf of
                                     and duly authorised by the
                                     Sheffield City Council



TO:-   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited
APPENDIX 1 - AMENDMENTS


Current Provision                        Amended Provision

1.   Schedule X - Interpretation Provisions

(a) The- Act - means the Safety          (a) The Act   means Che Safety of
of Sports Ground Act 1985                Sports Grounds Act 1985 including any
                                         modification or re-enactment thereof
                                         and any subordinate legislation made
                                         thereunder

(b) The County Council - means           (b) The Council or the County Council -
the South Yorkshire County               means the Sheffield City Council
Council

(c) The Stadium - means the              (c) The Stadium or Sports Ground - means
Hillsborough Stadium,                    the Hillsborough Sports Ground, Penistone
Penistone Road, Sheffield                Road, Sheffield


2.   Schedule 2 - General Terms and Conditions

(a) Condition 8(2).                      (a)  Condition 8(2). 1
The Holder shall ensure that             The Holder shall employ at least one
during every specified activity          medical practitioner (in addition to any
a physician employed or retained         medical practitioner employed to treat
by the Holder is available to            the Holders employees) to be present at
attend at the First Aid Room if          each Specified Activity and available to
requested and that his                   deal with any medical exigency at the
whereabouts are known to those           Sports Ground. He/she shall be trained
in the Police Central Control            and competent in advanced first aid.
Room at the Sports Ground.               He/she shall be present at the Sports
                                         Ground at least one hour before kick off
                                         and must remain until half an hour after
                                         the end of the Specified Activity. The
                                         medical practitioner must be immediately
                                         contactable and his/her whereabouts known
                                         to the Police Control Room.

(b) „ Condition 8(3)                     (b) Condition 8(3)
The Holder shall arrange for             The Holder shall arrange for
the attendance at every                  the attendance at every
Specified Activity of such               Specified Activity of such
numbers of qualified First Aid           numbers of qualified First Aid
assistants as the County Council         assistants as the County Council
shall require but without                shall require but without
prejudice to the foregoing the           prejudice to the foregoing the
Holde*-- shall ensure* that' a£• every   Holder shall ensure that at every
specified activity there is at           specified activity there is at
least one First Aid assistant            least one First Aid assistant
for every 2,000 spectators.              for every 1,000 spectators.
       Curren-t Provision                     Amended Provision

       3.   Schedule 3.

The number of spectators admitted to the     The number of spectators admitted to the
Sports Ground and to the various areas of    Sports Ground and to the various areas of
spectator accommodation within the Sports    spectator accommodation within the Sports
Ground shall not exceed the following         Ground shall not exceed the following
figures:-                                     figures

Spion Kop                   16,850            Spion Kop                             [8    2jO O
South Stand Upper            5 ,567           South Stand Upper                       5,567
South Stand Lower            3,310            South Stand Lower                     • 3,310
West Stand                   4,465            West Stand                              4,465
North West Terrace                            North West Terrace                     t    U o        *
North Stand                  9,882            North Stand                                9,882

Total Crowd Capacity        50,174"           Total Crowd Capacity                  kk     1+Qis.




                                                  \£
                                                       (VOUTH WL<>r         r£/£/M £/£                   '■)   l,Uo
                                                       (V O tn r   W & ir            (i-o i^    aa   )




                                            -3-
                                APPENDIX 2 ~ ADDITIONAL COHDITIONS


   1.    Hie Holder shall arrange with South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
         for the attendance of at least on e ‘fully equipped* ambulance at a Specified
         Activity where 5,000 or more spectators are e-xpeeted to 3-tteod.


   2.    The Holder shall provide and maintain suitable and sufficient eut'ting
         equipment to enable perimeter fencing to be removed quickly if necessary in
         the event of an emergency. The Holder shall ensure that stewards (a) are
         properly trained in the use of this cutting equipment and (b) use the
         equipment when directed to do so by the South Yorkshire Police.


   3.    The Holder shall inspect each turnstile and measure its potential rate of
          flow and shall ensure that each turnstile is and       remains capable   of
          admitting spectators at   the anticipated rate and     shall provide a   reportto
          the Council of the results of such inspection by 16th August, 1989.

  -4.    The Holder shall enter into a written agreement with the Chief Constable of
          the South Yorkshire Police setting out the respective res.ponsibilities pf
          the Club and the Police for crowd safety and control. The agreement shall
          specify responsibilities for the filling of all terraced areas of the_ Sports
          Ground and the monitoring of spectators in such areas to avoid overcrowding.
          A copy of the agreement shall be supplied to the Council by 16th August,
          1989. Any variation of the agreement shall be agreed in writing in advance
          and the Council notified of the variation.

   5.    All gates in radial or perimeter fencing shall be painted in a different
         colour from the rest of   the fence and marked "emergency exit".

   6.    All gates giving access   from the terraces to the pitch shall be keptfully
         open during a Specified Activity.

   7.    (a) The Holder shall immmediately visually inspect all crush barriers for
         signs of corrosion. Any barrier found to be affected by a significant
         degree of corrosion shall be repaired or replaced by 16th August, 1989.

         (b) The Holder shall immediately review the layout of barriers in each
         terraced area to ensure that it complies with the criteria contained in
         Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.

         (c) The Holder shall notify the Council in writing of the results of the
         inspection and review carried out pursuant to conditions 27(a) and (b) by
         16th August, 1989 .

   8.    The Holder shall immediately review the signposting for spectators both
         inside and outside the Ground and any information printed on tickets.   The
         Holder shall notify the Council of the results of this review and of its
         ppop#s«i;S in this regard by the- '16 th August, 1989 .

   9.       The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
            safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and/or inspections as may
            be specified in the notice.  The Holder shall comply with any requirement or
            conditions specified in that notice.

   10.      No spectator shall be allowed access to that part of the Sports Ground known
            as The West Terrace.

HB7AAC/JS                                       -4-
                        -SA FE T Y O F S P O B T S GBOUNDS A C T . 1975
                               GENEBAL SAFETY CEBTIFICATE

Address of p r e m ises for which                                • TheHillsbcrough-rStadium,
this Certificate is issued                                        Penistone Boad, Sheffield.

Occupier of the prem ises                                         Sheffield Wednesday Football
          and                                _                    Club Ltd.
Holder of this Certificate

U se of the prem ises in respect                                  Football matches.
of which this Certificate is issued                               Beligious Conventions.

1.       This Certificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council in respect of
         the prem ises described above, being a Sports Stadium designated by Order
         under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as a stadium
         requiring a Safety C ertificate.

2.       The term s and conditions set out in the Schedules attached hereto     are hereby
         imposed.

3.       The term s and conditions hereby imposed are those which the South Yorkshire
         County Council consider n ecessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety at
         the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in respect of which this
         Certificate is issued.

4.       The words used in this Certificate and the Schedules attached hereto have
         the meaning assigned to them by Schedule l to this Certificate and
         Section 17 of the Act,

5.       The Schedules and Plans attached hereto all form part of this Certificate.

6.       This Certificate commences on the twenty first day.of D ecem ber, One
         thousand nine hundred and seventy nine for an indefinite period.


          2   ate   21st D ecem ber, 1979                    S ig n e d ...'K l.f i.W A ^ T T ...
                                                                      Chief Executive on behalf
                                                                     of and duly authorised by
                                                                     the South Yorksfaire County
                                                                       ouncil.
                                                                 S C H E D U LLtZi
                                                                               E                                         1                                                                                                                         ,




                                                                  I n t e r p r e t a t i o n



■ T h e    A ct                                                       “             m           e s a s           t h e ' S a f e t y                 o f          Sports              G     r o u n d           A c t ,            1 9 7 5 ,


 A u t h o r i s e d              ' P e r s o n                       -             m e a n s a person authorised la accordance with


 T h e     B u i l d i n g            A u t h o r i t y               -             m           e a n s '            t h e           S h e f f i e l d             C i t y      Council.
 T h e     C        h i e f   C o n s t a b l e                       -             m           e a n s              t h e            C h i e f      C o n s t a b l e                 f o r      t h e          t i m      e       b e i n g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                    of the                      S o u t h ' Y o r k s h i r e                              P o l i c e          o r ,         a s        t h e        c a s e                      ;


                                                                                    A           c t i v i t y .


 T h e     C        h i e f   F i r e      O   f f i c e r        -                     m         e a n s             t h e           C h i e f       F i r e          O     f f i c e r        f o r        t h e         t i m     e     b e i n g

                                                                                        o f        t h e         S o u t h               Y    o r k s h i r e                C o u n t y          F i r e            S e r v i c e           o r

                                                                                        h i s           designated                              r e p r e s e n t a t i v e .


  T h e        C e r t i f i c a t e                                  -                 m         e a n s                t h e         w r i t t e n           G    e n e r a l            S a f e t yC ertificate of
                                                                                        w h i c h                t h e               S c h e d u l e s              a n d       P l a n s          form p a r t .
  T h e        C o u n t y          C o u n c i l                         -             m         e a n s                t h e         S o u t h      Y     o r k s h i r e                C o u n t y             C o u n c i l .


  T h e        G u i d e                                     -                m   e a n s               t h e            ’ ’G       u i d e    t o        S a f e t y         a t      S p o r t s           G     r o u n d s "



                                                                                        H         o m      e         O        f f i c e ,      o r        s u c h          o t h e r         c o d e         o f     p r a c t i c e               a s

                                                                                            m     a y          b e            s o      i s s u e d .


   T h e        H     o l d e r
                                                                                            m      e a n s               t h e         a p p l i c a n t             f o r     a n d          person                 t o        w   h o m       t h e



                                                                                            I s     a          ' q u a l i f i e d              p e r s o n ’                f o r     t h e      p u r p o s e s                    o f   t h e       A   c t .


   Invalid               C a r r i a g e
                                                                                            m      e a n s                a         v e h i c l e ,         w h e t h e r              m      e c h a n i c a l l y                  p r o p e l l e d

                                                                                            o r




                                                                          -   '                 means the document or documents attached to and




                                                                                                Council.

    Specified Activity                                                                          means a football                                           m       a t c h      or a E ellglous Convention.



                                                                                                                                                                                 a t        the stadium.

    The Stadium                                                                                 means the Hillsborough                                                           S t a d i u m           ,        Penistone Road,

     Structural Parts                                                                           S ^ iu ies* stru ctu res, components, Installations,


     V ehicles                                                                                    Includes invalid carriages.
                           SC H ED U LE 2

                  General Term s and Conditions

(1)   The Holder’s nominee for the time being approved in writing by the
       County Council shall be present whenever the Stadium is used for a
       Specified Activity and he shall on behalf of the Holder ensure that
      the term s and conditions of the Certificate are complied with at
      the Specified Activity.

(2)   The appointment by the Holder of a nominee to attend each Specified
       Activity shall not absolve the Holder and any responsible person (as
       defined in section 12(2) of the Act) from their obligation to take all
       reasonable precautions and e x ercise all due diligence to avoid the
       contravention of any term or condition of the C ertificate.

The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium unless a
Specified Activity is taking place.

The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to. the several areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
sp ecified ln P a r ti of Schedule 3.

Subject to the term s and conditions hereof and to the statutory controls relating
thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified Activity for one or
more of the following:-

(a)    the playing of music or singing;

(b)    the provision of news or comment associated with football;

(c)    the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities, programmes, new -sheets
        and souvenirs;

(d)    the sale and consumption of refreshments;

(e)    any other use ancillary to a Specified Activity which has the prior approval
        in writing of the County Council.

(1)    Where the prior written approval of the County Council is required under
       the term s and conditions hereof, an application for that approval shall
       be made by the Holder to the County Council at lea st 21 days before the
       occurrence in respect of which it is required.

(2)    If whilst the Certificate is in operation it is proposed to alter or extend the
        Stadium or any of it's installations in a manner m entioned!:! Section 8
        of the Act the Holder shall at lea st 21 days before the carrying out of the.
        proposal is begun give notice in writing of the proposal to the County
        Council.
    (1)      The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at le a st 21 days
              (or such shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent)
             prior to every Specified Activity the methods of adm ission to be
,            employed in connection with the Specified Activity and (in relation
              to a Football Match) the methods to be used for the segregation o f
             home and visiting supporters.
    (2)      The Holder shall refuse adm ission to, or evacuate spectators from,
              the Stadium or any part thereof at any time before or during a
              Specified Activity upon receiving instructions so to do from the
               Chief Constable.

    The Holder shall at his own expense arrange, for the attendance at every
    Specified Activity of an adequate number of police officers to secure the
    orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators and the number of police
    officers required at each Specified Activity shall be agreed between the
    Chief Constable and the Holder at le a st 21 days (or such shorter tim e to
    which the Chief Constable may consent) before a Specified Activity takes
    place.
    (1)     Subject to such interim arrangements as may be agreed by the County Coundv^
                                                                                          K
            the Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
            of the County Council a suitably equipped F irst Aid Room. The fir st
            aid room shall be adequately signed and shall be capable of being lit
            by the emergency power supply referred to in paragraph 1 2 of this
            Schedule.

     (2)     The Holder shall ensure that during every Specified Activity a
             physician employed or retained by the Holder is available to attend
             at the F irst Aid Room if required and that his whereabouts are known
             to those in the P olice Central Control Room at the Stadium.

     (3)     The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity
             of such numbers of qualified F irst Aid assistan ts as the County Council
              shall require but without prejudice to the foregoing the Holder shall
              ensure that at every specified activity there is at lea st one F irst Aid
              assistant for every 2 , 0 0 0 spectators.

     The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity of such
     number of Safety Stewards as may be required by Part 2 of Schedule 3, and
     shall ensure that the Safety Stewards shall be (a) fit and capable to carry out
     their duties (b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by dress (d)
     provided with written instructions as to their general duties in order to carry
     out the following:-

     (1)      Manning of exits as indicated on the plans

      (2 )    Control and direction of spectators entering using or leaving the
              Stadium                   ';:l1..

               Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency including
               raising an alarm and extinguishing any sm all fire.
Training ex ercises relating to the action to be taken in the event of an
em ergency shall be held for Safety Stewards and Staff, employed at the
SfoHtMTn at lea st once every three months.

The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked on the Plans,
all doors and gates which form an eg ress route between any spectator
accommodation and the public highway, or other open space outside the
stadium, shall be so secured as to open immediately and easily from the inside
and shall be manned at all tim es by at lea st the number of stewards required
by Part 2 of Schedule 3. All such doors or gates shall be opened by the
stewards responsible and secured in the fully open position at a tim e before
the end of a Specified Activity agreed between the Holder and the Chief
 Constable and at any other tim e on evacuation of the Stadium or a part
thereof on being ordered .so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the
sounding of the alarm .

(1)     The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief
        Firfe Officer exit signs com prising white letters on a green background
        over all exits from the Stadium and all exits from spectator                -
        accommodation therein and shall ensure that such exit signs may be
        illuminated by both the main and emergency lighting s y ste m s. Such
         supplementary illuminated signs in such locations as the Chief Fire
         Officer may require shall also be provided by the Holder.

 (2)    The Holder shall ensure that the corridors, gangways and staircases
         indicated on the Plans may be illuminated when required during a
         Specified Activity by both the main and em ergency lighting sy stem s.

 (3 )   The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be
         illuminated whenever adequate natural light is deficient during a
         Specified Activity or as directed by the Chief Constable.

 (4 )   All means of ingress to and egress from the Stadium and to and from
         any Spectator Accommodation therein shall be maintained free from
         obstruction and with non-slip and even surfaces and in particular
         stair coverings shall be secured and maintained so that they do not
         constitute a source of danger.
 (1 )   Subject to such interim arrangements as may be agreed by the Chief Fire O fficer,
         the Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief
         F ire Officer a separate emergency power supply for providing
         electricity sufficient to light all emergency lighting throughout the
         Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the communication system s
         within the Stadium, such emergency power supply to be operable
         independently of the main power supply and to come into automatic
         operation within ten seconds of the failure of the latter and to be

         three hours from the failure of the main power supply.

  (2)   At least once in each: period of 12 months the Holder shall supply to
         the Chief Fire Officer a report as to the condition of the emergency
       P o w e r Supply c e r t i f i e d by a n in d e p e n d e n t E l e c t r i c a l E n g in e e r .

(3)   On the day of a Specified Activity and not le s s than 3 hours prior to
      its commencement the emergency power supply shall be tested for
      a period of 30 m inutes. Any defect revealed in this te st Shall be
      rectified before the commencement of the Specified A ctivity.

(4)   A competent electrician employed or retained by the Holder shall be
      present during a Specified Activity.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
      of the Chief Fire Officer a fire warning system .

(2)    The fire warning system shall be tested periodically to the satisfaction
       of the Chief Fire Officer.
Subject to such interim arrangements as may be agreed by the Chief Constable,
the Holder shall provide and maintain~at the Stadium to the satisfaction of the
Chief Constable

(1)   A P olice Central Control Room which shall be provided with such
      ancillary equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

(2)   Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention room
      and for administrative purposes.

(3)   A puhlic address system audible in all parts of the Stadium. The P olice
      sLall have the right to use the public address system for police purposes
      in priority to its use for any other purpose.

(1)   The Holder shall at all tim es maintain all structural parts of the stadium
      in sound order and to the appropriate and relevant standards in the Guide
      and in all ca ses to the satisfaction of the Council.

(2)   The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance, repair and
       renewal to the Stadium as may be required from tim e to time by the
       County Council.

The Holder shall at all tim es maintain all operational parts of the Stadium
(including the electrical and communications installations) and all emergency
equipment in good and efficient working order to the satisfaction of the County
Council and shall undertake such maintenance repair or renewal as may from
time to tim e be n ecessary to maintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.

The^oWeafsh^ft-filaee,within the Stadium, at such positions as may be specified
by the Chief F ire Officer, eoi exigency procedure noMces which shall be :
maintained legible and unobstructed in those positions.

(1)   The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium shall be
       restricted to those areas indicated on the Plans unless otherwise
       approved for emergency purposes by a P olice Officer in uniform.
(2)      The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the
         satisfaction of the County Council the access routes for emergency
         vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that members of the P r e ss, T. V. and radio services
having a ccess to the public and playing areas of the Stadium are identifiable
as such.

T elevision cam eras and portable equipment shall be placed only in such
positions as may be agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable.

(1)      Liquid refreshments may be sold or distributed at the Stadium only in
          containers constructed from soft plastic or other soft m aterial, or as
          allowed by the Licensing Ju stices.      —

(2)      No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other m aterials which
          in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use as m issile s
          shall be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium to which
          spectators have a c ce ss.

No accumulation of flammable rubbish, dirt, surplus m aterial or goods shall
be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium except in a place and quantity
approved in writing by the Chief Fire Officer.

No flammable gases or liquids shall be stored or used in any part of the
Stadium without the prior written approval of the Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified
Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a representative of the
County Council within 7 months of the date of the Certificate and at lea st once in each
period of 12 months thereafter and the Holder shall as soon as possible after
each inspection supply to the County Council a Certificate by the said
Chartered Engineer as to the current compliance or non-compliance with good
engineering and building practices and with the relevant British Standard
Specifications and Codes of Practice and with the appropriate provisions and
recommendations of the Guide of all structural parts of the Stadium excluding the
crush barriers and handrails.

(1)       The Holder shall arrange for all crush barriers and handrails within the
          Stadium to be tested in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
          Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil)
          in the presence of a representative of the County Council within 2 -months
          of the date of this Certificate and for the results thereof to be notified
          in writing to the County Council as soon as possible thereafter.

(2)(i)    The Holder shall ensure that not more than 7 months after the date of this
          Certificate and thereafter not le s s than once in each period of 12 months
          a representative sample of crush barriers and handrails amounting to not
          le s s than 2 0 % of the total number of such barriers and rails is tested in
         accordance with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
         (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a representative of the County
         Council and the results thereof notified in writing to the County Council
         as soon as possible thereafter.
 (ii)    a record shall be kept of those crush barriers said handrails tested in
         accordance with sub-paragraph (2)(1) alone and a barrier so tested
         not be tested again within a period of 4^ years thereafter.

The Holder shall within 7 months of the date of this certificate and thereafter
not le s s than once in each period of 12 months supply to the Chief Fire Officer
the certificate of an independent E lectrical Engineer as to the current
compliance or non-compliance of the electrical installation within the Stadium
with Section E of the I .E .E . Regulations or other sections or Regulations for
the time being in force relating to the E lectrical Equipment of Buildings.

 (i)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium fire fighting
         equipment of such type and in such positions as may be required by the
        Chief Fire Officer.

 (ii)   The Holder shall arrange for all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and
        other water supply within the Stadium to be inspected and tested as
        appropriate at least once in each period of 12 months by a competent
        person to the satisfaction of the Chief F ire Officer.

The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be made
available for inspection at all reasonable time to Authorised Persons:

(1)     A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the Stadium during
        a Specified Activity and to each area of Spectator Accommodation
        therein mentioned in Part 1 of Schedule 3.

(2)     A record of any accident or incident occurring whilst the Stadium is in
        use for a Specified Activity which causes injury to a spectator, such
        record to include the name, address, and age of the spectator
        injured, the nature of the injury and how it was caused, as far as can
        be ascertained by diligent inquiry, and the location of the incident.
        The Holder shall provide a written report to the County Council within
        48 hours of all such accidents or incidents.

(3)     A record of the training and instruction given and the ex ercises held in
        accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 9 of this Schedule such
        record to include the date and tim e and duration of the instruction or
        exercise, the name of the person giving instruction, the nature of the
        instruction or exercise, and the name(s) of the person(s) instructed.

(4 )    A record of all inspections, tests, maintenance, repairs and renewals
        carried out at the Stadium.
The Stadium shall be maintained with the facilities and structures including
all cru sh 'barriers, entrances, exits and means of access to the entrances
and exits in the number, siz e , position and strength existing at the date
of the Certificate and indicated on the plans and no alteration shall be made
thereto unless prior notice in writing is given to the County Council in
accordance with paragraph 5(2) of this Schedule.

No spectators shall be allowed to use the Stadium in conditions of extrem e
wind and/or snow loadings acting singular or in combination and in
particular: -

(1)     No spectators shall be allowed to use the stadium in wind
        speeds in excess of 100 Km.p.h. at 10m above ground level
        and this prohibition shall be effective when m ore than one gust of
        this speed of at least 3 seconds duration is recorded in the area of
        the stadium in the 30 minutes immediately prior to the tim e of the
        enquiry mentioned in (2) to the local_meteorological office,

 (2)    The wind speed in (1) shall be ascertained by the Holder by enquiry
        to the local meteorological office by telephone not m ore than 30
        minutes before the adm ission of spectators to the stadium and
        the wind speed given shall be recorded at once in a bo<5k kept
        for the purpose.

 Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council shall
 have the right at any tim e to require the Holder at his own expense to arrange
 for the conduct of any inspection or test which the County C cinoil may consider
 to be n ecessary in the interests of securing reasonable safety at the
 Stadium when it is in use for a Specified Activity.
                         SCHED ULE 3

                           PAST 1
                         Crowd Capacity

The number of spectators admitted to the stadium and to the various areas
o f spectator accommodation within the stadium shall not exceed the following
figures: -

Spion Kop                             16,850
South Stand Upper                     5*56.7
South Stand Lower                     3,310
West Stand                            4,465
West Terrace                          7,200
North West Terrace                    2, S00
North Stand                           9, 882

      Total Crowd Capacity            50,174


                             PABT 2

                         Safety Stewards

The minimum number of Safety Stewards required for each function shall
be as follow s:-
                                                         25    ‘ Stewards (2 per main
(1)      Manning of exists
(2)      Control and direction of spectators                                   exit)
          entering or leaving the Stadium                        Stewards (1 per vomitory)
(3)      Patrolling the Stadium and dealing
          with any emergency including raising            2
           an alarm and extinguishing any sm all fire           Stewards ,-ul-i a -r ^outh
                                                                                .taud)
The Stewards shall be distributed as iollow s:-

Section of Stadium                     Number required for each function
                                          1            2         3



  South i-tand                                           12

  V ost Stand                                             3

  North -itnnd                                           13
