2 o J ) / g r                                         X 2 % /4 fi/i


            hlU JfiG tlooC rM       5 r /h ? /U A f   o    ^ nY?

            R,tco*»^eMWn(wi tv rue i n q v , ^ ■                      .


                C r P   w   /   l
 s w e fv & c b cit'7
GxuJtic -
rt-ec£ T o     rZ/JOwiiZ?1.
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD        MEMOR ANDUM
           The Building Surveyor                          The Acting Head of Administration and
rom                                               To
                                                          Legal

           21 July 1989                                   For the attention of Mr D M Bownes
ate
           BSD/ABu/EH
ef.
           4162 - Mr Butler                               GP/262/DMB (5.7.^)
el. Ext.                                          Ref.
                                                                                        9/161




           Reccmnendations to the Hillsborough Inquiry

           The following recommendations of both general and specific measures may be
           made to the Taylor Inquiry on behalf of the Building Authority, or
           incorporated into the recommendations of the Council as Certifying
           Authority.

           1.0    General

           1.1    The legislation could be remodelled to create regulations (with
                  functional statements) requiring certain minimum standards to be met
                  regarding Safety of Sports Grounds. The Guide to Safety at Sports
                  Grounds may then be re-issued (in a revised form) on a similar basis
                  io that of the majority of the Approved Documents to the Building
                 'Regulations. Compliance would therefore not be necessary, yet
                  failure to comply with the guide could be taken as being evidence
                  tending to show that the requirements had not been met, unless it
                  could be demonstrated by the party concerned, using other means,
                  that the requirements of statutory legislation had been satisfied.

           1.2    To avoid the relatively late arrival of fans at a stadium, a
           fV     requirement to provide pre-match entertainment could be included
                  either in legislation or licence conditions.

           1.3    A standardised form of conditions should form the nucleus of all
                  certificates for sports stadia. Additional conditions should only
                     permitted to cover local conditions. This would enable national
                 /uniformity of application of conditions, and allow test case
                  litigation against non-complying clubs to be applicable to all
                  designated stadia.

           l.£    Legislation could be used to prescribe a minimum percentage of
                  seated capacity for stadia. Such a percentage could differ for
                  various size, type and use of the stadia.

           1.5 j In order to increase the speed of ingress of spectators, legislation
              / could be used to require all-ticket entry for events where greater
                 than, say, 70 per cent of total available capacity could be
                 expected.

           1.6    The present guide to Safety at Sports Grounds is predominantly
                  written for football single use stadia. Multi-use stadia are
                  becoming more popular, and it is suggested that the guide be
                  expanded to cover spectator safety requirements pertaining to
                  speedway, stock car racing, hockey, archery and shooting.

           1.7    Either by expansion of the "Guide", or by the creation of a similar
                  document, requirements for spectator safety in fully enclosed stadia
                  should be created.

           1.8    Due to the possible risk of explosion, it is suggested that gas
                  installations should not be permitted in any building in the stadia
                                               - 2 -

               used for spectator accommodation.

      1 9     Compulsory safety inspections of the stadia at minimum six monthly
              intervals would be more desirable than the present annual inspection
              minimum.

        10     To enable a Local Authority to provide the necessary resources to
               carry out this licencing function, prescribed fees could be
             / introduced for; the issue of a certificate, the amendment of a
         J     certificate, the consideration of an improvement scheme, and the
               carrying out of an annual (or biannual) inspection.

        0     Management Responsibility

        1      The role of the police should be more clearly defined so as to
               clarify the extent of responsibility maintained by the managment
               when police officers are present at an event.

        2      It is recommended that the acceptable age range of stewards be
               between 18 and 65.

        3      Stewards carrying out isolated tasks, i.e. external gate duty should
               be provided with an efficient means of communication with the Safety
               Officer.

vX    3 0     General Fabric

      3 1     It is recommended that the headroom for tunnels be increased from
               2.4 m to at least 3 m to facilitate overhead viewing of any crushing
              or other problems occuring along its length.

      3. 2    So as to dissipate pressure build up from the rear, long tunnels
               should be successively widened in the direction of maximum flow.
               (i.e. means of escape routes).

      3. 3    To cater for differing speeds of travel through tunnels or
               restricted passageways longer than, say, 5 m, a minimum of 4 units
              of exit widths should be provided.

^     4. 0    Ingress

      4. 1    Segregation of entrances for supporters of opposing teams is
              recommended as a permanent design criteria.

      4 2     Permanent unobstructed access to the pitch area for emergency
              vehicles to be provided in at least 2 positions, and these being at
              opposite ends of the ground (whenever possible).

      4 3     The 'guide' states a maximum notional rate of 750 person per
               turnstile per hour, however it does not state the design time. It
               is suggested that a revised code should state a maximum ingress
              design time of say 45 minutes.

\ /   5 0     Terraces

      5. 1    Where terraces are to be sub-divided so as to avoid major migration
              and sideways surge, each section should be formed by inserting
               radial barriers. Radial fences should be avoided.

        2     It is considered that spectator accommodation should not be lower
               than the pitch level or pitch perimeter path level (whichever is the
               higher).
                                          - 3 -


      5.3   In the present 'Guide1, it states 'gradients steeper than 1 in 2
            (26°34') could be dangerous' (para. 94). In Table 1 barrier
            requirements are specified for terrace gradients of up to 30° or 1
            in 1.7, therefore contradicting the previous statement. From a
            graphical interpolation and extrapolation of all the relevant data
            it is recommended that the maximum gradient should be 31°30'. This
            equates to approximately 1 in 1.63.

            Crush Barriers - Design

      6.1   To avoid rusting in unseen and non- maintainable places,
            over-clipped barrier rail supports should no longer be acceptable.
            All parts of barriers should be capable of direct inspection and
            maintenance.

      6.2   Welding of all joints would achieve the aims set out in 6.1 above,
            and would create a structural continuity where the failure of an
            individual element would minimise the risk of collapse.

      6.3   Consideration should be given to the application of horizontal, (in
            addition to lateral) forces. This could be taken as 5% of the
            horizontal force thus resisting torsional and secondary effects.

      6.4   The reconniended heights of the barrier rails should be reassessed.
            Clarification is also required, (preferably by sketch) to show where
            this measurement should be taken from. The present guide appears to
            take an assumption that the barrier rail is in the same vertical
            plane as the terrace riser. When these vertical planes differ, the
            method of height measurement may also differ. The acid test being
            at what level a normal person would stand who was comfortable,
            immediately behind the barrier.

      6.5   The opportunity should be taken to re-appraise the required test and
            design loads. An increase would achieve a greater reistance to
            collapse but may increase the risk of injury due to resisting
            greater crowd pressures. A decrease however may result in earlier
            collapse, yet may prevent fatal injury.

      7.0   Crush Barriers - Testing

      7.1   It is suggested that each barrier span should be tested separately
             (for rail strength) and then adjacent spans be tested together to
            determine rail and support strengths.

      7.2   The specification of the test should be modified to clearly state
             how recovery deflection is to be calculated. Such a modification
             should be in accord with the testing procedures in BS 5950 and other
             similar British Standard documents.

      7.3   To avoid any further doubt, a standardised test specification and
             procedure is now required. This should include a specification of a
             standardised testing rig, and a standardised test results sheet.

v//   8.0   Stands with Seated Accaimodation

      8.1   Although steeper gradients can create better forward viewing for the
             spectators, very steep gradients will have the effect of creating
            equally steep radial gangways, and may create a domino effect during
            an evacuation where all persons may be stood - instead of being
             seated. No maximum gradient is directly stated in the present guide
             for seated areas; the only tenuous reference being to the maximum
            calculated gradient for stairways in para.73 as being 34°9'.
                                      - 4 -


       It is considered that Seated Acconmodation greated than 30 degrees
       should have intermediate crush barriers at approximately 5 metre
       centres.

9.0    Pitch Perimeter Fences

9.1    Whether by design or otherwise, forward escape onto the pitch from
       all sides of the ground is highly desirable, and post Hillsborough,
       psychologically necessary* Recent events have however failed to
       convince many Clubs of the need for scrapping pitch perimter
       fencing.

       To satisfy the psychological need, it is suggested that where these
       fences are to remain, at least 50% of its linear length is openable,
       and such openings are evenly spaced so as to provide maximum
       benefits for spectator safety.

       Where pitch-side police or stewards require access into the
       spectator area through relatively small doors or gates, these may be
       provided as additional openings or as wicket gates in the large
       opening panels.

       So as to avoid sudden forward movement, all such gates should be
       vertically multi-hinged and open towards the pitch. Collapsable
       panels should not be acceptable.

       It is a further pre-requisite that the release mechanism should be:-

       (a)   Capable of being operational remotely in tandem with others.

       (b)   Capable of independent opening, whilst under crovri pressure, by
             the operation of a quick release manually operated catch.

       (c)   All opening devices must be capable of use under crovri loading
             conditions.

9.2    In order to simplify any new designs of catch for pitch perimter
       gates, and bearing in mind the fact that there should be no
       spectators in front of the opening sections of the perimeter
       fencing, the test loading on perimeter fences could be reduced to
       say 3 KN/m.

10.0   Estimation of Safe Capacity - Terraces

10.1   Under the present 'guide1, terraces in good condition can be
        calculated as capable of holding a maximum of 54 persons per
        10 sq. m., throughout the available terraced area. It is however,
       accepted that sane parts of that area are 'Peak Viewing areas' and
       as such will achieve in practice a greater population density due to
        their popularity. The figure of 54/lOm^ is therefore an average,
       without the peak viewing parts being given a maximum packing
        density.

       It is considered that the 54/lOm^ should be treat as being the
       maximum and therefore only be applied to the areas of 'peak
       viewing'. Other areas of the terrace should be calculated as
       having a lower packing density say 40 persons per^square metres.

10.2   In order to practically achieve the considerations in 10.1 above, it
       would be necessary to:-

       (a)   Define the size and position of peak viewing areas.
                                           - 5 -




             (b)   Surround the areas of peak viewing using radial barriers (see
                   5.1 above).


             (c)   Calculate the maximum population of each peak viewing area, and
                   adequately steward to see this is not exceeded.

J   11.0     Flow Rates

    11.1     Throughout the Inquiry the flow rates of 40 & 60 persons per minute
             per unit of exit width, have been heavily criticised as being based
             on inconclusive research. A practical lesson from the Hillsborough
             Tragedy is that when people are very tightly packed, their ability
             to flow through exits is dramatically reduced. Until the outcome of
             further research is known, it is suggested that flow rates are
             reduced to the following

             (a)   Peak viewing area of terraces - 30 persons per minute
                                                   per unit of exit width.

             (b)   All other areas                 - 40 persons per minute
                                                     per unit of exit width.

             It is considered that the emergency evacuation time should remain at
             2| minutes.

             If you wish to discuss any of the above items in greater detail
             please contact my Principal District Surveyor (Mr. Butler) or my
             Principal Engineer (Mr. Sheriff) on extensions 4162 and 4170
             respectively.




    K30ACN
                               CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      Director of Health and Consumer       I To    Head of Administration & Legal Dept.
          Services                              I       (FOR THE ATTENTION OF MR. D. BOWNES)

Date      15th August 1989
Ref       EPU/JCH/PB
Tel Ext   4619 - Mr. Hendley                    I Ref




          SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS

          As we all realise, activity surrounding the above issue has been somewhat
          frantic over recent weeks.   In an attempt to put affairs in order before
          taking annual leave, I have come across a number of items of '
          correspondence from yourself which I have not replied to. I will
          therefore condense these replies into this one memo.

          1.   Review of Admin/Inspection System

               This document is almost complete and will be forwarded to you within
               the next few days.              »

          2.   Comments on the City Council's Draft Submission to the Inquiry

               I am in general agreement with the recommendations.      There are,
               however, one or two minor points.-

                (i)    Recommendation 2

               It should be made clear that we are suggesting that the "Green Guide"
               is given the same status as an Approved Code of Practice under the
               Health and Safety at Work Etc. Act.

               (ii)    Recommenation 9

               Information and standarisation is particularly relevant on a regional
               basis where emergency services will cover a number of district
               authorities.

          3.   Memo, of 10th August 1989 re. Interim Recommendations
               of the Taylor Inquiry

               The interim recommendations 39, 40, 41, 42 and 43 are issues that
               should rightly be considered by the advisory group. They relate to
               existing safety certificate conditions and are currently under the
               remit of this department.   Consultations have already been commenced
               by this department in relation to recommendation 40.

          4.   Letter from Eastwood and Partners - 21.7.89. re. Barrier
               Testing and Bramall Lane

                 (i)    Barrier testing is rightfully within the remit of the Building
                        Surveyor.

                (ii)    From my own point of view we should require a 4 yearly cycle
                        as of now.

               (iii)    The future of perimeter fences is adequately covered by the
                        interim report and we should not sanction works other than
                        those included in recommendations   6 to 10 of that report.
   tS S -^ lr & ’S
                                                                                                                  (^yC-c^G^le-Of                        ..fo            'ffe




                                                                                               O k .

                                                                                               Ofc.              .?       ot^tc a i~cR
                                                                                               fc.M                   k~ o   .

 J-f'N /)!_■_jOifetaSiaxi__                                                                    J
              M.     /Vw^ t p K ^                                                              Seg. cWc«44r -
                                                                                               /
  <?)
  ""7^__£> • sSb^vv^-                                                                          /
          _._ C _• (oexiei S .                                                                 2             ....
 A)          .4.                                                                               /
  to} _ C. & M 3 s                                                                             n/

 4 '                                                                                     ,.Z _               :        .
  4,
 -'.^i                                                                                       %/




  j       cxSa -o    c K a -cM J i.G i         'ftv P ‘1/    'f t i s j e     X?      >ajD                                       ....... .............jrv>—t'S S lC a ^ v s

budt           ’
               Xfc&S'                          ss V v O ' w X X > ^ i a e ,    C<y>                ltr>          "ffce,                                /~f       feJ^2j2,tjuS...
l)> c .       k & sjc s A       ixs .    i o          i>e_                            < x jt        ~ tfc&       7W ? v           <£)          tfc e         c^e< < r         ..... ..
             CL/EB


             5th October, 1989




The Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
50 Queen Anne"s Gate,
LONDON.
SW1H 9AT

Dear Sirs,

Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

I enclose herewith the recommendations to the Inquiry on behalf of
Sheffield City Council.

If you require any further information, please do not hesitate to contact
ray Assistant on the number shown below.

Yours faithfully,




Acting Head of Department


Enc.




MS2/AA




                                                 734059 - Mrs. Bashforth
            CL/EB


            6th October, 1989




Messrs. Keeble Hawson,
Solcitors,
Old Vicarage,
St. James Row,
SHEFFIELD.



For the attention of Mr. C. Gregory


Dear Mr. Gregory,

Recommendations to the Hillsborough Inquiry

Please find enclosed a copy of the recommendations submitted by Sheffield
City Council to the Inquiry.

Yours sincerely,




Acting Head of Department.




MS3AAB/MA




                                               734059 - Mrs. Bashforth
 T H E   H I L L S B O R O U G H   S T A D I U M   D I S A S T E R

                         15th April, 1989




Recommendations to the Inquiry on behalf of Sheffield City Council
                                  Page 1




                           I N T R O D U C T I O N




These recommendations and suggestions have been drawn together from

representatives with various interests within Sheffield City Council.


They are submitted having taken time to assess the effect of the

Hillsborough Disaster, the Inquiry and the Interim Recommendations of Lord

Justice Taylor which are being implemented in Sheffield.
                                       Page 2


1.   Clarification and Codification of Legislation

     If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the
     existing legislation then the opportunity could be taken to codify and
     clarify the legislation.

     The provisions, which are currently contained in the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act 1975, the Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987,
     various Regulations and statutory guidance could be remodelled to create one
     Act and Regulations (with functional statements) requiring certain standards
     to be achieved.

2.   Improvement/Prohibition Notices

     The 1975 legislation (as amended) makes provision for the issue of a
     Prohibition Notice to the holder of a certificate.  It is suggested that
     consideration should be given to including an intermediate course of action.
     The Health and Safety at Work, Etc. Act 1974 makes provision of the issue of
     Improvement Notices and Prohibition Notices. An Improvement Notice requires
     the employer to carry out certain works within a given time.  If the
     employer fails to comply with the Notice, they are guilty of an offence.

     The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a useful intermediate step
     where a Prohibition Notice is not appropriate, but where some formal Notice
     is required.

3.   Periodic Certificates and Inspections

     The Popplewell Report recommended (at paragraph 3.68) that there should be
     (i) annual renewal of safety certificates issued under the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act 1975; (ii) a duty on the local authority annually to inspect the
     premises prior to re-issuing the certificate; and (iii) power for the local
     authority to revoke the certificate.

     The interim recommendations compliment the first proposal; the second
     recommendation was implemented in statutory guidance after the Popplewell
     Report; the third recommendation has not been acted upon.

     With regard to the fii'st recommendation, annual certificates focus the
     parties' minds on the whole situation and not on a particular application or
     inspection.  It tends to promote- an overall review of the circumstances
     surrounding the re-issue of a certificate.

     With regard to the second recommendation, it is suggested that prior to
     re-issuing the certificate there should be an inspection, but that there
     should also be inspections on a half-yearly or quarterly basis with guidance
     given as to timing, e.g., prior to renewal, end of season, start of season,
     during season (obviously this is less relevant to multi-use stadia where
     "seasons" are not as clear cut.)

     Visits to the ground should be carried out whilst it is empty and during use
     but the limitations on "during use" inspections by their very nature must be
     recognised.

4.   Model Safety Certificate Conditions

     The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety
     certificate conditions should be drawn up. A standardised form of
     conditions could form the nucleus of all certificates.   Additional
     conditions could be added to cover local conditions.   This would enable some
                                       Page 3


      degree of national uniformity of application of conditions.  It would seem
      appropriate, that the Home Office draw up the standard conditions as it has
      done in respect of byelaws for example.

5.    Resource Implications - Fees

      At present it is suggested in Circular No. 72/1987 that the statutory
      inspection should not result in significant resource implications but that
      in general inspections are not expected to take more than about two man days
      per ground. This point is made in the context of emphasising the scope of
      inspections, together with associated report work and are not intended to be
      as detailed or extensive as that often required by the holder of the
      certificate.

      Clearly, more time is spent on safety of sports grounds than the Home Office
      anticipates. The resource implications involved for local authorities and
      their advisers from other services to implement the existing provisions and
      the new recommendations must be recognised.

      Although the certificating authority is allowed to charge fees for dealing
      with applications for the issue or amendment of a certificate (by virtue of
      the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) there is no express provision
      for fees for the ongoing work of enforcing the provisions of the Act and
      dealing with inspections that have to be carried out at least once a year.
      The Inquiry may wish to consider whether express provisions should be made
      to allow a certificating authority to make some reasonable charge.  There
      are many examples of legislation where local authorities are empowered to
      charge a reasonable fee to cover the cost of administering and enforcing a
      particular licensing function.

6.    Definition of Roles

      The Popplewell Report recommended that there should be urgent consultation
      between the Health and Safety Executive and the Fire Authorities and Local
      Authorities as how best to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and
      reports (paragraph 3.95).

      It has again become clear during the Inquiry that a lack of clarity in the
      definition of roles, 3s well as a lack of communication, can cause problems.
      This is particularly relevant in relation to the Police who are involved in
      the safety.of sports grounds in a number of roles, e.g. a member of the
      Advisory Group, upholders of law and order and their role inside and outside
      the Ground.  It is also relevant to consider if and at what point in an
      emergency the role of the safety officer is subsumed by the emergency
      services.

      Clarification, following consultation, is needed of the different roles
      Authorities are required to fulfil and the means of communication between
      them.

7 .   The Advisory Group

      The Police and the Building Authority and, for metropolitan districts
      subsequent to local government reorganisation, the Police and the Fire
      Authority, have to be consulted by the certificating authority by virtue of
      the legislation.  Sheffield City Council have included officers from the
      Building Authority and Health and Consumer Services in their Advisory Group
      prior to this Inquiry.
                                         Page 4


      The legislation therefore, provides the basis of expert opinion on which the
      Local Authority makes decisions.

      The decision making process can take a number of forms, but perhaps the two
      extremes are:-

      (a) where all the experts are in agreement that decision is delegated to an
      officer of the Council, where one or more experts differ - that decision is
      delegated to an appropriate committee of the Council;

      (b) the appropriate committee considers all matters relating to works
      carried out at the sports ground.

      Further guidance could be   given over and above that contained in the interim
      recommendations as to the   preferred course of action.

      In addition to the statutory consultees, together with those recommended in
      the Interim Report, i.e., the Ambulance Service, the Club and the recognised
      Supporters' Club, consideration should be given as to whether any other
      bodies should be involved in the wider Advisory Group, e.g., Health and
      Safety Executive.

      It may also be necessary to have a consultation group consisting of Police,
      Fire, Building Authority, Environmental Health, Ambulance Service in
      addition to the wider Advisory Group.

      Members should be able to have professional advice from officers.

8 . Pooling of Information

      Some consideration should   be given to pooling informationon a national
      basis to improve the flow   of that information.

      Information should be available to all certificating Authorities and their
      statutory consultees. This would assist to achieve a degree of uniformity
      throughout the country and enable all Authorities to learn from each others
      experiences.

      This is particularly relevant to regional level where the emergency services
      will cover a number of District Authorities.

 9.   Safety Management and Safety Planning

      Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as essential
      aspects of their business and not an adjunct to it. It is essential for
      safety responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of
      accountability to be included. Any regulations or the "Green Guide" could
      usefully develop this theme. The term safety planning is preferable to that
      of emergency planning in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
      safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should
      promote better safety standards. All relevant agencies should be included
      in the planning process.  Safety planning is aimed to prevent disasters as
      well as providing contingency plans to ensure emergencies and disasters can
      be coped with.

10.   Status and Content of the "Green Guide"

      A comprehensive review of the status and content of the Green Guide is
      required.  The present guide to safety of sports grounds is predominantly
      written for football single use stadia. Multi use stadia are becoming more
                                  Page 5


popular and it is suggested that the guide be expanded to cover spectator
safety requirements pertaining to a wider variety of sports, e.g., speedway,
stock car racing, hockey, archery, shooting, etc. and other potentially
dangerous activities.

In addition, either by expansion of the guide or by the creation of a
similar document, requirements for spectator safety of fully enclosed stadia
should be created.

"Flexibility"

The 1986 edition of the Green Guide, paragraph 6, states as follows:-

"Deviations from individual guidelines are possible without necessarily
detracting from the overall safety of the ground.  The variety of type,
function and layout of sports grounds means that a flexible approach should
be maintained to take account of the particular circumstances at individual
grounds".

And paragraph 8 states:-

"It should be borne in mind when using the guide to assess whether existing
circumstances provide adequately for the safety of spectators the criteria
to be aimed for is that of a reasonable degree of safety.  It would be
unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the absolute safety of
everyone attending a ground".

And, again in paragraph 11:—

"The principles referred to in paragraphs 4-10 above should be kept in mind
by both ground management and, where applicable, by the local authority when
applying the guide to an individual ground.  The guide is an aid to, not a
substitute for, professional judgment and common sense".

There is a problem in affording the Green Guide this kind of status. What
is "flexibility" to one mind may be slap-dash permissiveness to another.
Clearly, emphasis on flexibility was and is well intentioned, but the effect
is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where non-compliance
can be justified as falling within the scope of some flexible discretion
allowed to the relevant authority.

For the future perhaps the Inquiry would wish to consider recommending that
the approach of the Green Guide should move away from that of "flexibility"
to, for example, an approach of the following kind:-

"That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the club itself,
should always seek to establish whether there is some reasonable cause why a
relevant guideline is not c.omplied with, and that in the absence of some
such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the guideline should be
achieved or insisted upon". A recommendation not to comply with a relevant
guideline should be in writing and approved by the-certificating authority.
If such a decision is considered by the relevant committee of the Council
then the public will have access to that information.

Parts of the existing guide could become regulatory and other parts
re-issued (in a revised form) as a guide cf. the majority of the Approved
Documents to the Building Regulations or an "Approved Code of Practice" cf.
status of an approved code of practice under the Health and Safety at Work,
Etc., Act 1974.  In the case of documents similar to the Building
Regulations compliance would therefore not be necessary, yet failure to
                                       Page 6


      comply with the Guide could be taken as being evidence tending to show that
      the requirements had not been met, unless it could be demonstrated by the
      party concerned, using other means, that the requirements of the legislation
      had been satisfied.

11.   Specific Recommendations in relation to the Structure and Design
      Requirements for a Sports Ground

      General Fabric

      It is recommended that the headroom for tunnels be increased from 2.4 metres
      to at least 3 metres to facilitate overhead viewing of any crushing or other
      problems occuring along its length.

      Due to the possible risk of explosion, it is suggested that gas
      installations should not be permitted in any building in the stadia used for
      spectator accommodation,  cf. tower blocks.

      To cater for different speeds of travel through tunnels or restricted
      passageways longer than, say, 5 metres, a minimum of 4 units of exit width
      should be provided.

      Ingress

      Segregation of entrances for supporters of opposing teams is recommended as
      a permanent design criteria.

      Permanent unobstructed access to the pitch area for emergency vehicles to be
      provided in at least two positions, and these being at opposite ends of the
      ground (whenever possible).

      The "guide" states a maximum notional rate of 750 persons per turnstile per
      hour, however it does not state the design time, i.e., the time within which
      all spectators are capable of being admitted.  It is suggested that a
      revised code should state a maximum ingress design time of say, 45 minutes.
      For multi use stadia, in particular, investigation of the flow rate should
      be carried out as rates may differ, e.g., for families with young children.

      Terraces

      Where terraces are to be sub-divided so as to avoid major migration and
      sideways surge, each section should be formed by inserting radial barriers.
      Radial fences should be avoided.

      It is considered that spectator accommodation should not be lower than the
      pitch level or pitch perimeter path level (whichever is the higher), so that
      spectators do not have to step up from the spectator accommodation.
      In the present "guide", it states "gradients steeper than 1:2 (26°, 34')
      could be dangerous" (paragraph 94).  In Table 1 barrier requirements are
      specified for terrace gradients of up to 30° or 1:1.7, therefore
      contradicting the previous statement. From a graphical interpolation and
      extrapolation of all the relevant data the maximum gradient should be 31°,
      30'. This equates to approximately 1:1.63.

      Crush Barriers - Design

      To avoid rusting in unseen and non-maintainable places, overclipped barrier
      rail supports should no longer be acceptable. All parts of barriers should
      be capable of direct inspection and maintenance.
                                   Page 7


Welding of all joints would achieve the aims set out in the above paragraph
and will create a structural continuity where the failure of an individual
element would minimise the risk of collapse.

Consideration should be given to the application of horizontal, (in addition
to lateral) forces. This could be taken as 5% of the horizontal force thus
resisting torsional and secondary effects.

The recommended heights of the barrier rails should be re-assessed.
Clarification is also required (preferably by sketch) to show where this
measurement should be taken from. The present "guide" appears to make an
assumption that the barrier rail is in the same vertical plane as the
terrace riser. When these vertical planes differ, the method of height
measurement may also differ.  The acid test being at what level a normal
person would stand who was comfortable, immediately behind the barrier.

The opportunity should be taken to re-appraise the required test and design
loads. An increase would achieve a greater resistance to collapse but may
increase the risk of injury due to resisting greater crowd pressures.  A
decrease, however, may result in earlier collapse, yet may prevent fatal
injury.

Crush Barriers - Testing

It is suggested that each barrier span should be tested separately (for rail
strength) and then adjacent spans be tested together to determine rail and
support strength.

The specification of the test should be modified to clearly state how
recovery deflection is to be calculated.  Such a modification should be in
accordance with the testing procedures in BS 5950 and other similar British
Standard documents.

To avoid any further doubt, a standardised test specification and procedure
is now required. This should include a specification of a standardised
testing rig and a standardised test result sheet.

Stands with seated accommodation

Although steeper gradients can create better forward viewing for the
spectators, very steep gradients will have the effect of creating equally
steep radial gangways and may create a domino effect during an evacuation
where all persons may be stood - instead of being seated.   No maximum
gradient is directly stated in the present guide for seated areas; the only
tenuous 'reference being to the maximum calculated gradient for stairways in
paragraph 73 as being 34°,9 1. It is considered that seated accommodation
greater than 30° should have intermediate crush barriers at approximately 5
metre centres.

Pitch Perimeter Fences

The Popplewell Report (paragraph 4.136 to 4.138 and also Appendix 'E1,
paragraph E29) recommended that consideration should be given to the design
of a standard efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.

As a direct result of the Hillsborough disaster it has been suggested that
spectators may feel reassured by the possibility of forward escape onto the
pitch from all sides of the ground.
                                  Page 8


If pitch perimeter fences are to remain, it is suggested that at least 50%
of its linear length is openable and such openings are evenly spaced so as
to provide maximum benefit for spectators' safety.

Where pitch side police or stewards require access into the spectator area
through relatively small doors or gates, these may be provided as additional
openings or as wicket gates in the large opening panels.

So as to avoid sudden forward movement, all such gates should be vertically
multi-hinged and open towards the pitch.  Collapsible panels should not be
acceptable.  It is a further pre-requisite that the release mechanism should
be

a ) capable of being operational remotely in tandem with others;

b) capable of independent opening whilst under crowd pressure, by the
   operation of a quick release, manually operated catch;

c) all opening devices must be capable of use under crowd loading
   conditions.

In order to simplify any new designs of catch for pitch perimeter gates and
bearing in mind the fact that there should be no spectators on the pitch
side of the opening sections of the perimeter fencing, test loading on
perimeter fences could be reduced to, say 3 KN/m.

Estimation of Space Capacity - Terraces

Under the present "guide", terraces in good condition can be calculated as
capable of holding a maximum of 54 persons per 10 m2 , throughout the
available terraced area. It is, however, accepted that some parts of that
area are "peak viewing areas" and as such will achieve in    practice a greater
population density due to their popularity.  The figure of 54/10 m 2 is
therefore an average, without the peak viewing parts being given a maximum
packing density.

It is considered that the 54/10 m 2 should be treated as being the maximum
and therefore only be applied to the areas of peak viewing.   Other areas of
the terrace should be*calculated as having a lower packing density, say
40/10 m 2 .

In order to practically achieve the consideration set out in the above
paragraph, it would be necessary to:-

(a)   Define the size and position of "peak viewing areas".

(b)   Surround the areas of "peak viewing" using radial barriers as opposed
      to radial fences.

(c)   Determine by effective stewarding or policing that the crowd density
      of each "peak viewing area" is at a satisfactory, safe and comfortable
      level.

Flow Rates

Throughout the Inquiry, the flow rate of 40 and 60 persons per minute per
unit of exit width have been heavily criticised as being based on
inconclusive research. A practical lesson that has been learned is that
                                        Page 9


      when people are very tightly packed, their ability to flow through exits is
      dramatically reduced. Until the outcome of further research is known, it is
      suggested that flow rates are reduced to the following:-

      (a)   "Peak viewing area" of terraces - 30 persons per minute per unit of
            exit width.

      (b)   All other areas - 40 persons per minute per unit of exit width.

      It is considered that the emergency evacuation time should remain at 2 i
      minutes.

12.   Stewards

      Training of Stewards should be carried out by people who have experience in
      training and safety. Training should be regular to remind existing Stewards
      of procedures and ensure that new Stewards receive appropriate training.

      The acceptable age range for Stewards should be specified as being between
      eighteen and sixty five years, in addition to the current requirements
      relating to fitness etc.

      A Steward (or a police officer) carrying out isolated tasks, e.g. external
      gate duty, should be provided with an efficient means of communication with
      the Safety Officer.

13.   National First Aid Guidelines

      There is the need for national first aid guidelines which are drawn up with
      particular reference to occasions when large numbers of people are likely to
      be present, e.g.  football matches, pop concerts etc.

      It is also important for the individuals expected to provide first aid to
      receive appropriate training.

14.   Counselling and Support for Victims

      Substantial knowledge and experience now exists about the services the
      public and those directly affected by a disaster need afterwards.   These
      responses are informed by an understanding of the potentially long-term
      needs of victims.  Initiatives must be taken immediately after the disaster
      without waiting for requests for help and be available for a period of at
      least two years. Their establishment and co-ordination with the voluntary
      sector and between statutory organisations needs to be undertaken on the
      basis of an agreed general plan. The services have to be carefully
      provided, managed and last appropriate lengths of time, if the bereaved,
      survivors and rescue staff are not to suffer lasting damage.  These
      co-ordinated services are expensive to provide and outside of the normal
      provision made by local authorities.  Therefore their establishment and
      continuance is dependent on new and additional resources being made
      available.  Such separate funding needs to be made available.

15.   Public Appeals

      The legal issues surrounding public appeals are complicated, e.g. charitable
      status, tax etc. Guidelines are required on the establishment,
      administration and termination of disaster appeals to ensure that funds are
      distributed as fairly, quickly and effectively as possible.
                                        Page 10


16.   Pre-Match Entertainment

      Further to recommendation 25 in the Interim Report, consideration should be
      given as to whether pre-match entertainment and associated activities can
      influence the type of crowd attending football matches (in particular) and
      for example can therefore be used to encourage family attendance.  Such
      entertainment may also result in staggered entry times.

17 . Day and Time

      Consideration should also be given to what effect changing the day and/or
      time of kick off of football matches, in particular, may have on crowd
      behaviour and therefore crowd safety.

18.   Football Membership Schemes - I.D. Cards

      The Popplewell Report recommends (at paragraph 4.128) that consideration
      should be given to some form of membership scheme for football league clubs
      in England and Wales.

      However, in view of the experiences at Hillsborough, careful consideration
      needs to be given to any national football membership scheme. It would
      clearly be undesirable if any such scheme resulted in significant delays at
      turnstiles.

      There are other practical considerations which must be taken into account,
      e.g., patterns of attendance, different method of entry, space required for
      a complex admission system, i.e., two turnstile systems, number of
      turnstiles required, additional policing/stewarding required to control the
      crowd and eject individuals, where to eject individuals from and how and
      reducing further the ground capacity.

19.   All Ticket Entry

      In order to increase the speed of ingress of spectators, consideration could
      be given to requiring all ticket entry for events where greater than, say,
      70% of the total available capacity could be expected.




 HB8AAC/JJJ
 T H E   H I L L   S B O R O U G H   S T A D I U M   D I S A S T E R

                           15th April, 1989




Recommendations to the Inquiry on behalf of Sheffield City Council
                                  Page 1




                           I N T R O D U C T I O N




These recommendations and suggestions have been drawn together from

representatives with various interests within Sheffield City Council.


They are submitted having taken time to assess the effect of the

Hillsborough Disaster, the^Inquiry and the Interim Recommendations of Lord

Justice Taylor which are being implemented in Sheffield.
                                       Page 2


1.   Clarification and Codification of Legislation

     If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the
     existing legislation then the opportunity could be taken to codify and
     clarify the legislation.

     The provisions, which are currently contained in the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act 1975, the Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987,
     various Regulations and statutory guidance could be remodelled to create one
     Act and Regulations (with functional statements) requiring certain standards
     to be achieved.

2.   Improvement/Prohibition Notices

     The 1975 legislation (as amended) makes provision for the issue of a
     Prohibition Notice to the holder of a certificate. It is suggested that
     consideration should be given to including an intermediate course of action.
     The Health and Safety at Work, Etc. Act 1974 makes provision of the issue of
     Improvement Notices and Prohibition Notices. An Improvement Notice requires
     the employer to carry out certain works within a given time.  If the
     employer fails to comply with the Notice, they are guilty of an offence.

     The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a useful intermediate step
     where a Prohibition Notice is not appropriate, but where some formal Notice
     is required.

3.   Periodic Certificates and Inspections

     The Popplewell Report recommended (at paragraph 3.68) that there should be
     (i) annual renewal of safety certificates issued under the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act 1975; (ii) a duty on the local authority annually to inspect the
     premises prior to re-issuing the certificate; and (iii) power for the local
     authority to revoke the certificate.

     The interim recommendations compliment the first proposal; the second
     recommendation was implemented in statutory guidance after the Popplewell
     Report; the third recommendation has not been acted upon.

     With regard to the fiifst recommendation, annual certificates focus the
     parties' minds on the whole situation and not on a particular application or
     inspection.  It tends to promote an overall review of the circumstances
     surrounding the re-issue of a certificate.

     With regard to the second recommendation, it is suggested that prior to
     re-issuing the certificate there should be an inspection, but that there
     should also be inspections on a half-yearly or quarterly basis with guidance
     given as to timing, e.g., prior to renewal, end of season, start of season,
     during season (obviously this is less relevant to multi-use stadia where
     "seasons" are not as clear cut.)

     Visits to the ground should be carried out whilst it is empty and during use
     but the limitations on "during use" inspections by their very nature must be
     recognised.

4.   Model Safety Certificate Conditions

     The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety
     certificate conditions should be drawn up. A standardised form of
     conditions could form the nucleus of all certificates.   Additional
     conditions could be added to cover local conditions.   This would enable some
                                       Page 3


      degree of national uniformity of application of conditions.  It would seem
      appropriate, that the Home Office draw up the standard conditions as it has
      done in respect of byelaws for example.

5.    Resource Implications - Fees

      At present it is suggested in Circular No. 72/1987 that the statutory
      inspection should not result in significant resource implications but that
      in general inspections are not expected to take more than about two man days
      per ground. This point is made in the context of emphasising the scope of
      inspections, together with associated report work and are not intended to be
      as detailed or extensive as that often required by the holder of the
      certificate.

      Clearly, more time is spent on safety of sports grounds than the Home Office
      anticipates. The resource implications involved for local authorities and
      their advisers from other services to implement the existing provisions and
      the new recommendations must be recognised.

      Although the certificating authority is allowed to charge fees for dealing
      with applications for the issue or amendment of a certificate (by virtue of
      the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) there is no express provision
      for fees for the ongoing work of enforcing the provisions of the Act and
      dealing with inspections that have to be carried out at least once a year.
      The Inquiry may wish to consider whether express provisions should be made
      to allow a certificating authority to make some reasonable charge. There
      are many examples of legislation where local authorities are empowered to
      charge a reasonable fee to cover the cost of administering and enforcing a
      particular licensing function.

6.    Definition of Roles

      The Popplewell Report recommended that there should be urgent consultation
      between the Health and Safety Executive and the Fire Authorities and Local
      Authorities as how best to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and
      reports (paragraph 3.95).

      It has again become clear during the Inquiry that a lack of clarity in the
      definition of roles, as well as a lack of communication, can cause problems.
      This is particularly relevant in relation to the Police who are involved in
      the safety.of sports grounds in a number of roles, e.g. a member of the
      Advisory Group, upholders of law and order and their role inside and outside
      the Ground.  It is also relevant to consider if and at what point in an
      emergency the role of the safety officer is subsumed by the emergency
      services.

      Clarification, following consultation, is needed of the different roles
      Authorities are required to fulfil and the means of communication between
      them.

7 .   The Advisory Group

      The Police and the Building Authority and, for metropolitan districts
      subsequent to local government reorganisation, the Police and the Fire
      Authority, have to be consulted by the certificating authority by virtue of
      the legislation.  Sheffield City Council have included officers from the
      Building Authority and Health and Consumer Services in their Advisory Group
      prior to this Inquiry.
                                          Page 4


        The legislation therefore, provides the basis of expert opinion on which the
        Local Authority makes decisions.

        The decision making process can take a number of forms, but perhaps the two
        extremes are:-

        (a) where all the experts are in agreement that decision is delegated to an
        officer of the Council, where one or more experts differ - that decision is
        delegated to an appropriate committee of the Council;

        (b) the appropriate committee considers all matters relating to works
        carried out at the sports ground.

        Further guidance could be given over and above that contained in the interim
        recommendations as to the preferred course of action.

        In addition to the statutory consultees, together with those recommended in
        the Interim Report, i.e., the Ambulance Service, the Club and the recognised
        Supporters' Club, consideration should be given as to whether any other
        bodies should be involved in the wider Advisory Group, e.g., Health and
        Safety Executive.

        It may also be necessary to have a consultation group consisting of Police,
        Fire, Building Authority, Environmental Health, Ambulance Service in
        addition to the wider Advisory Group.

        Members should be able to have professional advice from officers.

8 .     Pooling of Information

        Some consideration should be given to pooling information on anational
        basis to improve the flow of that information.

        Information should be available to all certificating Authorities and their
        statutory consultees.  This would assist to achieve a degree of uniformity
        throughout the country and enable all Authorities to learn from each others
        experiences.

        This is particularly relevant to regional level where the emergency services
        will cover a number of District Authorities.

9.      Safety Management and Safety Planning

        Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as essential
        aspects of their business and not an adjunct to it. It is essential for
        safety responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of
        accountability to be included. Any regulations or the "Green Guide" could
        usefully develop this theme. The term safety planning is preferable tothat
        of emergency planning in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
        safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should
      ' promote better safety standards. All relevant agencies should be included
        in the planning process. Safety planning is aimed to prevent disasters as
        well as providing contingency plans to ensure emergencies and disasters can
        be coped with.

10.     Status and Content of the "Green Guide"

        A comprehensive review of the status and content of the Green Guide is
        required.  The present guide to safety of sports grounds is predominantly
        written for football single use stadia. Multi use stadia are becoming more
                                   Page 5


 popular and it is suggested that the guide be expanded to cover spectator
 safety requirements pertaining to a wider variety of sports, e.g., speedway,
 stock car racing, hockey, archery, shooting, etc. and other potentially
 dangerous activities.

 In addition, either by expansion of the guide or by the creation of a
 similar document, requirements for spectator safety of fully enclosed stadia
 should be created.

 "Flexibility"

 The 1986 edition of the Green Guide, paragraph 6, states as follows:-

 "Deviations from individual guidelines are possible without necessarily
 detracting from the overall safety of the ground.  The variety of type,
 function and layout of sports grounds means that a flexible approach should
 be maintained to take account of the particular circumstances at individual
 grounds".

 And paragraph 8 states:-

 "It should be borne in mind when using the guide to assess whether existing
 circumstances provide adequately for the safety of spectators the criteria
 to be aimed for is that of a reasonable degree of safety.  It would be
 unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the absolute safety of
 everyone attending a ground".

 And, again in paragraph 11:—

 "The principles referred to in paragraphs 4-10 above should be kept in mind
 by both ground management and, where applicable, by the local authority when
 applying the guide to an individual ground.  The guide- is an aid to, not a
 substitute for, professional judgment and common sense".

 There is a problem in affording the Green Guide this kind of status. What
 is "flexibility" to one mind may be slap-dash permissiveness to another.
 Clearly, emphasis on flexibility was and is well intentioned, but the effect
 is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where non-compliance
 can be justified as falling within the scope of some flexible discretion
 allowed to the relevant authority.

 For the future perhaps the Inquiry would wish to consider recommending that
 the approach of the Green Guide should move away from that of "flexibility"
 to, for example, an approach of the following kind:-

 "That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the club itself,
 should always seek to establish whether there is some reasonable cause why a
 relevant guideline is not complied with, and that in the absence of some
 such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the guideline should be
 achieved or insisted upon". A recommendation not to comply with a relevant
 guideline should be in writing and approved by the certificating authority.
 If such a decision is considered by the relevant committee of the Council
 then the public will have access to that information.

  Parts of the existing guide could become regulatory and other parts
. re-issued (in a revised form) as a guide cf. the majority of the Approved
  Documents to the Building Regulations or an "Approved Code of Practice" cf.
  status of an approved code of practice under the Health and Safety at Work,
  Etc., Act 1974.  In the case of documents similar to the Building
  Regulations compliance would therefore not be necessary, yet failure to
                                       Page 6


      comply with the Guide could be taken as being evidence tending to show that
      the requirements had not been met, unless it could be demonstrated by the
      party concerned, using other means, that the requirements of the legislation
      had been satisfied.

11.   Specific Recommendations in relation to the Structure and Design
      Requirements for a Sports Ground

      General Fabric

      It is recommended that the headroom for tunnels be increased from 2.4 metres
      to at least 3 metres to facilitate overhead viewing of any crushing or other
      problems occuring along its length.

      Due to the possible risk of explosion, it is suggested that gas
      installations should not be permitted in any building in the stadia used for
      spectator accommodation,  cf. tower blocks.

      To cater for different speeds of travel through tunnels or restricted
      passageways longer than, say, 5 metres, a minimum of 4 units of exit width
      should be provided.

      Ingress

      Segregation of entrances for supporters of opposing teams is recommended as
      a permanent design criteria.

      Permanent unobstructed access to the pitch area for emergency vehicles to be
      provided in at least two positions, and these being at opposite ends of the
      ground (whenever possible).

      The "guide" states a maximum notional rate of 750 persons per turnstile per
      hour, however it does not state the design time, i.e., the time within which
      all spectators are capable of being admitted.   It is suggested that a
      revised code should state a maximum ingress design time of say, 45 minutes.
      For multi use stadia, in particular, investigation of the flow rate should
      be carried out as rates may differ, e.g., for families with young children.

      Terraces

      Where terraces are to be sub-divided so as to avoid major migration and
      sideways surge, each section should be formed by inserting radial barriers.
      Radial fences should be avoided.

      It is considered that spectator accommodation should not be lower than the
      pitch level or pitch perimeter path level (whichever is the higher), so that
      spectators do not have to step up from the spectator accommodation.
      In the present "guide", it states "gradients steeper than 1:2 (26°, 34')
      could be dangerous" (paragraph 94).   In Table 1 barrier requirements are
      specified for terrace gradients of up to 30° or 1:1.7, therefore
      contradicting the previous statement. From a graphical interpolation and
      extrapolation of all the relevant data the maximum gradient should be 31°,
      30'.  This equates to approximately 1:1.63.

      Crush Barriers - Design

      To avoid rusting in unseen and non-maintainable places, overclipped barrier
      rail supports should no longer be acceptable. All parts of barriers should
      be capable of direct inspection and maintenance.
                                   Page 7


Welding of all joints would achieve the aims set out in the above paragraph
and will create a structural continuity where the failure of an individual
element would minimise the risk of collapse.

Consideration should be given to the application of horizontal, (in addition
to lateral) forces. This could be taken as 5% of the horizontal force thus
resisting torsional and secondary effects.

The recommended heights of the barrier rails should be re-assessed.
Clarification is also required (preferably by sketch) to show where this
measurement should be taken from. The present "guide" appears to make an
assumption that the barrier rail is in the same vertical plane as the
terrace riser. When these vertical planes differ, the method of height
measurement may also differ.  The acid test being at what level a normal
person would stand who was comfortable, immediately behind the barrier.

The opportunity should be taken to re-appraise the required test and design
loads. An increase would achieve a greater resistance to collapse but may
increase the risk of injury due to resisting greater crowd pressures. A
decrease, however, may result in earlier collapse, yet may prevent fatal
injury.

Crush Barriers - Testing

It is suggested that each barrier span should be tested separately (for rail
strength) and then adjacent spans be tested together to determine rail and
support strength.

The specification of the test should be modified to clearly state how
recovery deflection is to be calculated.  Such a modification should be in
accordance with the testing procedures in BS 5950 and other similar British
Standard documents.

To avoid any further doubt, a standardised test specification and procedure
is now required.  This should include a specification of a standardised
testing rig and a standardised test result sheet.

Stands with seated accommodation

Although steeper gradients can create better forward viewing for the
spectators, very steep gradients will have the effect of creating equally
steep radial gangways and may create a domino effect during an evacuation
where all persons may be stood - instead of being seated. No maximum
gradient is directly stated in the present guide for seated areas; the only
tenuous reference being to the maximum calculated gradient for stairways in
paragraph 73 as being 34°,9'.  It is considered that seated accommodation
greater than 30° should have intermediate crush barriers at approximately 5
metre centres.

Pitch Perimeter Fences

The Popplewell Report (paragraph 4.136 to 4.138 and also Appendix 'E',
paragraph E29) recommended that consideration should be given to the design
of a standard efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.

As a direct result of the Hillsborough disaster it has been suggested that
spectators may feel reassured by the possibility of forward escape onto the
pitch from all sides of the ground.
                                  Page 8


If pitch perimeter fences are to remain, it is suggested that at least 50%
of its linear length is openable and such openings are evenly spaced so as
to provide maximum benefit for spectators' safety.

Where pitch side police or stewards require access into the spectator area
through relatively small doors or gates, these may be provided as additional
openings or as wicket gates in the large opening panels.

So as to avoid sudden forward movement, all such gates should be vertically
multi-hinged and open towards the pitch.  Collapsible panels should not be
acceptable. It is a further pre-requisite that the release mechanism should
be :-

a) capable of being operational remotely in tandem with others;

b) capable of independent opening whilst under crowd pressure, by the
   operation of a quick release, manually operated catch;

c) all opening devices must be capable of use under crowd loading
   conditions.

In order to simplify any new designs of catch for pitch perimeter gates and
bearing in mind the fact that there should be no spectators on the pitch
side of the opening sections of the perimeter fencing, test loading on
perimeter fences could be reduced to, say 3 KN/m.

Estimation of Space Capacity - Terraces

Under the present "guide", terraces in good condition can be calculated as
capable of holding a maximum of 54 persons per 10 m ^ , throughout the
available terraced area. It is, however, accepted that some parts of that
area are "peak viewing areas" and as such will achieve in    practice a greater
population density due to their popularity.  The figure of 54/10 m^ is
therefore an average, without the peak viewing parts being given a maximum
packing density.

It is considered that the 54/10 m^ should be treated as being the maximum
and therefore only be applied to the areas of peak viewing.  Other areas of
the terrace should be'calculated as having a lower packing density, say
40/10 m2.

In order to practically achieve the consideration set out in the above
paragraph, it would be necessary to:-

(a)   Define the size and position of "peak viewing areas".

(b)   Surround the areas of "peak viewing" using radial barriers as opposed
      to radial fences.

(c)   Determine by effective stewarding or policing that the crowd density
      of each "peak viewing area" is at a satisfactory, safe and comfortable
      level.

Flow Rates

Throughout the Inquiry, the flow rate of 40 and 60 persons per minute per
unit of exit width have been heavily criticised as being based on
inconclusive research. A practical lesson that has been learned is that
                                         Page 9


       when people are very tightly packed, their ability to flow through exits is
       dramatically reduced. Until the outcome of further research is known, it is
       suggested that flow rates are reduced to the following:-

       (a)   "Peak viewing area" of terraces - 30 persons per minute per unit of
             exit width.

       (b)   All other areas - 40 persons per minute per unit of exit width.

       It is considered that the emergency evacuation time should remain at 2 i
       minutes.

12.    Stewards

       Training of Stewards should be carried out by people who have experience in
       training and safety. Training should be regular to remind existing Stewards
       of procedures and ensure that new Stewards receive appropriate training.

       The acceptable age range for Stewards should be specified as being between
       eighteen and sixty five years, in addition to the current requirements
       relating to fitness etc.

       A Steward (or a police officer) carrying out isolated tasks, e.g. external
       gate duty, should be provided with an efficient means of communication with
       the Safety Officer.

13 .   National First Aid Guidelines

       There is the need for national first aid guidelines which are drawn up with
       particular reference to occasions when large numbers of people are likely to
       be present, e.g.  football matches, pop concerts etc.

       It is also important for the individuals expected to provide first aid to
       receive appropriate training.

14.    Counselling and Support for Victims

       Substantial knowledge and experience now exists about the services the
       public and those directly affected by a disaster need afterwards.    These
       responses are informed by an understanding of the potentially long-term
       needs of victims.  Initiatives must be taken immediately after the disaster
       without waiting for requests for help and be available for a period of at
       least two years. Their establishment and co-ordination with the voluntary
       sector and between statutory organisations needs to be undertaken on the
       basis of an agreed general plan. The services have to be carefully
       provided, managed and last appropriate lengths of time, if the bereaved,
       survivors and rescue staff are not to suffer lasting damage.   These
       co-ordinated services are expensive to provide and outside of the normal
       provision made by local authorities.  Therefore their establishment and
       continuance is dependent on new and additional resources being made
       available.  Such separate funding needs to be made available.

15.    Public Appeals

       The legal issues surrounding public appeals are complicated, e.g. charitable
       status, tax etc. Guidelines are required on the establishment,
       administration and termination of disaster appeals to ensure that funds are
       distributed as fairly, quickly and effectively as possible.
                                        Page 10


16.   Pre-Match Entertainment

      Further to recommendation 25 in the Interim Report, consideration should be
      given as to whether pre-match entertainment and associated activities can
      influence the type of crowd attending football matches (in particular) and
      for example can therefore be used to encourage family attendance.  Such
      entertainment may also result in staggered entry times.

17.   Day and Time

      Consideration should also be given to what effect changing the day and/or
      time of kick off of football matches, in particular, may have on crowd
      behaviour and therefore crowd safety.

18.   Football Membership Schemes - I.D. Cards

      The Popplewell Report recommends (at paragraph 4.128) that consideration
      should be given to some form of membership scheme for football league clubs
      in England and Wales.

      However, in view of the experiences at Hillsborough, careful consideration
      needs to be given to any national football membership scheme.  It would
      clearly be undesirable if any such scheme resulted in significant delays at
      turnstiles.

      There are other practical considerations which must be taken into account,
      e.g., patterns of attendance, different method of entry, space required for
      a complex admission system, i.e., two turnstile systems, number of
      turnstiles required, additional policing/stewarding required to control the
      crowd and eject individuals, where to eject individuals from and how and
      reducing further the ground capacity.

19.   All Ticket Entry

      In order to increase the speed of ingress of spectators, consideration could
      be given to requiring all ticket entry for events where greater than, say,
      70% of the total available capacity could be expected.




 HB8AAC/JJJ
T H E   H I L L S B O R O U G H    S T A D I U M   D I S A S T E R

                         15th April, 1989




Recommendations to the Inquiry on behalf of Sheffield City Council
1




                                      Page 1




                               I N T R O D U C T I O N




    These recommendations and suggestions have been drawn together from

    representatives with various interests within Sheffield City Council.


    They are submitted having taken time to assess the effect of the

    Hillsborough Disaster, the Inquiry and the Interim Recommendations of Lord

    Justice Taylor which are being implemented in Sheffield.
                                       Page 2


1.   Clarification and Codification of Legislation

     If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the
     existing legislation then the opportunity could be taken to codify and
     clarify the legislation.

     The provisions, which are currently contained in the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act 1975, the Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987,
     various Regulations and statutory guidance could be remodelled to create one
     Act and' Regulations (with functional statements) requiring certain standards
     to be achieved.

2.   Improvement/Prohibition Notices

     The 1975 legislation (as amended) makes provision for the issue of a
     Prohibition Notice to the holder of a certificate.  It is suggested that
     consideration should be given to including an intermediate course of action.
     The Health and Safety at Work, Etc. Act 1974 makes provision of the issue of
     Improvement Notices and Prohibition Notices. An Improvement Notice requires
     the employer to carry out certain works within a given time. If the
     employer fails to comply with the Notice, they are guilty of an offence.

     The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a useful intermediate step
     where a Prohibition Notice is not appropriate, but where some formal Notice
     is required.

3.   Periodic Certificates and Inspections

     The Popplewell Report recommended (at paragraph 3.68) that there should be
     (i) annual renewal of safety certificates issued under the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act 1975; (ii) a duty on the local authority annually to inspect the
     premises prior to re-issuing the certificate; and (iii) power for the local
     authority to revoke the certificate.

     The interim recommendations compliment the first proposal; the second
     recommendation was implemented in statutory guidance after the Popplewell
     Report; the third recommendation has not been acted upon.

     With regard to the fiifst recommendation, annual certificates focus the
     parties' minds on the whole situation and not on a particular application or
     inspection. It tends to promote an overall review of the circumstances
     surrounding the re-issue of a certificate.

     With regard to the second recommendation, it is suggested that prior to
     re-issuing the certificate there should be an inspection, but that there
     should also be inspections on a half-yearly or quarterly basis with guidance
     given as to timing, e.g., prior to renewal, end of season, start of season,
     during season (obviously this is less relevant to multi-use stadia where
     "seasons" are not as clear cut.)

     Visits to the ground should be carried out whilst it is empty and during use
     but the limitations on "during use" inspections by their very nature must be
     recognised.

4.   Model Safety Certificate Conditions

     The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety
     certificate conditions should be drawn up. A standardised form of
     conditions could form the nucleus of all certificates.   Additional
     conditions could be added to cover local conditions.   This would enable some
                                      Page 3


     degree of national uniformity of application of conditions.  It would seem
     appropriate, that the Home Office draw up the standard conditions as it has
     done in respect of byelaws for example.

5.   Resource Implications - Fees

     At present it is suggested in Circular No. 72/1987 that the statutory
     inspection should not result in significant resource implications but that
     in general inspections are not expected to take more than about two man days
     per ground. This point is made in the context of emphasising the scope of
     inspections, together with associated report work and are not intended to be
     as detailed or extensive as that often required by the holder of the
     certificate.

     Clearly, more time is spent on safety of sports grounds than the Home Office
     anticipates. The resource implications involved for local authorities and
     their advisers from other services to implement the existing provisions and
     the new recommendations must be recognised.

     Although the certificating authority is allowed to charge fees for dealing
     with applications for the issue or amendment of a certificate (by virtue of
     the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) there is no express provision
     for fees for the ongoing work of enforcing the provisions of the Act and
     dealing with inspections that have to be carried out at least once a year.
     The Inquiry may wish to consider whether express provisions should be made
     to allow a certificating authority to make some reasonable charge.  There
     are many examples of legislation where local authorities are empowered to
     charge a reasonable fee to cover the cost of administering and enforcing a
     particular licensing function.

6.   Definition of Roles

     The Popplewell Report recommended that there should be urgent consultation
     between the Health and Safety Executive and the Fire Authorities and Local
     Authorities as how best to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and
     reports (paragraph 3.95).

     It has again become clear during the Inquiry that a lack of clarity in the
     definition of roles, as well as a lack of communication, can cause problems.
     This is particularly relevant in relation to the Police who are involved in
     the safety.of sports grounds in a number of roles, e.g. a member of the
     Advisory Group, upholders of law and order and their role inside and outside
     the Ground.  It is also relevant to consider if and at what point in an
     emergency the role of the safety officer is subsumed by the emergency
     services.

     Clarification, following consultation, is needed of the different roles
     Authorities are required to fulfil and the means of communication between
     them.

7.   The Advisory Group

     The Police and the Building Authority and, for metropolitan districts
     subsequent to local government reorganisation, the Police and the Fire
     Authority, have to be consulted by the certificating authority by virtue of
     the legislation.  Sheffield City Council have included officers from the
     Building Authority and Health and Consumer Services in their Advisory Group
     prior to this Inquiry.
                                         Page 4


      The legislation therefore, provides the basis of expert opinion on which the
      Local Authority makes decisions.

      The decision making process can take a number of forms, but perhaps the two
      extremes are:-

      (a) where all the experts are in agreement that decision is delegated to an
      officer of the Council, where one or more experts differ - that decision is
      delegated to an appropriate committee of the Council;

      (b) the appropriate committee considers all matters relating to works
      carried out at the sports ground.

      Further guidance could be   given over and above that contained in the interim
      recommendations as to the   preferred course of action.

      In addition to the statutory consultees, together with those recommended in
      the Interim Report, i.e., the Ambulance Service, the Club and the recognised
      Supporters' Club, consideration should be given as to whether any other
      bodies should be involved in the wider Advisory Group, e.g., Health and
      Safety Executive.

      It may also be necessary to have a consultation group consisting of Police,
      Fire, Building Authority, Environmental Health, Ambulance Service in
      addition to the wider Advisory Group.

      Members should be able to have professional advice from officers.

8. • Pooling of Information

      Some consideration should   be given to pooling informationon a national
      basis to improve the flow   of that information.

      Information should be available to all certificating Authorities and their
      statutory consultees.  This would assist to achieve a degree of uniformity
      throughout the country and enable all Authorities to learn from each others
      experiences.

      This is particularly relevant to regional level where the emergency services
      will cover a number of District Authorities.

 9.   Safety Management and Safety Planning

      Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as essential
      aspects of their business and not an adjunct to it. It is essential for
      safety resppnsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of
      accountability to be included. Any regulations or the "Green Guide" could
      usefully develop this theme. The term safety planning is preferable to that
      of emergency planning in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
      safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should
      promote better safety standards. All relevant agencies should be included
      in the planning process. Safety planning is aimed to prevent disasters as
      well as providing contingency plans to ensure emergencies and disasters can
      be coped with.

10.   Status and Content of the "Green Guide"

      A comprehensive review of the status and content of the Green Guide is
      required.  The present guide to safety of sports grounds is predominantly
      written for football single use stadia. Multi use stadia are becoming more
                                  Page 5


popular and it is suggested that the guide be expanded to cover spectator
safety requirements pertaining to a wider variety of sports, e.g., speedway,
stock car racing, hockey, archery, shooting, etc. and other potentially
dangerous activities.

In addition, either by expansion of the guide or by the creation of a
similar document, requirements for spectator safety of fully enclosed stadia
should be created.

"Flexibility"

The 1986 edition of the Green Guide, paragraph 6, states as follows:-

"Deviations from individual guidelines are possible without necessarily
detracting from the overall safety of the ground.  The variety of type,
function and layout of sports grounds means that a flexible approach should
be maintained to take account of the particular circumstances at individual
grounds".

And paragraph 8 states:-

"It should be borne in mind when using the guide to assess whether existing
circumstances provide adequately for the safety of spectators the criteria
to be aimed for is that of a reasonable degree of safety. It would be
unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the absolute safety of
everyone attending a ground".

And, again in paragraph 11:-

"The principles referred to in paragraphs 4-10 above should be kept in mind
by both ground management and, where applicable, by the local authority when
applying the guide to an individual ground. The guide is an aid to, not a
substitute for, professional judgment and common sense".

There is a problem in affording the Green Guide this kind of status. What
is "flexibility" to one mind may be slap-dash permissiveness to another.
Clearly, emphasis on flexibility was and is well intentioned, but the effect
is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where non-compliance
can be justified as falling within the scope of some flexible discretion
allowed to the relevant authority.

For the future perhaps the Inquiry would wish to considerrecommending that
the approach of the Green Guide should move away from that of "flexibility"
to, for example, an approach of the following kind:-

"That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the club itself,
should always seek to establish whether there is some reasonable cause why a
relevant guideline is not complied with, and that in the absence of some
such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the guideline should be
achieved or insisted upon". A recommendation not to comply with a relevant
guideline should be in writing and approved by the certificating authority.
If such a decision is considered by the relevant committee of the Council
then the public will have access to that information.

Parts of the existing guide could become regulatory andother parts
re-issued (in a revised form) as a guide c f . the majority of the Approved
Documents to the Building Regulations or an "Approved Code of Practice" cf.
status of an approved code of practice under the Health and Safety at Work,
Etc., Act 1974. In the case of documents similar to the Building
Regulations compliance would therefore not be necessary, yet failure to
                                       Page 6


      comply with the Guide could be taken as being evidence tending to show that
      the requirements had not been met, unless it -could be demonstrated by the
      party concerned, using other means, that the requirements of the legislation
      had been satisfied.

11.   Specific Recommendations in relation to the Structure and Design
      Requirements for a Sports Ground

      General Fabric

      It is recommended that the headroom for tunnels be increased from 2.4 metres
      to at least 3 metres to facilitate overhead viewing of any crushing or other
      problems occuring along its length.

      Due to the possible risk of explosion, it is suggested that gas
      installations should not be permitted in any building in the stadia used for
      spectator accommodation,  cf. tower blocks.

      To cater for different speeds of travel through tunnels or restricted
      passageways longer than, say, 5 metres, a minimum of 4 units of exit width
      should be provided.

      Ingress

      Segregation of entrances for supporters of opposing teams is recommended as
      a permanent design criteria.

      Permanent unobstructed access to the pitch area for emergency vehicles to be
      provided in at least two positions, and these being at opposite ends of the
      ground (whenever possible).

      The "guide" states a maximum notional rate of 750 persons per turnstile per
      hour, however it does not state the design time, i.e., the time within which
      all spectators are capable of being admitted.  It is suggested that a
      revised code should state a maximum ingress design time of say, 45 minutes.
      For multi use stadia, in particular, investigation of the flow rate should
      be carried out as rates may differ, e.g., for families with young children.

      Terraces

      Where terraces are to be sub-divided so as to avoid major migration and
      sideways surge, each section should be formed by inserting radial barriers.
      Radial fences should be avoided.

      It is considered that spectator accommodation should not be lower than the
      pitch level or pitch perimeter path level (whichever is the higher), so that
      spectators do not have to step up from the spectator accommodation.
      In the present "guide", it states "gradients steeper than 1:2 (26°, 34')
      could be dangerous" (paragraph 94).  In Table 1 barrier requirements are
      specified for terrace gradients of up to 30° or 1:1.7, therefore
      contradicting the previous statement. From a graphical interpolation and
      extrapolation of all the relevant data the maximum gradient should be 31°,
      30'.  This equates to approximately 1:1.63.

      Crush Barriers - Design

      To avoid rusting in unseen and non-maintainable places, overclipped barrier
      rail supports should no longer be acceptable. All parts of barriers should
      be capable of direct inspection and maintenance.
                                   Page 7


Welding of all joints would achieve the aims set out in the above paragraph
and will create a structural continuity where the failure of an individual
element would minimise the risk of collapse.

Consideration should be given to the application of horizontal, (in addition
to lateral) forces.  This could be taken as 5% of the horizontal force thus
resisting torsional and secondary effects.

The recommended heights of the barrier rails should be re-assessed.
Clarification is also required (preferably by sketch) to show where this
measurement should be taken from. The present "guide" appears to make an
assumption that the barrier rail is in the same vertical plane as the
terrace riser. When these vertical planes differ, the method of height
measurement may also differ.  The acid test being at what level a normal
person would stand who was comfortable, immediately behind the barrier.

The opportunity should be taken to re-appraise the required test and design
loads. An increase would achieve a greater resistance to collapse but may
increase the risk of injury due to resisting greater crowd pressures. A
decrease, however, may result in earlier collapse, yet may prevent fatal
injury.

Crush Barriers - Testing

It is suggested that each barrier span should be tested separately (for rail
strength) and then adjacent spans be tested together to determine rail and
support strength.

The specification of the test should be modified to clearly state how
recovery deflection is to be calculated.  Such a modification should be in
accordance with the testing procedures in BS 5950 and other similar British
Standard documents.

To avoid any further doubt, a standardised test specification and procedure
is now required. This should include a specification of a standardised
testing rig and a standardised test result sheet.

Stands with seated accommodation

Although steeper gradients can create better forward viewing for the
spectators, very steep gradients will have the effect of creating equally,
steep radial gangways and may create a domino effect during an evacuation
where all persons may be stood - instead of being seated. No maximum
gradient is directly stated in the present guide for seated areas; the only
tenuous reference being to the maximum calculated gradient for stairways in
paragraph 73 as being 34°,9'.  It is considered that seated accommodation
greater than 30° should have intermediate crush barriers at approximately 5
metre centres.

Pitch Perimeter Fences

The Popplewell Report (paragraph 4.136 to 4.138 and also Appendix 'E1,
paragraph E29) recommended that consideration should be given to the design
of a standard efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.

As a direct result of the Hillsborough disaster it has been suggested that
spectators may feel reassured by the possibility of forward escape onto the
pitch from all sides of the ground.
                                  Page 8


If pitch perimeter fences are to remain, it is suggested that at least 50%
of its linear length is openable and such openings are evenly spaced so as
to provide maximum benefit for spectators' safety.

Where pitch side police or stewards require access into the spectator area
through relatively small doors or gates, these may be provided as additional
openings or as wicket gates in the large opening panels.

So as to avoid sudden forward movement, all such gates should be vertically
multi-hinged and open towards the pitch. Collapsible panels should not be
acceptable. It is a further pre-requisite that the release mechanism should
be :-

a) capable of being operational remotely in tandem with others;

b) capable of independent opening whilst under crowd pressure, by the
   operation of a quick release, manually operated catch;

c) all opening devices must be capable of use under crowd loading
   condi tions.

In order to simplify any new designs of catch for pitch perimeter gates and
bearing in mind the fact that there should be no spectators on the pitch
side of the opening sections of the perimeter fencing, test loading on
perimeter fences could be reduced to, say 3 KN/m.

Estimation of Space Capacity - Terraces

Under the present "guide", terraces in good condition can be calculated as
capable of holding a maximum of 54 persons per 10 m ^ , throughout the
available terraced area. It is, however, accepted that some parts of that
area are "peak viewing areas" and as such will achieve in    practice a greater
population density due to their popularity.  The figure of 54/10 m^ is
therefore an average, without the peak viewing parts being given a maximum
packing density.

It is considered that the 54/10 m^ should be treated as being the maximum
and therefore only be applied to the areas of peak viewing.  Other areas of
the terrace should be*calculated as having a lower packing density, say
40/10 m^.

In order to practically achieve the consideration set out in the above
paragraph, it would be necessary to:-

(a)   Define the size and position of "peak viewing areas".

(b)   Surround the areas of "peak viewing" using radial barriers as opposed
      to radial fences.

(c)   Determine by effective stewarding or policing that the crowd density
      of each "peak viewing area" is at a satisfactory, safe and comfortable
      level.

Flow Rates

Throughout the Inquiry, the flow rate of 40 and 60 persons per minute per
unit of exit width have been heavily criticised as being based on
inconclusive research. A practical lesson that has been learned is that
                                        Page 9


      when people are very tightly packed, their ability to flow through exits is
      dramatically reduced. Until the outcome of further research is known, it is
      suggested that flow rates are reduced to the following:-

      (a)   "Peak viewing area" of terraces - 30 persons per minute per unit of
            exit width.

      (b)   All other areas - 40 persons per minute per unit of exit width.

      It is considered that the emergency evacuation time should remain at 2b
      minutes.

12.   Stewards

      Training of Stewards should be carried out by people who have experience in
      training and safety. Training should be regular to remind existing Stewards
      of procedures and ensure that new Stewards receive appropriate training.

      The acceptable age range for Stewards should be specified as being between
      eighteen and sixty five years, in addition to the current requirements
      relating to fitness etc.

      A Steward (or a police officer) carrying out isolated tasks, e.g. external
      gate duty, should be provided with an efficient means of communication with
      the Safety Officer.

13.   National First Aid Guidelines

      There is the need for national first aid guidelines which are drawn up with
      particular reference to occasions when large numbers of people are likely to
      be present, e.g.  football matches, pop concerts etc.

      It is also important for the individuals expected to provide first aid to
      receive appropriate training.

14.   Counselling and Support for Victims

      Substantial knowledge and experience now exists about the services the
      public and those directly affected by a disaster need afterwards.   These
      responses are informed by an understanding of the potentially long-term
      needs of victims.  Initiatives must be taken immediately after the disaster
      without waiting for requests for help and be available for a period of at
      least two years. Their establishment and co-ordination with the voluntary
      sector and between statutory organisations needs to be undertaken on the
      basis of an agreed general plan.  The services have to be carefully
      provided, managed and last appropriate lengths of time, if the bereaved,
      survivors and rescue staff are not to suffer lasting damage.  These
      co-ordinated services are expensive to provide and outside of the normal
      provision made by local authorities.  Therefore their establishment and
      continuance is dependent on new and additional resources being made
      available.  Such separate funding needs to be made available.

15.   Public Appeals

      The legal issues surrounding public appeals are complicated, e.g. charitable
      status, tax etc. Guidelines are required on the establishment,
      administration and termination of disaster appeals to ensure that funds are
      distributed as fairly, quickly and effectively as possible.
                                        Page 10


16.   Pre-Match Entertainment

      Further to recommendation 25 in the Interim Report, consideration should be
      given as to whether pre-match entertainment and associated activities can
      influence the type of crowd attending football matches (in particular) and
      for example can therefore be used to encourage family attendance.  Such
      entertainment may also result in staggered entry times.

17 . Day and Time

      Consideration should also be given to what effect changing the day and/or
      time of kick off of football matches, in particular, may have on crowd
      behaviour and therefore crowd safety.

18.   Football Membership Schemes - I.D. Cards

      The Popplewell Report recommends (at paragraph 4.128) that consideration
      should be given to some form of membership scheme for football league clubs
      in England and Wales.

      However, in view of the experiences at Hillsborough, careful consideration
      needs to be given to any national football membership scheme. It would
      clearly be undesirable if any such scheme resulted in significant delays at
      turnstiles.

      There are other practical considerations which must be taken into account,
      e.g., patterns of attendance, different method of entry, space required for
      a complex admission system, i.e., two turnstile systems, number of
      turnstiles required, additional policing/stewarding required to control the
      crowd and eject individuals, where to eject individuals from and how and
      reducing further the ground capacity.

19.   All Ticket Entry

      In order to increase the speed of ingress of spectators, consideration could
      be given to requiring all ticket entry for events where greater than, say,
      70% of the total available capacity could be expected.




 HB8AAC/JJJ
                                                                     Draft 27.9.89




    TIE      H I L L S B ® I 0 S G H   ST Ai I B M     D I S A S T E R

                             15th April,




    Recommendations to the Inquiry on behalf of. Sheffield City Council




O
                                      Page 1




                               I N T R O D U C T I O N
O

    These recommendations and suggestions have been drawn together from

    representatives with various interests within Sheffield City Council.


    They are submitted having taken time to assess the effect of the

    Hillsborough Disaster, the Inquiry and the Interim Recommendations of Lord

    Justice Taylor^   -UcK   art                           (Vn
Clarification and Codification of Legislation

If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the
existing legislation then the opportunity could be taken to codify and
clarify the legislation.

The provisions, which are currently contained in the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975, the Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987,
various Regulations and statutory guidance could be remodelled to create one
Act and Regulations (with functional statements) requiring certain miniwafr
standards to be »e-t. .

Improvement/Prohibition Notices

The 1975 legislation (as amended) makes provision for the issue of a
Prohibition Notice to the holder of a certificate. It is suggested that
consideration should be given to including an intermediate course of actiop.
The Health and Safety at Work, Etc. Act 197j^%akes provision of the issue of
Improvement Notices and Prohibition Notices. An Improvement Notice requires
the employer to carry out certain works within a given time. If the
employer fails to comply with the Notice, they are guilty of an offence.

The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a useful intermediate step
where a Prohibition Notice is not appropriate, but where some formal Notice
is required.

Periodic Certificates and Inspections

The Popplewell Report recommended (at paragraph 3.68) that there should be
(i) annual renewal of safety certificates issued under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975; (ii) a duty on the local authority annually to inspect the
premises prior to re-issuing the certificate; and (iii) power for the local
authority £o revoke the certificate.

The interim recommendations compliment the first proposal; the second
Recommendation was implemented in statutory guidance after the Popplewell
Report; the third recommendation has not been acted upon..

With regard to the first recommendation, annual certificates focus the
parties' minds on the whole situation and not on a particular application or
inspiection. It tends to promote an overall review of the circumstances
surrounding the re-issue of a certificate.

With regard to the second recommendation, it is suggested that prior to
re-issuing the certificate there should be an inspection, but that thjere
should also be inspections on a half-yearly or quarterly basis with guidance
given as to timing, e.g., prior to renewal, end of season, start of season,
during season (obviously this is less relevant to multi-use stadia where
"seasons" are not as clear cut.)

The Advioory-Group skouid visit£> the ground^whilsritfempty and during use but
the limitations on'during use"inspections by theirvery nature must be
recognised.

Model Safety Certificate Conditions

The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety
certificate conditions should be drawn up. A standardised form of
conditions could form the nucleus of all certificates. Additional
conditions could be added to cover local conditions.  This would enable some
                                                 Page 3


               degree of national uniformity of application of conditions.  It would seem
               appropriate, that the Home Office draw up the standard conditions as it has
               done in respect of byelaws for example.

          5.   Resource Implications - Fees

               At present it is suggested in Circular No. 72/1987 that the statutory
               inspection should not result in significant resource implications but that
               in general inspections are not expected to take more than about two^ays
               per ground.  This point is made in the context of j^mpbasising the scope of
               inspections, together with associated report workfare not intended to be as
               detailed or extensive as that often required by the holder of the
               certificate.

               Clearly, more time is spent on safety of sports grounds than the Home Office
               anticipates. The resource implications involved for local authorities and
               their advisers from other services to implement the existing provisions and
               the new roqu-t-remeirtMi must be recognised.
                                 . . .           . .                              .    (trf*
               Although the certificating authority is allowed to charge fees in respecte-c f
               dealing with applications for the issue or amendment of a certificate (by
               virtue of the Safety of. Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) there is no express
^              provision for fees forjjongoing workAenforcing the provisions of the Act and
               dealing with inspections that have to be carried out at least once a year.
               The Inquiry may wish to consider whether express provisions should be made
               to allow a certificating authority to make some reasonable charge.       There
     lt        are many examples of legislation where local authorities are empowered
               to charge a reasonable fee        c over (( the cost of administering ^and
               enforcing a particular licensing function.

          6.   Definition of Role*s

               The Popplewell Report recommended that there should be urgent consultation
               between the Health and Safety Executive and the Fire Authorities and Local
               Authorities as how best to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and
               reports (paragraph 3.95).

               It has again become clear during the Inquiry that a lack of clarity in the
    . .        definition of roles, as well as a lack of communication, can cause problems,
    v J        This is particularly relevant in relation to the Police who are involved in
                the safety of sports grounds in a number of roles, e.g. a member of the
               Advisory Group, upholders of law and order and their role inside and outside
                the' Ground. "it- c*s cOso feiMjewd  to            jl a***          .SVocV peovvk
&              iVx exv\               tfco                            (A .SulcSiAtfv-MSteA
               Clarification, following consultation, is needed of the different roles
               Authorities are required to fulfil^ M l ttSz
                    >
          7.   The Advisory Group

    ^          The Police and the Building Authority andjJ^subsequent to local government, ^
               reorganisation, the Police and the Fire Authority, have to be consulted ix &
               certificating authority by virtue of the legislation.                 ^
               &&SBsaBjs. iVsWid                                Qn~ov«>**r Sg/wiC«-% <*•            ,

               The legislation therefore, provides the basis of expert opinion on which the
               Local Authority makes decisions.

               The decision making process can take a number of forms, but perhaps the two
               extremes are:-
  (a) where all the experts are in agreement that decision is delegated to an
  officer of the Council, where one or more experts differ - that decision is
  delegated to an appropriate committee of the Council;

  (b) the appropriate committee considers all matters relating to works
  carried out at the sports ground.

  Further guidance could be given over and above that contained in the interim
  recommendations as to the preferred course of action.                             n    4-

    In eolation to the-statutory consulteeyx consideration should be given as to    zJ
   iSi5lBeFjaS^ 7o^Sr"'‘Bddie8.should, be involved in tlretAdvisory GroupJ) other
    than^the Ambulance Service, the Club and the recognised Supporters' Club,.
£^ e . g , , Health and Safety Executive.

  Pooling of Information    PiUcc., FVe-
                             r«v                 w*OVJU~   A^u-'»se-c^
  Some consideration should be given to pooling information on a national
  basis to improve the flow of that information.

  Information should be available to all certificating Authorities and their
  statutory consultees. This would assist to achieve a degree of uniformity
  throughout the country and enable all Authorities to learn from each others
  experiences*

  This is particularly relevant to regional level where the emergency s«rvices
  will cover a number of District Authorities.

  Safety Managment and Safety Planning

  Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as essential
  aspects of their business and not an adjunct to it. It is essential for
  safety responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of
  accountability to be included. Any regulations or the "Green Guide" could
  usefully develop this theme. The term safety planning is preferable to that
 ^of emergency planning in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
  safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should
  promote better safety standards. All relevant agencies should be included
  in the planning process. Safety planning is aimed to prevent disasters as
  well as providing contingency plans to ensure emergencies amd disasters can
  be coped with.
           .r
  Status and Content of the "Green Guide"

  A comprehensive review of the status and content of the Green Guide is
  required. The present guide to safety of sports grounds is predominantly
  written for football single use stadia. Multi use stadia are becoming more
  popular and it is suggested that the guide be expanded to cover spectator
  safety requirements pertaining to a wider variety of sports, e.g., speedway,
  stock car racing, hockey, a t h l e t i g etc.                            a            ■
                                     >sV\
  In addition, Either by expansion of the guide or by the creation of a
  similar document, requirements for spectator safety of fully enclosed stadia
  should be created.

  "Flexibility"

  The 1986 edition of the Green Guide, paragraph 6 , states as follows:-
"Deviation? from individual guidelines are possible without necessarily
detracting from the overall safety of the ground.  The variety of type,
function and layout of sports grounds means that a flexible approach should
be maintained to take account of the particular circumstances at individual
grounds".

And paragraph 8 states;-

"It should be borne in mind when using the guide to assess whether existing
circumstances provide adequately for the safety of spectators the criteria
to be aimed for is that of a reasonable degree of safety. It would be
unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the absolute safety of
everyone attending a ground".

And, again in paragraph 11:-

"The principles referred to in paragraphs 4-10 above should be kept in mind
by both ground management and, where applicable, by the local authority when
applying the guide to an individual ground. Hie guide is an aid to, not a
substitute for, professional judgment and common sense".

There is a problem in affording the Green Guide this kind of status. What
is "flexibility" to one mind may be slap-dash permissiveness to another.
Clearly, emphasis on flexibility was and is well intentioned, but the effect
is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where non-compliance
can be justified as falling'within the scope of some flexible discretion
allowed to the relevant authority.

For the future perhaps the Inquiry would wish to consider recommending that
the approach of the Green Guide should move away from that of "flexibility"
to, for example, an approach of the following kind:-

"That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the club itself,
should always seek to establish whether there is some reasonable cause why a
relevant guideline is not complied with, and that in the absence of some
such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the guideline should be
achieved or insisted upon".                                                                     ~
                                                               AS# aw*. 3)                     Sl   / .,
                 •        .                                                kj-tto
Parts of t h e existing guide could become regulatpa?y and ©ther parts
re-issued (in a revised form) as a guide c V ^ ^ t h e majority of the Approved
Documents to the Building Regulations^^ompliance would therefore not be
necessary, yet,failure to comply with the B^ide could be taken as being
evidence tending to show that the requirement^had not been met, unless it
could be demonstrated by the party concerned, vising other means, that the
requirements of the legislation had been satisfieojor fK^an "Approved Code
of Practice" c)tf. status of an approved code of practice under the Health
and Safety at Work, Etc., Act 197)0'^

Specific Recommendations in relation to the Structure and Design
Requirements for a Sports Ground

General Fabric

It is recommended that the headeroom for tunnels be increased from 2.4
metres to at least 3 metres to facilitate overhead yiewing of any crushing
or other problems oecuring along its length.

                si pace" pressure b u M d up/fr      tne^srear              Is' shouKK be
                 widened i-n/the\ d/r e ct io n of    ximum ziow             ans     esca


       Vo     Vfce.                                       , ’iV 0>           t~c{   -tfcskV
       i^sVc^UvWOvvS      sUpwVfii    ^   S*Avvifec(      ^                             VtXo
 SV-O-cJUCv                  ^                  act cnvvVAO     av* . C-f            UVotVcS
 To cater for different speeds of travel through tunnels or restricted
 passageways longer than, say, 5 metres, a minimum of.4 units of exit width
 should be provided.

 Ingress

 Segregation of entrances for supporters of opposing teams is recommended as
 a permanent design criteria.

 Permanent unobstructed access to the pitch area for emergency vehicles to be
 provided in at least two positions, and these being at opposite ends of the
 ground (whenever possible).
                                                                                            collate.
 The "guide" states a maximum notional rate o . f ^ S O ^ p e r ^ o n s ^ r ^ r ^ i l e g & r ^ ^
 hour, however it does not state the design time.      It is suggested that a
 revised code should state a maximum ingress design time of say, 45 minutes.
 For multi use stadia, in particular, investigation of the flow rate should
 be carried out as rates may differ, e.g., for families with young children.

 Terraces

 Where terraces are to be sub-divided so as to avoid major, migration and
 sideways surge, each section should be formed by inserting radial barriers.
 Radial fences should be avoided.

 It is considered that spectator accommodation should not be lower than the
 pitch level or pitch perimeter path level (whichever is the higher)^ se>
             do   ttfaV                     ffCM/N "Wo.   Spfet.tSkhW”             .
  In the present "guide", it states ’’gradients steeper than 1:2 (26°, 3 4 1)
  could be dangerous" (paragraph 94). In Table 1 barrier requirements are
  specified for terrace gradients of up to 30° or 1:1.7, therefore
'contradicting the previous statement. From a graphical interpolation and
  extrapolation of all the relevant data Lb io geeamnendeTh’tlitt* the maximum
 [gradient should be 31°, 30’, This equates to approximately 1:1.63.

 Crash Barriers - Design

 To avoid rusting in unseen and non-maintainable places, overclipped barrier
 rail supports should no longer be acceptable. All parts of barriers should
 be capable of direct inspection and maintenance.                         ^

 Welding of all joints would achieve the aims set out in the above paragraph
 and will create a structural continuity where the failure of an individual
 element would minimise the risk of collapse.

 Consideration should be given to the application of horizontal, (in addition
 to lateral) forces. This could be taken as 5% of the horizontal force X K u S
 resisting torsional and secondary effects.

 The recommended heights of the barrier rails should be re-assessed.
 Clarification i£ also required (preferably by sketch) to show where this
 measurement should be taken from. The present "guide" appears to make an
 assumption that the barrier rail is in the same vertical plane as the
 terrace riser. When these vertical planes differ, the method of height
 measurement may also differ.  The acid test being at what level a normal
 person would stand who was comfortable, immediately behind the barrier.

  The opportunity should be taken to re-appraise the required test and design
  Loads. An increase would achieve a greater resistance to collapse but may
  increase the risk of injury due to resisting greater crowd pressures. A
                                          Page 7


     decrease, however, may result in earlier collapse, yet may prevent fatal
     injury.
       i
     Crash Barriers- Testing

     It is suggested that each barrier span should be tested separately (for rail
     strength) and then adjacent spans be tested together to determine rail and
     support strength.

     The specification of the test should be modified to clearly state how
     recovery deflection is to be calculated.  Such a modification should be in
     accordance with the testing procedures in BS 5950 and other similar British
     Standard documents.

     To avoid any further doubt, a standardised test specification and procedure
     is now required. .This should include a specification qf a standardised
     testing rig and a standardised test result sheet.

     Stapds with seatedaccommodation

     Although steeper gradients can create better forward viewing for the
     spectators, very steep gradients will have the effect of creating equally
     steiep radial gangways and may create a domino effect during an evacuation
     where all persons may be stood — instead of being seated.T'toHre maximum
     gradient is directly stated in the present guide for seated areas; the on}.y
     tenuous reference being to the maximum calculated gradient for stairways in
     paragraph 73 as being 34°,9'. It is considered that seated accommodation

ir   greater than 30° should have intermediate crush barriers at approximately5
     metre centres.

     Pitch Feriaeter Fences

      The Popplewell Report (paragraph 4.136 to 4.138 and also Appendix 'E',
      paragraph E29) recommended that consideration should be given to the design
      of a standard efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.
      fe               'Mt/avL.W- ^                      "ft/   baffle
&    -Whether by—deaign or othcrrwirse-;— §e-rward ea-ca      r        cim-a lir^STbde-e-
            ,,igTTrBOTgr,,trgrilil^H'ly'^ggiTgfe4«".

     If pitch perimeter fences are to remain, it is suggested that at least 50%
     of its linear length is openable and such openings are evenly spaced so as
     to provide maximum benefit for spectators' safety.

     Where pitch Side police or stewards require access into the spectator area
     through relatively small doors or gates, these may be provided as additional
     openings or as wickeir gates in the large opening panels.

     So as to avoid sudden forward movement, all such ga£es shouId be vertically
     multi-hinged and open towards the pitch. Collapsible panels shouId not be
     acceptable.  It is a further pre-requisite that the release mechanism should
     be:-
        I
?    a) capable of being operational remotely in tandem with others;

     b) capable of independent opening whilst under crowd pressure, by the
        operation of a quick release, manually operated catch;

     c) all openihg devices must be capable of use under crowd loading
        conditions.
                                                   Page 8


            In order to simplify any new designs of catch for pitch ^e^i^e^ei^gates and
            bearing in mind the fact that there should be fio spectators^rnafamt*. of the
            opening sections of the perimeter fencing, test loading on perimeter fences
            could be reduced to, say 3 Kn/m.
                        > '            ktf
            Estimation of Space Capacity - Terraces

            Under the present "guide", terraces in good condition can be calculated as
            capable of holding a maximum of 54 persons per 10 m2, throughout the
            available terraced area. It is, however, accepted that some parts of that
            area are "peak viewing areas" and as such will achieve in practice a greater
            population density due to their popularity.  The figure of 54/10 m^ is
            therefore an average, without the peak viewing parts being given a maximum
            packing density.                      ,

            It is considered that the 54/10 m^ should be treated as being the maximum
            and therefore only be applied to the areas of peak viewing. Other areas' of
            the terrace should be calculated as having a lower packing density, say
            40/10 m^.

            In order to, practically achieve the consideration set out in the above
            paragraph, it would be necessary to;-

            (a)   Define the size and position of "peak viewing areas".

            (b)   Surround the areas of "peak viewing" using radial barriers* OS
                                                                            ‘                         cc*4K\oSl ^vvcaa


                  adeqtlcftnri^s^e^rdHfcxr^serirHthirt^^                                                   ,, v
                                   a 1^                     ^                        ’tfe            <3Uwvv\ rVj Oj
                         i»tW    (*«!<.      ^                  od~ ex.   nxhyvvv)    t.s*4»-<**tk                    tkMA..


            Throughout the Inquiry, the flow rate of 40 and 60 persons per minute per
            unit of exit width have been heavily criticised as being based on^
            inconclusive research. A practical lesson that has been, learned is that
            when people are very tightly packed, their ability to flow through exits is
            dramatically reduced. Until the outcome of further research is known, it is
            suggested that flow rates are reduced to the following:-

V.)         (a)   "Peak viewing area" of terraces - 30 persons per minute per unit of
                  exit width.
            (b)   All other areas - 40 persons per minute per unit of exit width.

            it is considered' that the emergency evacuation time should remain at 2i
            minutes.

      12.   Stewards

            Training of Stewards should be carried out by people who have expetience in
            training and safety. Training*should be regular to remind existing Stewards
            of procedures and ensure that new Stewards receive appropriate training.

            The acceptable age range for Stewards should be specified as being between
            eighteen and sixty five years, in addition to the current requirements
            relating to fitness etc.

            A Steward (or a police officer) carrying out isolated tasks, e.g. external
            gate duty, should be provided with an efficient means of communication with
            the Safety Officer.
                              Uo       \f «-'4.e/w\i/wJt/v^c^-^W 'OVv              <2^            (<^>    IV'ft       »*/-»Vt*Y i/v\       /"           >        Qiw^ovcAX^CA.h'O'V'-v

        sS V flv > ^ o C        IQ&.     c jv ^ « x v -v          C co    /o        i^ S t^ C -ttv L -r      p /- ^ _ -                      &A<-t(&-STXA. lH W --i^v\X -        C Ln^xK

         ck%s t>   c-\ ci t               <sce f"Vv/~» f->- £ £          c«3i^v\         iV v fC c ^ e ^ io e .       ~~t^A       ~b-\y&e,      S\      c v c —rs^
                                                                                                   .              jfcv"                         j
          k s c J V lo C c iX      i/v% _SU-cUj2>0           ( i'f>      ^< 5w ^'O c-vC *= v»- J                      ^   C * * ^~                          -e    4>e       IX ^S3 = *

        . fcp                                          n                                          (axjZ. ....
                                                                                   ^p4^€-*y^i>C06—■                           .                  . €s\rSs\*-^       ^T/v-c. *




H .                           <*--d         ~K'<^ ^


               CPvi>»oc^sj ckU' caa                        SUo-^vj^            <3X 0©               bo.                              l*o             t-bUoct
                CUdvA>^.i/'—^            .. .....^ysC^        I     ov      ■fr.'V'je.         ,£j..       k s'c k r       “S^f.................. Sj                               p&SttaCxJUL
                 fr^oJoJ^O y Uo.                       ^ / h -UA.(s\r               7                                           C*^             Ov'c^c^            b ^ U & ^ u \c ^ r
                  C^woC            /ifecw:e^^cv A. .....■„ Cvtfv-aeL                         S<



   'V
 <v„
  „




 Q
13.    National First Aid Guidelines

        There is the need for national first aid guidelines which are drawn up with
        particular reference to occasions when large numbers of people are likely to
        be present, e.g.  football matches, pop concerts etc.

14.     Counselling and Support for Victims

        The need for guidance and training for those professionals involved in
        counselling and support for victims in the aftermath of a disaster requites
        investigation.

         In conjunction with that, the issue of long term support needed by victims
         of the disaster, also requires consideration.
      J0P.       ,
         Both issues need to be discussed by a variety of agencies including:-

        Social Services, The Health Service (including GPs), organisations assisting
        the bereaved, Samaritans etc.

15.     Public Appeals

        The legal issues surrounding public appeals are complicated, e.g. charitable
        status, tax etc. Guidelines are required on the establishment,
        administration and termination of disaster appeals to ensure that funds are
        distributed as fairly, quickly a&d effectively as possible.

16.     Football Membership; Schemes - I.D. Cards

        The Popplewell Report recommends (at paragraph 4.128) that consideration
        should be given to some form Of membership scheme for football leag&e clubs
        in England and Wales.

        However, in view of the experiences at Hillsborough, careful consideration
        needs to be given to any national football membership scheme.  It would
        clearly be undesirable if any such scheme resulted in significant delays at
        turnstiles.

        There are other practical considerations which must be taken into account,
        e.g., patterns of attendance, different method of entry, space required for
        a complex admission system, i.e., two turnstile systems, number of
        turnstiles required, additional polieing/stewarding required to control the
        crowd and eject individuals, where to eject individuals from and h o w ^
        reducing further the ground capacity.

17.     All Ticket Entry

        In order to increase the speed of ingress of spectators, consideration could
        be given to requiring all ticket entry for events where greater than, say,
        70% of the total available capacity could be expected.

18.         Beater       lia

        Coiysideration sthould b& given to/fcftether al^/skater     shoul
         aandatary.j Alternatively,! the iegi\slation/cou
        minimum\ percentage of seated capacity for/stadi
        differ ror various^sizes, ttypjss and V s e r of the




HB8AAC/JJJ
C he      H i l l s b o r o u g h                S ta d iu m           D i s d s i e r           1 5 th ,, A 'p r i l ,         1 9 8 9 ..
                      /       I                 s'
R e c o ra m e h d a tjio n s                 t o      t h e     I n q u i r y         o n       b e h a l f       oft       S heJ                       C i t y
C o u n c p l ,


S e c t i o n        1 4*
C o u n s e l l i n g             a n d       S u p p o r t        f o r       V i c t i m s .


S u b s t a n t i a l             k n o w le d g e             a n d     e x p e r i e n c e             n o w     e x i s t s         a b o u t         th e

s e r v i c e s           t h e     p u b lic -          a n d     t h o s e       d i r e c t l y           a f f e c t e d           b y     a     d i s a s t e r

n e e d       a f t e r w a r d s .                  T h e s e     r e s p o n s e s             a r e     in f o r m e d            b y     a n    u n d e r s t a n d

- i n g       o f    t h e        p o t e n t i a l l y            l o n g - t e r m             n e e d s       o f     v i c t i m s .             I n i^ tx ^ r e s

m u s t       b e     t a k e n         im m e d ia te ly                a f t e r       t h e       d i s a s t e r          w i t h o u t         w a i t i n g

f o r     r e q u e s t s           f o r        h e l p       a n d     b e     a v a i l a b l e           f o r       a    p e r i o d          o f     a t     l e a s t

tw o      y e a r s ^             T h e i r          e s t a b l i s h m e n t               and!        c o - o r d i n a t i o n             w i t h       t h e

v o l u n t a r y           s e c t o r          a n d     b e tw e e n          s t a t u t o r y           o r g a n i s a t i o n s              n e e d s

t o     b e     u n d e r ta k e n               o n     t h e     b a s i s       o f       a     a g r e e d         g e n e r a l         p l a n .           T he

s e r v i c e s           h a v e       t o      b e     c a r e f u l l y         p r o v i d e d ,             m a n a g e d         a n d       l a s t

a p p r o p r i a t e             l e n g t h s          o f     tim e ,         i f     t h e       b e r e a v e d r           s u r v i v o r s           a n d

r e s c u e         s t a f f       a r e        n o t     t o     s u f f e r         l a s t i n g         d a m a g e .             T h e s e         c o - o r d i n a t e d

s e r v i c e s           a r e     e x p e n s iv e             t o     is r o v id e           a n d     o u t s i d e         o         t h e    n o r m a l

p r o v i s i o n           m ade         b y        l o c a l     a u t h o r i t i e s . £ r h e i r                       e s t a b l i s h m e n t             a n d

c o n ti n u a n c e              i s     d e p e n d e n t            o n     n e w     a n d       a d d i t i o n a l             r e s o u r c e s           b e in g

m ade         a .v a ila b 1 e .                J e & a r a t e          f u n d i n g                                          m ad e         a v a i l a b l e           «

                                                                                                                             suT roor                              esc ulVi.
        diofset .


                         k&pryy-ir         <^>.pv.cv^&<a(... t-^rsit _        rv^rvf".. Ic^._l-


                           CM/ -           t&fcfe.i'l
                           cU{
                         ...CjU jT      i0exscv\        'Z
                          jQCL.          fltL(*jC.cd<at-.-_^..
                          r K l_______ o   3 g J o < fo r    .   a / -




                                                            J/

                                                             v /         ’

                                                             vX
■\ /"




        G ^ ''-JUO-                                                          ■$£LAj&   to   C*jQi>L.* ..._XC>£, _...                                    _
        &.   ks^K^<~a~               ,SVv f .


                                                                                                                 - ..................................
                          r

-jL \ 2 ^   S   f-o/trK   '




o
                              /
    Our reference

    Your reference

    Date




O




                     For telephone enquiries on this ma
                                              Telex 64
THE      H I L L S B O R O U G H        T A D I D M    S A S T E R

                         15t h iS p r il, 1989




Recxawnendations to the Inquiry on behalf of SHeffield City Council
                                       Page 1


    I N T R O D U C T ION
                                     Q/VvIV <2

    These reccxtmendations and suggestions have been drawn together frcm

    representatives with various interests within Sheffield City Council.


    Ihey arc sukmitted having taken time to assess the effect of the

    Hillsborough Disaster, the Inquiry and the Interim Recommendations of Lord

    justice Taylor.




O




                                 C £y''wfv £L




o
                                       Page 2


1.   Clarification and Codification of Legislation

     If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the
     existing legislation then the opportunity could be taken to codify and
     clarify the legislation.

     The provisions, which are currently contained in the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act 1975, the Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987,
     various Regulations and statutory guidance could be remodelled to create one
     Act and Regulations (with functional statements) requiring certain minimal
     standards to be met.

2.   n^rovement/Prohlbition Notices

     The 1975 legislation (as amended) makes provision for the issue of a
     Prohibition Notice to the holder of a certificate. It is suggested that
     consideration should be given to including an intermediate course of action.
     The Health and Safety at Work, Etc. Act 1975 makes provision of the issue of
     Improvement Notices and Prohibition Notices. An Improvement Notice requires
     the employer to carry out certain works within a given time. If the
     employer fails to comply with the Notice, they are guilty of an offence.

     The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a useful intermediate step
     ■where a Prohibition Notice is not appropriate, but where seme formal Notice
     is required.

3.   Periodic Certificates and Inspections

     The Popplewell Report recanmended (at paragraph 3.68) that there should be
     (i) annual renewal of safety certificates issued under the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act 1975; (ii) a duty on the local authority annually to inspect the
     premises prior to re-issuing the certificate; and (iii) power for the local
     authority to revoke the certificate.

     The interim recommendations compliment the fir^t proposal; the second
     recommendation was implemented in                 after the Popplewell
     Report; the third recommendation has not been acted upon.

     With regard to the first recommendation, annual certificates focus the
     parties' minds on the whole situation and not on a particular application or
     inspection. It tends to promote an overall review of the circumstances
     surrounding the re-issue of a certificate.

     With regard to the second recommendation, it is suggested that prior to
     re-issuing the certificate there should be an inspection, but that there
     should also be inspections on a half-yearly or quarterly basis with guidance
     given as to timing, e.g., prior to renewal, end of season, start of season,
     during season (obviously this is less relevant to multi-use stadia where
     "seasons" are not as clear cut.)

     The Advisory Group should visit the ground whilst empty and during use but
     the limitations on during use inspections by their very nature must be
     recognised.

4.   Model Safety Certificate Conditions     .

     The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety
     certificate conditions should be drawn up. A standardised form of
     conditions could form the nucleus of all certificates. Additional
     conditions could be added to cover local conditions. This would enable some
                                 Page 3


degree of national uniformity of application of conditions. It would seem
appropriate, that the Home Office draw up the standard conditions as it has
done in respect of by-laws for example.

Resource Implications - Fees

At present it is suggested in Circular No. 72/1987 that the statutory
inspection should not result in significant resource implications but that
in general inspections are not expected to take more than about two days
per ground. This point is made in the context of emphasising the scope of
inspections, together with associated report work are not intended to be as
detailed or extensive as that often required by the holder of the
certificate.

Clearly, more time is spent on safety of sports grounds than the Home Office
anticipates. The resource implications involved for local authorities and
their advisers from other services to implement the existing provisions and
the new requirements must be recognised.

Although the certificating authority is allowed to charge fees in respect of
dealing with applications for the issue or amendment of a certificate (by
virtue of the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) there is no express
provision for fees for ongoing work enforcing the provisions of the Act and
dealing with inspections that have to be carried out at least once a year.
The Inquiry may wish to consider whether express provisions should be made
to allow a certificating authority to make some reasonable charge. There
are many examples of legislation where local authorities are empowered
to charge a reasonable fee which covers the cost of administering and
enforcing a particular licensing function.

Definition of Roles

The Popplewell Report recommended that there should be urgent consultation
between the Health and Safety Executive and the Fire Authorities and Local
Authorities as how best to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and
reports (paragraph 3.95).

It has again became clear during the Inquiry that a lack of clarity in the
definition of roles, as well as a lack of camnunication, can cause problems.
This is particularly relevant in relation to the Police who are involved in
the safety of sports grounds in a number of roles, e.g. a member of the
Advisory Group, upholders of law and order and their role inside and outside
the Ground.

Clarification, following consultation, is needed of the different roles
Authorities are required to fulfil.

The Advisory Group

The Police and the Building Authority and, subsequent to local government
reorganisation, the Police and the Fire Authority, have to be consulted in
certificating authority by virtue of the legislation.

The legislation therefore, provides the basis of expert opinion on which the
Local Authority makes decisions.

The decision making process can take a number of forms, but perhaps the two
extremes are:-
                                       Page 4


      (a) where all the experts are in agreement that decision is delegated to an
      officer of the Council, where one or more experts differ - that decision is
      delegated to an appropriate committee of the Council;

      (b) the appropriate committee considers all matters relating to works
      carried out at the sports ground.

      Further guidance could be given over and above that contained in the interim
      recommendations as to the preferred course of action.

      In relation to the statutory consultees, consideration should be given as to
      whether any other bodies should be involved in the Advisory Group, other
      than the Ambulance Service, the Club and the recognised Supporters' Club,
      e.g., Health and Safety Executive.

 8.   Pooling of Information

      Seme consideration should be given to pooling information on a national
      basis to improve the flow of that information.

      Information should be available to all certificating Authorities and their
      statutory consultees. This would assist to achieve a degree of uniformity
      throughout the country and enable all Authorities to learn from each others
      experiences.

      This is particularly relevant to regional level where the emergency services
      will cover a number of District Authorities.

 9.   Safety Manaqment and Safety Planning

      Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as essential
      aspects of their business and not an adjunct to it. It is essential for
      safety responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of
      accountability to be included. Any regulations or the "Green Guide" could
      usefully develop this theme. The term safety planning is preferable to that
      of emergency planning in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
      safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should
      promote better safety standards. All relevant agencies should be included
      in the planning process. Safety planning is aimed to prevent disasters as
      well as providing contingency plans to ensure emergencies and disasters can
 1    be coped with.

10.   Status and Content of the "Green Guide"

      A comprehensive review of the status and content of the Green Guide is
      required. The present guide to safety of sports grounds is predominantly
      written for football single use stadia. Multi use stadia are becoming more
      popular and it is suggested that the guide be expanded to cover spectator
      safety requirements pertaining to a wider variety of sports, e.g., speedway,
      stock car racing, hockey, athletics, etc.

      In addition, either by expansion of the guide or by the creation of a
      similar document, requirements for spectator safety of fully enclosed stadia
      should be created.

      "Flexibility"

      The 1986 edition of the Green Guide, paragraph 6, states as follows:-
                                          Page 5


         "Deviations frctn individual guidelines are possible without necessarily
         detracting frcm the overall safety of the ground. The variety of type,
         function and layout of sports grounds means that a flexible approach should
         be maintained to take account of the particular circumstances at individual
         grounds".                                             \

         And paragraph 8 states

         "It should be borne in mind when using the guide to assess whether existing
         circumstances provide adequately for the safety of spectators the criteria
         to be aimed for is that of a reasonable degree of safety. It would be
         unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the absolute safety of
         everyone attending a ground".

         And, again in paragraph 11:-

         "The principles referred to in paragraphs 4-10 above should be kept in mind
         by both ground management and, where applicable, by the local authority when
         applying the guide to an individual ground. The guide is an aid to, not a
         substitute for, professional judgment and common sense".
 ( !
         There is a problem in affording the Green Guide this kind of status. What
         is "flexibility" to one mind may be slap-dash permissiveness to another.
         Clearly, emphasis on flexibility was and is well intentioned, but the effect
         is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where non-compliance
         can be justified as falling within the scope of seme flexible discretion
         allowed to the relevant authority.

         For the future perhaps the Inquiry would wish to consider recommending that
         the approach of the Green Guide should move away from that of "flexibility"
         to, for example, an approach of the following kind:-

         'That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the club itself,
         should always seek to establish whether there is seme reasonable cause why a
         relevant guideline is not complied with, and that in the absence of seme
         such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the guideline should be
         achieved or insisted upon".

         Parts of the existing guide could become regulatory and other parts
         re-issued (in a revised form) as a guide c.f. the majority of the Approved
         Documents to the Building Regulations. Corpliance would therefore not be
         necessary, yet failure to comply with the Guide could be taken as being
         evidence tending to show that the requirements had not been met, unless it
         could be demonstrated by the party concerned, vising other means, that the
         requirements of the legislation had been satisfied or an an "Approved Code
         of Practice" c.f. status of an approved code of practice under the Health
         and Safety at Work, Etc., Act 1975.
                                                            < 2 .
<T 11.   Specific Recommendations in relation to the Structural and Design
         Requirements for a Sports Ground

         General Fabric

         It is recanmended that the head rocm for tunnels be increased from 2.4
         metres to at least 3 metres to facilitate overhead viewing of any crushing
         or other problems occuring along its length.

         So as to dissipate pressure build up frcm the rear, long tunnels should be
         successively widened in the direction of maximum flow (i.e., means of escape
         routes).
                                    Page 6


  *To cater for different speeds of travel through tunnels or restricted
  passageways longer than, say, 5 metres, a minimum of 4 units of exit width
  should be provided.

  Ingress

  Segregation of entrances for supporters of opposing teams is recommended as
  a permanent design criteria.

  Permanent unobstructed access to the pitch area for emergency vehicles to be
  provided in at least two positions, and these being at opposite ends of the
  ground (whenever possible).

  The "guide" states a maximum notional rate of 750 persons per turnstile per
  hour, however it does not state the design time. It is suggested that a
  revised code should state a maximum ingress design time of say, 45 minutes.
  For multi vise stadia, in particular, investigation of the flow rate should
  be carried out as rates may differ, e.g., for families with young children.

  Terraces

  Where terraces are to be sub-divided so as to avoid major migration and
  sideways surge, each section should be formed by inserting radial barriers.
  Radial fences should be avoided.

  It is considered that spectator accoranodation should not be lower than the
  pitch level or pitch perimeter path level (whichever is the higher).

  In the present "guide", it states "gradients steeper than 1:2 (26°, 34')
  could be dangerous" (paragraph 94). In Table 1 barrier requirements are
  specified for terrace gradients of up to 30° or 1:1.7, therefore
  contradicting the previous statement. Frcm a graphical interpolation and
  extrapolation of all the relevant data it is recommended that the maximum
  gradient should be 31°, 30'. This equates to approximately 1:1.63.

  Crush Barriers - Design

  Tto avoid rusting in unseen and non-maintainable places, overclipped barrier
  rail supports should no longer be acceptable. M l parts of barriers should
  be capable of direct inspection and maintenance.

  Welding of all joints would achieve the aims set out in the above paragraph
  and will create a structural continuity where the failure of an individual
  element would minimise the risk of collapse.

   Consideration should be given to the application of horizontal, (in addition
   to lateral) forces. This could be taken as 5% of the horizontal force as
   resisting torsional and secondary effects.

    The recommended heights of the barrier rails should be re-assessed.
    Clarification is also required (preferably by sketch) to show where this
 x measurement should be taken from. The present "guide" appears to^ake an
  v assumption that the barrier rail is in the same vertical plain as the
^ terrace riser. When these vertical plains differ, the method of height
   measurement may also differ. The acid test being at what level a normal
    person would stand who was comfortable, immediately behind the barrier.

   The opportunity should be taken to re-appraise the required test and design
   loads. An increase would achieve a greater resistance to collapse but may
   increase the risk of injury due to resisting greater crowd pressures. A
                                  Page 7


decrease, however, may result in earlier collapse, yet may prevent fatal
injury.

Crush Barriers - Testing

It is suggested that each barrier span should be tested separately (for rail
strength) and then adjacent spans be tested together to determine rail and
support strength.

The specification of the test should be modified to clearly state how
recovery deflection is to be calculated. Such a modification should be in
accordance with the testing procedures in BS 5950 and other similar British
Standard documents.

To avoid any further doubt, a standardised test specification and procedure
is now required. This should include a specification of a standardised
testing rig and a standardised test result sheet.

Stands with seated accomodation

Although steeper gradients can create better forward viewing for the
spectators, very steep gradients will have the effect of creating equally
steep radial gangways and may create a domino effect during an evacuation
where all persons may be stood - instead of being seated. The maximum
gradient is directly stated in the present guide for seated areas; the only
tenuous reference being to the maximum calculated gradient for stairways in
paragraph 73 as being 34°,9'. It is considered that seated accomodation
greater than 30° should have intermediate crush barriers at approximate 5
metre centres.

Pitch Perimeter Fences

The Popplewell Report (paragraph 4.136 to 4.138 and also Appendix 'E',
paragraph E29) recommended that consideration should be given to the design
of a standard efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.

Whether by design or otherwise, forward escape onto the pitch from all sides
of the ground is highly desirable.

If pitch perimeter fences are to remain, it is suggested that at least 50%
of its linear length is openable and such openings are evenly spaced so as
to provide maximum benefit for spectators' safety.

Where pitch side police or stewards require access into the spectator area
through relatively small doors or gates, these may be provided as additional
openings or as wicker gates in the large opening panels.

So as to avoid sudden forward movement, all such gates should be vertically
multi-hinged and open towards the pitch. Collapsible panels should not be
acceptable. It is a further pre-requisite that the release mechanism should
be:-

a) capable of being operational remotely in tandem with others;

b) capable of independent opening whilst under crowd pressure, by the
   operation of a quick release, manually operated catch;

c) all opening devices must be capable of use under crowd loading
   conditions.
                                  Page 8


In order to simplify any new designs of catch for pitch perimeter gates and
bearing in mind the fact that there should be no spectators in front of the
opening sections of the perimeter fencing, test loading on perimeter fences
could be reduced to, say 3 Kn/m.

Estimation of Space Capacity - Terraces

Under the present "guide", terraces in good condition can be calculated as
capable of holding a maximum of 54 persons per 10 m^, throughout the
available terraced area. It is, however, accepted that sane parts of that
area are "peak viewing areas" and as such will achieve in practice a greater
population density due to their popularity. The figure of 54/10 m? is
therefore an average, without the peak viewing parts being given a maximum
packing density.

It is considered that the 54/10 m? should be treated as being the maximum
and therefore only be applied to the areas of peak viewing. Other areas of
the terrace should be calculated as having a lower packing density, say
40/10 m^.

In order to practically achieve the consideration set out in the above
paragraph, it would be necessary to:-

(a)   Define the size and position of "peak viewing areas".

(b)   Surround the areas of "peak viewing" using radial barriers.

(c)   Calculate the maximum population of each "peak viewing area" and
       adequately steward to see that this is not exceeded.

Flew Rates

Throughout the Inquiry, the flow rate of 40 and 60 persons per minute per
unit of exit width have been heavily criticised as being based on
inconclusive research. A practical lesson that has been learned is that
when people are very tightly packed, their ability to flow through exits is
dramatically reduced. Until the outcome of further research is known, it is
suggested that flow rates are reduced to the following:-

(a)    "Peak viewing area" of terraces - 30 persons per minute per unit of
       exit width.
(b)   All other areas - 40 persons per minute per unit of exit width.

It is considered that the emergency evacuation time should remain at 2h
minutes.

Stewards

Training of Stewards should be carried out by people who have experience in
training and safety. Training should be regular to remind existing Stewards
of procedures and ensure that new Stewards receive appropriate training.

The acceptable age range for Stewards should be specified as being between
eighteen and sixty five years, in addition to the current requirements
relating to fitness etc.

A Steward (or a police officer) carrying out isolated tasks, e.g. external
gate duty, should be provided with an efficient means of communication with
the Safety Officer.
                                       Page 9


13.   National First Aid Guidelines

      There is the need for national first aid guidelines which are drawn up with
      particular reference to occasions when large numbers of people are likely to
      be present, e.g. football matches, pep concerts etc.

14.   Counselling and Support for Victims

      The need for guidance and training for those professionals involved in
      counselling and support for victims in the aftermath of a disaster requires
      investigation.

      In conjunction with that, the issue of long term support needed by victims
      of the disaster, also requires consideration.

      Both issues need to be discussed by a variety of agencies including:-

      Social Services, The Health Service (including GPs), organisations assisting
      the bereaved, Samaritans etc.

15.   Public Appeals

      The legal issues surrounding public appeals are complicated, e.g. charitable
      status, tax etc. Guidelines are required on the establishment,
      administration and termination of disaster appeals to ensure that funds are
      distributed as fairly, quickly and effectively as possible.

16.   Football Membership Schemes - I.D. Cards

      The Popplewell Report recommends (at paragraph 4.128) that consideration
      should be given to some form of membership scheme for football league clubs
      in England and Wales.

      However, in view of the experiences at Hillsborough, careful consideration
      needs to be given to any national football membership scheme. It would
      clearly be undesirable if any such scheme resulted in significant delays at
      turnstiles.

      There are other practical considerations which must be taken into account,
      e.g., patterns of attendance, different method of entry, space required for
■     a complex admission system, i.e., two turnstile systems, number of
      turnstiles required, additional policing/stewarding required to control the
      crowd and eject individuals, where to eject individuals frcm and how,
      reducing further the ground capacity.

17.   All Ticket Entry

      In order to increase the speed of ingress of spectators, consideration could
      be given to requiring all ticket entry for events where greater than, say,
      70% of the total available capacity could be expected.

18.   All Seater Stadia

      Corisideration should be given to whether all seater stadia should be
      mandatory. Alternatively, the legislation could be used to prescribe a
      minimum percentage of seated capacity for stadia. Such a percentage could
      differ for various sizes, types and uses of the stadia.




SD2AAN/JJJ
^             T M fe        VViuc--s<S»o<S-CriAC,-H    - S T v m w j^      J>iSY'"S.Te'R


                                   1*5=^     ftyvvS.




    ft.<2-*^vwvv £^v-»uA j=~{Sc^v3>    Lo                               OS'S k>-^i<vC3y^
                ...     S          j&-cc>
                                        *.    CvK-ji    C>v-<^w tXJ2 _,




Q
Pooling of Information

Same consideration should be given to pooling information on a national
basis to improve the flow of that information.

Information should be available to ajl(certificating Authorities and their
statutory consultees. This would assist^ degree of uniformity throughout
the country and enable all Authorities to learn from each others
experiences.

This is particularly relevant to regional level where the emergency services
will cover a number of District Authorities.

Rational First Aid Guidelines.

There is the need for practical first aid guidelines which are drawn up with
particular reference to occasions when large numbers of people are likely to
be present, e.g. football matches, pop concerts etc.

Msdel Safety Certificate Conditions

The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety
certificate conditions should be drawn up. A standardised form of
conditions could form the nucleus of all certificates. Additional
conditions could be added to cover local conditions. This would enable some
degree of national uniformity of application of conditions. It would seem
appropriate, that the Heirs Office draw up the standard conditions as it has
done in respect of by-laws for example.

Clarification and Codification of Legislation

If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the
existing legislation then the opportunity could be taken to codify and
clarify the legislation.

The provisions, which are currently contained in the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975, the Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987,
various Regulations and statutory guidance could be remodelled to create one
Act and Regulations (with functional statements) requiring certain minimal
standards to be met. The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds could then be
re-issued (in a revised form) on a similar basis to that of the majority of
the Approved Documents to the Building Regulations. Compliance would
therefore not be necessary, yet failure to comply with the Guide could be
taken as being evidence tending to show that the requirements had not been
met, unless it could be demonstrated by the party concerned, using other
means, that the requirements of the legislation had been satisfied.




MS1/AA
                   STATUS AND CONTENT OF THE "GREEN GUIDE"


A comprehensive review of the status and content of the Green Guide is
required.  The present guide to safety of sports grounds is predominantly
written for football single use stadia. Multi use stadia •^becoming more
popular and it is suggested that the guide be expanded to cover spectator
safety requirements pertaining to a wider variety of sports, e.g., speedway,
stock car racing, hockey

In addition, either by expansion of the guide or by the creation of a
similar document, requirements for spectator safety of fully enclosed stadia
should be created.

"Flexibility1*

The 1986 edition of the Green Guide, paragraph 6, states as follows:-

"Deviations from individual guidelines are possible without necessarily
detracting from the overall safety of the ground.  The variety of type,
function and layout of sports grounds means that a flexible approach should
be maintained to take account of the particular circumstances at individual
grounds".

And paragraph 8 states:-

"It should be borne in mind^when using the guide to assess whether existing
circumstances provide adequately for the safety of s p e c ta to r the criteria
to be aimed for is that of a reasonable degree of safety.      It would be
unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the absolute safety of
everyone attending a ground".

And, again in paragraph 11:—

"The principles referred to in paragraphs 4-10 above should be kept in mind
by both ground management and, where applicable, by the local authority when
applying the guide to an individual ground.  The guide is an aid to, not a
substitute for, professional judgment and common sense".

There is a problem in affording the Green Guide this kind of status. What
is "flexibility" to one mind may be slap-dash permissiveness to another.
Clearly, emphasis on flexibility was and is well intentioned, but the effect
is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where non-compliance
can be justified as falling within the scope of some flexible discretion
allowed to the relevant authority.

For the future perhaps the Inquiry would wish to consider recommending that
the approach of the Green Guide should move away from that of "flexibility"
to, for example, an approach of the following kind:-

"That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the club itself,
should always seek to establish whether there is some reasonable cause why a
relevant guideline is not complied with, and that in the absence of some
such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the guideline should be
achieved or insisted upon".




SD2AAN/JJJ
                  As stated under "Clarification and Codification of Legislation" parts of the
                  existing guide could become regulatory and other parts embodied in "Approved
                  Documents" c.f. building regulations or an "Approved Code of Practice" c.f.
                  status of an approved code of practice under the Health and Safety at Work,
                  Etc., Act 1975.
                                                                            7
                  (Recommendations in relation to the structural and desire requirements for a
                  sports ground are set out in a separate section.)

                  Specific Recommendations in relation to the Structural and Design
                  Requirements for a Sports Ground General Fabric
0 ^      ^                  ‘                  ~           /wyvLft.
                  It is recommended that the head room for c m is be increased from 2.4 metres
Wfoyjjj to        to at least 3 metres to facilitate overhead viewing of any crushing or other
                  problems occuring along its length.

 7            S° as to dissipate pressure build up from the rear, long tunnels should be
Q jJ          successively widened in the direction of maximum flow (i.e., means of escape
 L'           routes).
             a)
                  To cater for different speeds of travel through tunnels or restricted
                  passageways longer than, say, 5 metres, a minimum of 4 units of exit width
                  should be provided.

                  Ingress

                  Segregation of entrances for supporters of opposing teams is recommended as
                  a permanent design criteria.

                  Permanent unobstructed access to the pitch area for emergency vehicles to be
                  provided in at least two positions, and these being at opposite ends of the
                  ground (whenever possible).

                  The "guide" states a maximum notional rate of 750 persons per turnstile per
                  hour. However, it does not state the design time. It is suggested that a
                  revised code should state a maximum ingress design time of say, 45 minutes..
                   c^rry^i»y- i/v      \o twQK ^       W-         VmJ^           cxgW, -=5*
                  Terraces        V-'VM-                                                    fw?.


     o            Where terraces are to be sub-divided so as to avoid major migration and
                  sideways surge, each section should be formed by inserting radial barriers.
                  Radial fences should be avoided.

                  It is considered that spectator accommodation should not be lower than the
                  pitch level or pitch perimeter path level (whichever is the higher).

              In the present "guide", it states "gradients deeper 1:2 (26 degrees, 34
              minutes) could be dangerous" (paragraph 94). In Table 1 barrier
              requirements are specified for terrace gradients of up to 30 degrees or
              1:1.7, therefore contradicting the previous statement.  From a graphical
              interpolation and extrapolation of all the relevant data it is recommended
              that the maximum gradient should be 31 degrees, 30 minutes. This equates to
              approximately 1:1.63.

                  Crush Barriers - Design
                        )M
              To avoid resting in unseen and non-maintainable places, overclipped barrier
              rail supports should no longer be acceptable. All parts of barriers should
              be capable of direct inspection and maintenance.


                  SD2AAN/JJJ
Welding of all joints would achieve the aims set out in the above paragraph
and will create a structural continuity where the failure of an individual
element would minimise the risk of collapse.

Consideration should be given to the application of horizontal, (in addition
to lateral) forces.  This coo Id be taken as 5% of the horizontal force as
resisting torsional and secondary effects.

The recommended heights of the barrier rails should be re-assessed.
Clarification is also required (preferably by sketch) to show where this
measurement should be taken from.  The present guide appears to take an
assumption that the barrier rail is in the same vertical plain as the
terrace riser. When these vertical plains differ, the method of height
measurement may also differ* The acid test being what level a normal person
would stand who was comfortable, immediately behind the barrier.

The opportunity should be taken to re-appraise the design test and design
loads. An increase would achieve a greater resistance to collapse but may
increase the risk of injury due to resisting greater crowd pressures. A
decrease, however, may result in earlier collapse, yet may prevent fatal
inj ury.

Crush Barriers - Testing

It is suggested that each barrier span should be tested separately (for rail
strength) and then adjacent spans be tested together to determine rail and
support strength.

The specification of the test should be modified to clearly state how
recovery deflection is to be calculated.  Such a modification should be in
accordance with the testing procedures in BS 5950 and other similar British
Standard documents.

To avoid any further doubt, a standardised test specification and procedure
is now required.  This should include a specification of a standardised
testing rig and a standardised test result sheet.

Stands with seated accommodation

Although steeper gradients can create better forward viewing for the
spectators, very steep gradients will have the effect of creating equally
steep radial gangways and may create a domino effect during an evacuation
where all persons may be stood - instead of being seated.  The maximum
gradient is direcply stated in the present guide for seated areas; the only .
tenuous reference being to the maximum calculated gradient for stairways-in
paragraph 73 as being 34 degrees, 9 minutes.  It is considered that seated
accommodation greater than 30 degrees should have intermediate crush
barriers at approximate 5 metre centres.

Pitch Perimeter Fences

The Popplewell Report (paragraph 4.136 to 4.138 and also Appendix 'E1,
paragraph E29) recommended that consideration should be given to the design
of a standard efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.

Whether by design or otherwise, forward escape onto the pitch from all sides
of the ground is highly desirable.




SD2AAN/JJJ
If pitch perimeter fences are to remain, it is suggested that at least 50%
of its linear length is openable and such openings are evenly spaced so as
to provide maximum benefit for spectators' safety.

Where pitch side police or stewards require access into the spectator area
through relatively small doors or gates, these may be provided as additional
openings or as wicket gates in the large opening panels.

So as to avoid sudden forward movement, all such gates should be vertically
multi-hinged and open towards the pitch. Collapsible panels should not be
acceptable. It is a further pre-requisite that the release mechanism should
be:-

a) capable of being operational remotely in tandem with others;

b) capable of independent opening whilst under crowd pressure, by the
   operation of a quick release, manually operated catch;

c) all opening devices must be capable of using the crowd loading
   conditions.

In order to simplify any new designs of catch for pitch perimeter gates and
bearing in mind the fact that there should be no spectators in front of the
opening sections of the perimeter fencing, test loading on perimeter fences
could be reduced to, say 3 Kn/m.




SD2AAN/JJJ
Estimation of Space Capacity - Terraces

Under the present "Guide", terraces in good condition can be calculated as
capable of holding a maximum of 54 persons per 10 square metres, throughout
the available terraced area. It is, however, accepted that some parts of
that area are "peak viewing areas" and as such will achieve in practice a
greater population density due to their popularity. The figure of 54/10
metres squared is therefore an average, without the peak viewing parts being
given a maximum packing density.

It is considered that the 54/10 metres squared should be treated as being
the maximum and therefore only be applied to the areas of peak viewing.
Other areas of the terrace should be calculated as having a lower packing
density, say 40/10 metres squared.

In order to practically achieve the consideration set out in the above
paragraph, it would be necessary to:-

(a)   Define the size and position of peak viewing areas.

(b)   Surround the areas of peak viewing using radial ^fences.

(c)   Calculate the maximum population of each peak viewing area and
       adequately steward to see that this is not exceeded.

Flew Rates

Throughout the Inquiry, the flow rate of 40 and 60 persons per minute per
unit of exit width have been heavily criticised as being based on
inconclusive research. A practical lesson that has been ieamed is that
when people are very tightly packed, their ability to flow through exits is
dramatically reduced. Until the outcome of further research is known, it is
suggested that flow rates are reduced to the following:-

(a)   Peak viewing area of terraces - 30 persons per minute per unit of exit
      width.

(b)   All other areas - 40 persons per minute per unit of exit width.

It is considered that the emergency evacuation time should remain at 2h
minutes.




MS1/AA
MS1ABR
                    INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




Submission on Recommendations for the future on behalf of Sheffield City Council
                            INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


       Submission on Recommendations for the future on behalf of Sheffield City Council


       Introduction

       This document sets out the Sheffield City Council general recommendations in
       relation to how safety at snorts grounds can be improved. Clearly as a result
       of the Inquiry there are issues applicable primarily to Sheffield and the
       particular circumstances appertaining at Hillsborough on 15th April, 1989. This
       document does not seek to deal with these particular issues but rather the
       general issues in relation to safety at sports grounds.

       Recommendation 1 - The clarification and codification of legislation

       If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the existing
       legislation then the opportunity should be taken to codify and clarify the
       legislation which is currently contained in the 1975 Act, the 1987 Act, various
       regulations and statutory guidance.  It will be apparent that in a number of
       areas powers given by legislation will overlap and care will be needed to ensure
       that any such overlaps are properly dealt with.

       Recommendation 2 - The status and content of the green guide should be re-
       assessed

       The guide itself and the Home Office indicate that the guide should be applied
          xibly and "the guide is an aid to, not a substitute for, professional
          gement and common sense" (paragraph 6). The limits of this flexibility are



    J     ever not stated.  It seems to the council that parts of the Guide could be
          ulatory or embodied in an Approved Code of Practice - in any event clear
          guidance should be provided.  In the light of the evidence before the Inquiry
          the content of the guide also should be examined - for example in relation to
       pens and barrier testing.

       Recommendation 3 - Model safety certificate conditions

       The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety certifiate
       conditions should be drawn up.  It would seem appropriate that the Home Office
       draw up those conditions as it has done in respect of (for example) model
       b^elaws.  Obviously conditions covering all circumstances could not be
    ./established but certainly a useful number are capable of being drawn up in a
       model form. The use of model conditions would enable some degree of national
       standardisation to be achieved between certificate conditions imposed by
       different authorities.

       Recommendation 4 - Safety management and safety planning

       Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as a central aspect of
       their business and not an adjunct to it. It is essential for safety
       responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of accountability to
(      be included.  The green guide could usefully develop thisu^theme rather more than
J      it does at the moment. The term safety p lann ing^p'referaBl^'' to that of
       "emergency planning" iji^that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
       safety plannttigi§f<e5actly^that and an appropriate safety plan should promote
       better safety standards.
  Recommendation 5 - National first aid guidelines

  It^tias become apparent during the course of the Inquiry thatthere is a need   for
  ^national first aid guidelines to be issued.  Such guidelines should have
/ application not only to football matches but also to other large spectator
  events such as pop concerts.

  Recommendation 6 - Improvement/prohibition notices

 'The. prohibition notices within the 1975 legislation (as amended) could perhaps
 be extended to include Improvement Notices as are provided for in the Health and
 Safety at Work legislation. The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a
 useful intermediate stage for Certificating Authorities to use.

  Recommendation 7 - Certification of sports grounds for a definite period

 Mr. Justice Popplewell in his report (Recommendation 9, page       64) indicatedthat
  'onsideration should be given to issuing annual certificates in respect of
 sports grounds. The Inquiry might wish to consider a similar recommendation
 although the term may not be restricted to one year but could perhaps extend to
 three years or so. The benefit of having certificates with a definite expiry
 date is that the party's minds are focussed on the whole situation (i.e.
 Certificate Conditions, the state of the sports ground, etc.) and not on
 particular applications to alter the sports ground or on inspections.   This
 overall review of all the circumstances surrounding the issue of the particular
 Certificate would only help in the cause of greater public safety.

  Recommendation 8 - The payment of reasonable fees

  Certificating Authorities should have the power to require payment of reasonable
 /fees in respect of the certificating system. It has been the practice with many
  other licensing systems over recent years to enable licensing authorities to
  recover their reasonable costs directly from persons who are in receipt of what
  may be termed the "licensing service". Effectively this procedure removes the
  burden of paying for the licensing service from persons who do not directly
  benefit from it. The recovery of fees would also enable better resource
  planning to be carried out within Authorities.

  Recommendation 9 - Improving information flow on safety of sports grounds

 Spme consideration should be given to improving information flow on a national
y^asis.  Information should be available to all Authorities for certification
 purposes and it should enable a degree of unformity to be established in the
 exercise of Authorities' functions.

  Recommendation 10 - football membership schemes

  Careful consideration needs to be given to any scheme for national football
  membership schemes.  It would be undesirable if any such scheme resulted in (for
  instance) significant delays at turnstiles - it is abundantly clear from
  evidence before the Inquiry that crowd control problems can arise if there are
  delays at turnstiles for whatever reason.  It is also not reasonable to expect
  that football clubs (working within very limited sites) could provide much more
  space for a more complex admission system. At the Sheffield grounds many
  turnstiles actually abut the highway as do stadium structures themselves.

  GP/262/DMB
  13th July, 1989

  BH52/DB137
                     INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


Submission on Recommendations for the future on behalf of Sheffield City Council


Introduction

This document sets out the Sheffield City Council general recommendations in
relation to how safety at sports grounds can be improved.  Clearly as a result
of the inquiry there are issues applicable primarily to Sheffield and the
particular circumstances appertaining at Hillsborough on 15th April, 1989. This
document does not seek to deal with these particular issues but rather the
general issues in relation to safety at sports grounds.

Recommendation 1 - The clarification and codification of legislation

If the inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the existing
legislation then the "opportunity should be taken to codify and clarify the
legislation which is currently contained in the 1975 Act, the 1987 Act, various
regulations and statutory guidance.   It will be apparent that in a number of
areas powers given by legislation will overlap and care will be needed to ensure
that any such overlaps are properly dealt with.

Recommendation 2 - The status of the green guide should be re-assessed

The guide itself and the Home Office indicate that the guide should be applied
flexibly and "the guide is an aid to, not a substitute for, professional
judgement and commonsense” (paragraph 6). The limits of this flexibility are
however not stated.  It seems to the council that parts of the Guide could be
regulatory or embodied in an Approved Code of Practice - in any event clear
guidance should be provided.

Recommendation 3 - Model safety certificate conditions

The Popplewell report (paragraph 3-81) suggested that model safety certifiate
conditions should be drawn up.  It would seem appropriate that the Home Office
draw up those conditions as it has done in respect of (for example) model
byelaws.  Obviously conditions covering all circumstances could not be
established but certainly the vast majority are capable of being drawn up in a
model form.  The use of model conditions would enable some degree of national
standardisation to be achieved between certificate conditions imposed by
different authorities.

Recommendation 4 - Safety management and safety planning

Sports ground management and promotors must accept safety as a central aspect of
their business and not an adjunct to it.  It is essential for safety
responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of accountability to
be included.  The green guide could usefully develop this theme rather more than
it does at the moment. The term safety planning is preferable to that of
"emergency planning” in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should promote
better safety standards.

Recommendation 5 - National first aid guidelines

It has become apparent during the course of the Inquiry that there is a need for
national first aid guidelines to be issued.   Such guidelines should be drawn up
and-must have application n.jt only to football matches but also to other large
spectator events such as pop concerts.
Recommendation 6 - Improvement/prohibition notices

The prohibition notices wit'iin the 1975 legislation (as amended) could perhaps
be extended to include Improvement Notices as are provided for in the Health and
Safety at Work legislation. The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a
useful intermediate stage for Certificating Authorities to take.

Recommendation 7 - Certification of sports grounds for a definite period

Mr. Justice Popplewell in his report (Recommendation 9 page 64) indicated that
consideration should be given to issuing annual certificates in respect of
sports grounds.  The Inquiry might wish to consider a similar recommendation
although the term may not be restricted to one year but could perhaps extend to
three years or so. The benefit of having certificates with a definite expiry
date is that the party's minds are focussed on the whole situation (i.e.
Certificate Conditions, the state of the sports ground, etc.) and not on
particular applications to alter the sports ground or on inspections.  This
overall review of all the circumstances surrounding the issue of the particular
Certificate would only help in the cause of greater public safety.

Recommendation 8 - The payment of reasonable fees

Certificating Authorities should have the power to require payment of reasonable
fees in respect of the certificating system.   It has been the practice with many
other licensing systems over recent years to enable licensing authorities to
recover their reasonable costs directly from persons who are in receipt of what
may be termed the "licensing service". Effectively this procedure removes the
burden of paying for the licensing service from persons who do not directly
benefit from it. The recovery of fees would also enable proper resource
planning to be carried out /ithin Authorities.

Recommendation 9 - The proving of information on safety of sports grounds

Some consideration should be given to improving of information on a national
basis. That information would then be available to Authorities for
certification purposes and it would enable a degree of unformity to be
established in the administration of Authorities' functions.




GP/262/DMB
13th July, 1989




BH52/DB137
                    INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




Submission on Recommendations for the future on behalf of Sheffield City Council
                     INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


Submission on Recommendations for the future on behalf of Sheffield City Council


Introduction

This document sets out the Sheffield City Council general recommendations in
relation to how safety at sports grounds can be improved. Clearly as a result
of the Inquiry there are issues applicable primarily to Sheffield and the
particular circumstances appertaining at Hillsborough on 15th April, 1989. This
document does not seek to deal with these particular issues but rather the
general issues in relation to safety at sports grounds.

Recommendation 1 - The clarification and codification of legislation

If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the existing
legislation then the opportunity should be taken to codify and clarify the
legislation which is currently contained in the 1975 Act, the 1987 Act, various
regulations and statutory guidance.  It will be apparent that in a number of
areas powers given by legislation will overlap and care will be needed to ensure
that any such overlaps are properly dealt with.

Recommendation 2 - The status and content of the green guide should be re­
assessed

The guide itself and the Home Office indicate that the guide should be applied
flexibly and "the guide is an aid to, not a substitute for, professional
judgement and common sense" (paragraph 6). The limits of this flexibility are
however not stated. It seems to the council that parts of the Guide could be
regulatory or embodied in an Approved Code of Practice - in any event clear
guidance should be provided.  In the light of the evidence before the Inquiry
the content of the guide also should be examined - for example in relation to
pens and barrier testing.

Recommendation 3 - Model safety certificate conditions

The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety certifiate
conditions should be drawn up.  It would seem appropriate that the Home Office
draw up those conditions as it has done in respect of (for example) model
byelaws. Obviously conditions covering all circumstances could not be
established but certainly a useful number are capable of being drawn up in a
model form. The use of model conditions would enable some degree of national
standardisation to be achieved between certificate conditions imposed by
different authorities.

Recommendation 4 - Safety management and safety planning

Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as a central aspect of
their business and not an adjunct to it. It is essential for safety
responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of accountability to
be included.  The green guide could usefully develop this theme rather more than
it does at the moment. The term safety planning is preferable to that of
"emergency planning" in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should promote
better safety standards.
Recommendation 5 - National first aid guidelines

It has become apparent during the course of the Inquiry thatthere is a need   for
national first aid guidelines to be issued.   Such guidelines should have
application not only to football matches but also to other large spectator
events such as pop concerts.

Recommendation 6 - Improvement/prohibition notices

The prohibition notices within the 1975 legislation (as amended) could perhaps
be extended to include Improvement Notices as are provided for in the Health and
Safety at Work legislation. The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a
useful intermediate stage for Certificating Authorities to use.

Recommendation 7 - Certification of sports grounds for a definite period

Mr. Justice Popplewell in his report (Recommendation 9, page       64) indicatedthat
consideration should be given to issuing annual certificates in respect of
sports grounds. The Inquiry might wish to consider a similar recommendation
although the term may not be restricted to one year but could perhaps extend to
three years or so. The benefit of having certificates with a definite expiry
date is that the party's minds are focussed on the whole situation (i.e.
Certificate Conditions, the state of the sports ground, etc.) and not on
particular applications to alter the sports ground or on inspections. This
overall review of all the circumstances surrounding the issue of the particular
Certificate would only help in the cause of greater public safety.

Recommendation 8 - The payment of reasonable fees

Certificating Authorities should have the power to require payment of reasonable
fees in respect of the certificating system.   It has been the practice with many
other licensing systems over recent years to enable licensing authorities to
recover their reasonable costs directly from persons who are in receipt of what
may be termed the "licensing service". Effectively this procedure removes the
burden of paying for the licensing service from persons who do not directly
benefit from it. The recovery of fees would also enable better resource
planning to be carried out within Authorities.

Recommendation 9 - Improving information flow on safety of sports grounds

Some consideration should be given to improving information flow on a national
basis.  Information should be available to all Authorities for certification
purposes and it should enable a degree of unformity to be established in the
exercise of Authorities' functions.

Recommendation 10 - football membership schemes

Careful consideration needs to be given to any scheme for national football
membership schemes.  It would be undesirable if any such scheme resulted in (for
instance) significant delays at turnstiles - it is abundantly clear from
evidence before the Inquiry that crowd control problems can arise if there are
delays at turnstiles for whatever reason.  It is also not reasonable to expect
that football clubs (working within very limited sites) could provide much more
space for a more complex admission system. At the Sheffield grounds many
turnstiles actually abut the highway as do stadium structures themselves.

GP/262/DMB
13th July, 1989

BH52/DB137
                    INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




Submission on Recommendations for the future on behalf of Sheffield City Council
                     INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


Submission on Recommendations for the future on behalf of Sheffield City Council


Introduction

This document sets out the Sheffield City Council general recommendations in
relation to how safety at sports grounds can be improved. Clearly as a result
of the Inquiry there are issues applicable primarily to Sheffield and the
particular circumstances appertaining at Hillsborough on 15th April, 1989. This
document does not seek to deal with these particular issues but rather the
general issues in relation to safety at sports grounds.

Recommendation 1 - The clarification and codification of legislation

If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the existing
legislation then the opportunity should be taken to codify and clarify the
legislation which is currently contained in the 1975 Act, the 1987 Act, various
regulations and statutory guidance.  It will be apparent that in a number of
areas powers given by legislation will overlap and care will be needed to ensure
that any such overlaps are properly dealt with.

Recommendation 2 - The status and content of the green guide should be re­
assessed

The guide itself and the Home Office indicate that the guide should be applied
flexibly and "the guide is an aid to, not a substitute for, professional
judgement and common sense” (paragraph 6). The limits of this flexibility are
however not stated.  It seems to the council that parts of the Guide could be
regulatory or embodied in an Approved Code of Practice - in any event clear
guidance should be provided.  In the light of the evidence before the Inquiry
the content of the guide also should be examined - for example in relation to
pens and barrier testing.

Recommendation 3 - Model safety certificate conditions

The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety certifiate
conditions should be drawn up.  It would seem appropriate that the Home Office
draw up those conditions as it has done in respect of (for example) model
byelaws. Obviously conditions covering all circumstances could not be
established but certainly a useful number are capable of being drawn up in a
model form. The use of model conditions would enable some degree of national
standardisation to be achieved between certificate conditions imposed by
different authorities.

Recommendation 4 - Safety management and safety planning

Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as a central aspect of
their business and not an adjunct to it. It is essential for safety
responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of accountability to
be included. The green guide could usefully develop this theme rather more than
it does at the moment. The term safety planning is preferable to that of
"emergency planning" in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should promote
better safety standards.
Recommendation 5 - National first aid guidelines

It has become apparent during the course of the Inquiry that there is a need   for
national first aid guidelines to be issued. Such guidelines should have
application not only to football matches but also to other large spectator
events such as pop concerts.

Recommendation 6 - Improvement/prohibition notices

The prohibition notices within the 1975 legislation (as amended) could perhaps
be extended to include Improvement Notices as are provided for in the Health and
Safety at Work legislation.  The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a
useful intermediate stage for Certificating Authorities to use.

Recommendation 7 - Certification of sports grounds for a definite period

Mr. Justice Popplewell in his report (Recommendation 9, page       64) indicatedthat
consideration should be given to issuing annual certificates in respect of
sports grounds. The Inquiry might wish to consider a similar recommendation
although the term may not be restricted to one year but could perhaps extend to
three years or so. The benefit of having certificates with a definite expiry
date is that the party's minds are focussed on the Whole situation (i.e.
Certificate Conditions, the state of the sports ground, etc.) and not on
particular applications to alter the sports ground or on inspections.   This
overall review of all the circumstances surrounding the issue of the particular
Certificate would only help in the cause of greater public safety.

Recommendation 8 - The payment of reasonable fees

Certificating Authorities should have the power to require payment of reasonable
fees in respect of the certificating system.   It has been the practice with many
other licensing systems over recent years to enable licensing authorities to
recover their reasonable costs directly from persons who are in receipt of what
may be termed the "licensing service". Effectively this procedure removes the
burden of paying for the licensing service from persons who do not directly
benefit from it. The recovery of fees would also enable better resource
planning to be carried out within Authorities.

Recommendation 9 - Improving information flow on safety of sports grounds

Some consideration should be given to improving information flow on a national
basis.  Information should be available to all Authorities for certification
purposes and it should enable a degree of unformity to be established in the
exercise of Authorities’ functions.

Recommendation 10 - football membership schemes

Careful consideration needs to be given to any scheme for national football
membership schemes. It would be undesirable if any such scheme resulted in (for
instance) significant delays at turnstiles - it is abundantly clear from
evidence before the Inquiry that crowd control problems can arise if there are
delays at turnstiles for whatever reason.  It is also not reasonable to expect
that football clubs (working within very limited sites) could provide much more
space for a more complex admission system. At the Sheffield grounds many
turnstiles actually abut the highway as do stadium structures themselves.

GP/262/DMB
13th July, 1989

BH52/DB137
         (L < ,e             * /v r   fL U A ti    -      L A itu r /   C * ,v r * ~ T          ?
DRAFT REPORT                                                              '       •■       '
                                                   -       '£ * r   vr&       A        <


                                 SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
                                                                                               th /vi
                   RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TO CONSIDER




Introduction

Arising from the evidence produced to the Hillsborough Inquiry it is clear that
a number of areas within the Safety of Sports Grounds' system require to be
reviewed. Obviously the Council's internal administrative arrangements will be
looked at in considerable detail and will be changed where necessary.

It is thought that the tragedy at Hillsborough occurred in a set of very
specific circumstances and they would not necessarily be appropriate to
completely revise all the safety aspects of sports grounds as a result of the
disaster. There are a considerable number of wider issues to be considered.

The following recommendations are therefore put forward for the Inquiry to
consider:-

Recommendatlon 1

The legislation governing Safety of Sports Grounds should be simplified and
codified. At the present moment the legislation is mainly contained in two
separate documents (namely the 1975 Act and the 1987 Act) and the task of
identifying the current position in relation to that legislation is highly
complex. In addition the drafting of the legislation could no doubt be
improved.


Recommendation 2

There needs to be clarification as to the status of the "Green Guide". There
has been much evidence before the Inquiry as to differences in interpretation as
to the status of the Guide, for example, whether it should be rigidly adhered to
or whether it should be applied flexibly as the Home Office have often stated.
The limits of flexibility are not stated.  It seems to the Council that perhaps
parts of the Guide could be regulatory or perhaps embodied in an Approved Code
of Practice - in any event clear guidance should be provided.


Recommendation 3

There should be some model Safety Certificate conditions as was suggested by the
Popplewell Report (paragraph2.2f.81). It would seem to be appropriate that the
Home Office lls** up those conditions as it has done in respect of ([for example)
model Bye Laws. Obviously conditions covering all circumstances could not be
established but certainly the vast majority are capable of being drawn up in a
model form. The use of model conditions would enable some degree of national
standardisation to be achieved between certificate conditions.
      Recommendation 4                     '
                                                      ^         ::K r^ ,  [ ' ';■
      Safety Management should be a central aspect of the occupier of a sports
      ground’s business and this point should be emphasised to Certificate Holders -
      possibly in a revised Green Guide. Allied to safety management Is safety
      planning and once again this should be brought to the attention of Holders.


      Recommendation 5

      It has become apparent during the course of the Inquiry that there Is a need for
      national first aid guidelines to be Issued. Such guidelines should be drawn up
      and would have application not only to football matches but also to other large
      events such as pop concerts. The lack of any national guidelines Is a
      considerable hindrance both to Certificate Holders and Authorities.


      Recommendation 6

      The Prohlblton Notice system within the legislation could perhaps be extended to
      Include Improvement Notices as are provided for In the Health and Safety at Work
      legislation. The power to Issue Improvement Notices would be a useful
      Intermediate step for Certificating Authorities to take. It would have the
      added benefit of providing a set form which would be understandable both to
      Certificate Holders and Certificating Authorities.


      Recommendation 7

      Xord Justice Popplewell In his report (                      f p/fa*,
      indicated that consideration should be given to Issuing annual certificates In
 V    respect of Sports Grounds. This Idea has much to jb^commend It even though It
      would possibly Increase the amount of work which would have to be done by
      Authorities.  It Is the experience of the Sheffield City Council that the minds
      of licensees are particularly well focused by the Issue of annual certificates
      etc.. For example In the Public Entertainments Licence system few difficulties
      arise of an ongoing nature; they are usually resolved prior to licence renewal.
      The use of annual certificates would also help to focus the minds of Officers
  X
( )
      within the Authority and jfc4-fr#in outside bodies who are Involved In the system
      and such a move would be very helpful.


      Recommendation 8

      The Council should have the power to require payment of reasonable fees In
      xespect of the certificating system. It has been the practice with many other
      licensing systems over recent years to enable licensing Authorities to recover
  ^   their costs directly from perons who are In receipt of what may be termed <fthe
  ^   licensing service? Effectively this procedure removes the burden of paying for
      the licensing service from persons who do not directly benefit from It (for
      example the ratepayer). The recovery^fees would also enable proper resource
      planning to be carried out within Authorities.   It seems sensible that persons
      making direct use of licensing services should pay for them.
Recommendation 9

Some consideration should be given to the pooling of Information on Safety of
Sports Grounds on a national basis* That Information would then be available to
Authorities for their certification purposes and It would enable a degree of
uniformity to be established In the administration of Authorities' functions.


Recommendation 10

It Is plain from the evidence submitted to the Inquiry that some clear
definition of roles between the various parties (for example The Authorities,
the Clubs, the Police, etc.) Is required. This Is one area In which a lack of
clarity can cause major problems.


Recommendation 11

The role of the Health and Safety Executive requires clarification In view of
the Popplewell recommendation^




GP/262/DMB
6rh July, 1989




SD15/DB67/PB
A.M.A.
lect. To i w o c i i e y
                                                             (


          fe.             -—                           >~*SSL.i-t-v.PV S-/V                       4.           -K. '"T^j^o^ f<x,

                                           ^rw.                             /^ • M- l4 •




                    btt QjQ^>
        es^v        -®-«-c-^cr»-e.^                   ^re-^\.i^L e.           (^s? *-cc.C' <3^*



                                                                                                                       i»«r                                                             *SCClAV>

                                         -fo                     ©£>-/'                  -    -   -




Stirst-C***-                               s i u_eA          c|ct,4eya *fo ^*6. **LSLsz-U-r*j{? ^                                                   (a d ^h ^                    cpM ^JfL

                                  f-e ^ e jisiM.          <JL&'J~CkjB*i            mr         rJ&$LcJ*r&^Lc. .-*?safclcAeto



wk<^                ~7 Q )                 /i         S x^^Jsa J}                f^vsrtrrJl^*sj                            ~/^» y^e^u r^. 0~>                     «»    ^S^L + tr*           i.—




                    “T ’^ e                 a-c.«-«tl"< -o»t.        "«/»    a > 3 ^ s_ r^                         ju c fa P s s y y i $&                        C w * * < -^ v ^ |    Q rv v ^ rf

           ^jL^^vxr/vo              t>v         iLfttoJ?

                     ^Lo'w^avt-'C^.“C *—o-a J * S                    S3 c jL         .^/-MJ^ a/to                        cu\J]                                   tJifc                  ct-/~Cxi.

               8^                   t^rj         f^L a ,'-> a ^£ it          cs^uP                                      '/^e ^co^^-e                                                    c~r *r<**c^

                                                CL^jP                ^LstA^C^O ^                        T2i-CLxiccc~'2^:                        _jjl^

               AjQ-O-®                                           ^                           c-THr'-sdlo            ir-4-heuAj^             Ov                                               j

               (r€^^€_ j c£.u-^-»^                       €S^.tP                                                                                               «x ^SA»Kt"^>vs6^

                c *v    cu          rn .e J T B ^ '     / f - c%'~    C .C T w ts je V ^ 'y           - " f^ a -   « » o ^ < s - c _ i.- » /w u '       *2 sr**S jZ .Jlsu r>
                             —ssM sss                                            » ,/                                                _                                          n
               _Ar*vfiJ?q u ^    -b^^mJH                                               Cx                                                                          »i»*,f- ***tsJ
                                                                                                                                                    ^0-rf-«t/"*\. «,

                                           cvyt»'3<-tC^,                    A^TM-oJ^a                                                                <*w. ^/\.£«.         /Ksa^tA *i2»j./

                              r
               C*S>psJx~ vcrn^>                 try      c y y t I^sp ^/T ^M .
                                                                                 l                Do                     a                r . r t /7
                                                                                                                                          W iZ jS S ti/^ j      C trw J v tr l        a^Jf
                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                -$sx. jf+s*-                                                                           cJL ia          £**. -a^uc-O-*—                                   4       VTt^&Jl

                                           $JL.           AjBe.                                                                  j-Cirui.'JS           iko.

                       "fCft       rv^a.^n>JJ                                                                                                       cs«*yt»^c-<^«-feo                  fbJ-ra^asJl

                eu<«vo            gcac^          trLa>s3r
r




                                                                                                                                                      H
                                               't&J^
                                                 o                    Grcs-tv-te^L «,        "T*^*- 4er >n.                           lAJiLW^
                                                                                                                                      U"VjCLCO v.«i

    o.rgQ.                      ^-e   ^ > it^ r         JUrfLfjU <Xa*U sjCy&z-f'-                     /IVcpc.^*v *•*■*»*■ ^Xfl. ^ CUici?

    Cfc*y"7£X^igj£                                          /Kejt caH-0»-/w               tvv^wwU r             ^a/Otfxui

             fG-T       (Q ^ ____ ~f*>_________________________ ^                           f4a                      :«_a<9 <

    Ci^'-ejr—O        ^ U A ^ _          cx-i2 ca^ io              «=i^a     f •ejcpM -Cy          eu   ^ -7                          .—-^ L _______


    c^a'*~*9           ^^xS~a>r ^ / L*ri/* ‘■ ^ /          A~o      /uz-T to f*y J                                         <s*sj '$*. * \£ jd l

      ^or            Q fe. M Jpi^     -Ce^o^      -i^       C-g.     c jjj.^ A ji.'^ ’^     o v u * sj}$       s^f~u^o          C>«xyvnliaya




                                                                                                                 cla^, Ccj

       ffixM-eJZ                                        ^ x tr* . . ^-aj^jLrt ^                                £/±                    _
            KMW


            2&th June, 1989




Mr. Groanow,
AHA,
35 Great. Smith Street,
LOUDON.
SW1P 3BJ

Dear Mr. Grounow,

’’Draft Bemoranduo to the Taylor Inquiry”

Please find enclosed » brief schedule of coraa^nts on the «hov* draft
which I hops* you will find useful.

Ho doubt you will also take Account of any comaenta by the Fire Brigade
and Police.

Tt would b» helpful if you could provide ek? with & copy of this submitted
document for my records.

Yours 8lncere.1y,




Acting Head of Department




HB4AAU/AA




                                                734018 - Mr. Webster
                                   SCHEDULE


Specific Ccnroents


Para 4    - it should be stressed that each ground is different.

Para 5    - should the reference in the first line to Hillsborough in fact
            be a reference to Bradford?

             although the pitch can constitute a designated place of safety,
             for the purposes of the West Terrace this was not the escape
             route envisaged by the Fire Service. The exit route in an
             emergency for this particular terrace (pens 3 and 4) was
             through the tunnel arid the gates at. the back of the radial
             fencing. Alternative means of escape must be shown .to a crowd
             by effective policing/stewarding on the spot. Any sign posting
             would by its very existence turn a temporary or alternative
             escape route into one which would be used by sane if not all
             the people in the crowd as a primary means of escape.

Para 5(b) - "each exit    should wherever possible have direct access to open
            air ....".

             To suggest otherwise would be totally impractical in existing
             sports grounds.

Para 5(e) - The Inquiry has heard very detailed evidence with regard to the
            siting of emergency gates and the use of radios within grounds.
            Caution should be exercised in making specific recommendations
            without.reference to. the expert evidence available on each of
            these points. However, it should be noted:-

              (1)    There are other quick release devices to be considered
                     other than panic bolts or electronic switches.

              (2)    Provision of canmunication systems must be sensible and
                     supported by adequate training.

              (3)    The risk to stewards in "foreign" territory has been
                     brought to the attention of the Inquiry.

Para 6(a) - The issue of ticket games needs careful consideration. Where
            are the outlets to be for the sale of tickets? What happens to
            segregation? Is it really necessary for ordinary league
            matches?

              For "big" games which are expected to be a sell-out, all
              tickets might be a good idea. Should there then be Police
              checking tickets a distance fern the ground and turning those
              away without tickets? (This Police role may be a politically
              sensitive issue). There may then be the need for a
              "sterilisation" area for fans.
                                     2.



Para 6(b) -     Responsibility for spectator safety should remain with the
                Club. The Local Authority vrould have grave reservations about
              . a Council Official being present on the day to enforce safety
                provisions. This seems to encourage the occupier to leave to
                the Council, responsibility for something which really should
                be done by the occupier.

               cf theatre licences and liquor licences etc.

Para 7(b) - Obviously, several authorities have additional expenses
            including Knowsley and the Police.

Para 7(d) -    (1)   Scroe officers, in sane building control sections may, by
                     virtue of their particular experiences, be able to assist
                     in assessing crowd movement and dynamics, but it is
                     primarily the Police and the Fire Brigade who have
                     expertise in these areas.

               (2)   Match day "spot checks" by all members of the advisory
                     group are a good idea. Anything more comprehensive than
                     this would be difficult to achieve in practice.

               (3)   A vital issue is the need to drastically review the
                     recommendations of the method of calculating the safe
                     ground capacities for terraced areas and viewing slopes
                     as outlined in the Hone Office Guide to Safety of Sports
                     Grounds. The term "peak viewing" area should be further
                     defined and given a maximum size and arrangements made
                     for a maximum number of persons based on 54 per lOm^ to
                     occupy that part of the facilities. All other areas
                     should be classified as requiring a substantially lower
                     density factor, {possibly 40 per lOm^) yet maintaining the
                     need for 6kn/m tests to be achieved on all crush
                     barriers. (This maximum calculation should be reduced,
                     as in the current guide, depending on the state of the
                     terrace or viewing slope.)

                     The figure of 54 per lOm^ is used throughout the terrace
                     and therefore must be an average figure. This average is
                     exceeded in peak viewing areas and therefore any safety
                     factors are reduced proportionately.

                     It is also important in the light of Hillsborough, not
                     just to calculate terrace capacities but also to ensure
                     that there is on the spot monitoring that the capacities
                     are not exceeded or at least to keep a close eye on the
                     crowd to ensure that they are not too tightly packed.

                     In self-contained terraces it might be possible to
                     monitor capacities by means of a turnstile. Where the
                     terrace is not self-contained and there is the
                     possibility of movement by fans in and out of the terrace
                     or to other parts of the terrace the only control
                     possible would seem to be effective supervision by Police
                     or stewards whose task is to ensure proper "packing" of
                     terraces.


                                                                                  £
              (4)   The playing area is not always designated as a place of
                    safety. Adequate provision of exits and exit routes
                    should ensure that evacuation is achieved without
                    crushing.

General points which the AMZV may wish to consider

1.    Annual certificates.

2.    Recovery of reasonable fees.

3.    Improvement/prohibition notice system.

4.    Clarification as to the status of the Guide - whether parts should be
      regulatory or in an Approved Code of Practice.

5.    Model conditions - N.B. Popplewall suggested at para 3.81 that the AMA
      draw up model conditions.

6.    Simplification and codification of legislation.

7.    National first aid guidelines.

8.    Pooling of information nationally - available to relevant authorities -
      for discussion etc.

9.    Role of the Health and Safety Executive.

10.   Safety management as a central aspect to the occupiers business.

11.   Safety planning by the occupier.

12.   More clarity regarding the relationship between the occupier and the
      relevant authorities and theix respective roles and responsibilities.

13.   The Nimes fences need to be looked at very carefully. They can create
      different problems, e.g. all the fans on the pitch, fans falling
      forward, fence to act as a crush barrier, strength of gate catches,
      problems of using electronic catches.

14.   I.D. cards - patterns of attendance
                 - two turnstile system - not rocm at most grounds
                 - additional policing required.

15.   There is a danger of the very specific problems at Hillsborough being
      used as a format for the future - the wider issues must be considered.




HB4AAW /AA
                                      Association of                        35 Great Smith Street
                                                                            Westminster
                                      Metropolitan                          London SW1P3BJ
                                      Authorities                           Telephone
                                                                            01-2228100
                                      Secretary Alun Gronow                 Facsimile receiver only
                                      Deputy Joan Jones                     01-2220878




Mr M Webster                                        S/CB                    5 July 1989
                                      your ref      HMW
Acting Head of Department
Administration and Legal Department
City of Sheffield
Town Hall
Sheffield
S1 2HH


                                                                   1. O
                                         h ead op          H EAD   | L ’Q
                                          0'£?T

                                                           89
                                           0 7. JUL
                                       O.S.M.




Dear Mr Webster

DRAFT MEMORANDUM TO THE TAYLOR INQUIRY

Thank you very much for your letter of 28 June giving comments on our
original draft.   I enclose a copy of what in the event has now gone in and
I think you will see that we have taken on board the helpful observations
that you have made.   If I may, I would add one additional comment myself
regarding the fifteen general points you have listed at the back of your
letter.   I think some of these ought to be picked up separately rather
than through heavy statements to the Inquiry.   Certainly they are in many
cases things which the Association ought to be move forward and I intend
therefore to include them as items for consideration when I report the
evidence to the next meeting of our Policy Committee later this month.

Thank you again for your help in the sorting out of our evidence and
rather belatedly may I also register my gratitude and pleasure at the
attention and hospitality you provided when I came up to Sheffield last
week.   It made for a most pleasant day as well as a valuable one.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely
MEMORANDUM TO THE TAYLOR INQUIRY




1.   The Association of Metropolitan Authorities represents the 36

Metropolitan District Councils, 31 London Boroughs, the City of London, the

Inner London Education Authority and the Joint Authorities responsible for

Police, the Fire Service and Public Transport in the Metropolitan Areas.

The Association's role is to promote and protect the interests of its

member authorities and the community they serve, to provide a forum for

member authorities to discuss and act collectively on matters of common

concern and to provide a service to member authorities, including the

dissemination of good practice.    The county of Merseyside includes the

districts of Knowsley, Liverpool, St Helens, Sefton and Wirral where the

majority of the dead, the injured, their families, friends and neighbours

lived.   The county of South Yorkshire includes the districts of Barnsley,

Doncaster, Rotherham and Sheffield.    The district councils appoint the

elected members to the Fire & Civil Defence Authorities and Police

Authorities.




2.   Since March 1983, the Association has maintained a Working Party on

Football, which is now called the Football Development Working Party.      In

1984, the Association published "Football Violence : The Metropolitan

Viewpoint" (copy appended) and the Association also gave evidence before Mr

Justice Popplewell in 1985.   The Association provides joint secretariat

services for Football's Family Forum which will submit evidence separately

to the inquiry.




3.   The Association recognises that it would be possible for the Inquiry

to interpret narrowly its second term of reference "to make recommendations
about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports grounds".     The

Association urges the Inquiry to adopt the broadest approach because




      (a)   "the needs of crowd control and (crowd) safety" go beyond

            issues of movement, density, policing and building materials into

            areas of public policy such as responsibility for organisational

            procedures, co-ordination and liaison in the aftermath of

            disaster and medium to long-term commitments to victim support;

            and




       (b) "at sports grounds" interpreted narrowly would preclude the

            Inquiry from making recommendations on crowd control and safety

            at other large scale events such as pop concerts held elsewhere

            than in sports grounds.




A.   The Association recognises the necessity to balance the maintenance of

public order at large scale events with preserving the personal safety of

individual spectators.     It recognises the difficulties faced by the

police, but it believes that considerations of public order and control can

at times overshadow the issue of spectator safety.     Measures to promote

public order and public safety are not always identical.




The Association also accepts that the operational considerations relating

to any sporting event are unique.     Each football ground is different in

terms of construction and environment, while crowd size and demeanour are

affected by many different factors such as the weather, the importance of

the match and the relationship between the clubs involved.      In these

circumstances local knowledge is as crucial as any set of centrally agreed
           .'■-f
          //
     /;

:i

guidelines.            Nevertheless, principles relating to the growth of community

involvement in football set out in "Football Violence: The Metropolitan

Viewpoint" remain as valid today as they were in 1984 and the document was

publicly endorsed by the then Minister for Sport, Neil MacFarlane MP within

weeks of publication.            The Association would ask the Inquiry to give due

weight to these principles in any recommendations which it makes about the

general context of the Hillsborough tragedy.




Furthermore the Association has long held, and will continue to take,             the

view that any member of the public should have the same expectation of

safety at a public event whether this be an enclosed premises (such as a

theatre) in the open air, (a pop concert for exacple) or a sporting stadium

(football, cricket or rugby eg).




5.   With specific regard to the circumstances at Hillsborough, the

Association's position is clear and was stated in a previous inquiry to Mr

Justice Popplewell.           At any football match, the playing surface can

constitute a major place of safety for spectators in the event of an

emergency.           Whilst recognising the need to maintain public order, the

Association said that:




          (a)      there should be a choice of alternative means of escape from

                   a stand which would provide so far as is reasonably practicable,

                   for spectators to turn their back on the source of the fire or

                   other problem and travel to a place of safety.   Such means of

                   escape would require effective policing/stewarding on the spot;




                                             -3-
         (b)   each exit should wherever possible have direct access to open air

               and should be separated from other exits to avoid funnelling

               people into a congested area;



f
f        (c)   many seated stands are constructed so that people have to move

               forwards and downwards in order to get out.     This means that

               they may have to go towards the source of danger before reaching

               safety.     This is contrary to the interests of public safety, and

               the guidance document,    (Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds) should

               be updated to limit the forward travel distance where there is no

               alternative means of escape at the rear of the stand;




         (d)   the training and number of stewards at public events requires

               scrutiny.     Most are casually employed.   Measures are necessary

               to ensure that their knowlege of the ground, its safety systems

               and the correct procedures are of the highest order because of

               the public responsibility which they carry;




         (e)   specific measures which should be taken in respect of enclosure

               fences include:    the siting of emergency gates in fences, such

               gates to be secured by suitable quick release mechanisms; such

               gates to be manned by sufficient stewards; stewards to be trained

               (see above); stewards to have independent communication with a

               central control point, and to be trained in the system used.




    These points, which arose from the Bradford fire disaster are equally

    applicable to the Hillsborough tragedy.




                                         - h -
6.   Since Hillsborough, the Association's secretariat has inspected the

anti-panic barrier now installed at the municipal stadium in Nices,       in

operation at a match.      Although the system has only recently been

introduced, it does appear to provide a means of maintaining public order

and safety at the same time.      The Association would hope that the system

could be given an early trial in England to see if it would be appropriate

here.




7.      At this stage in the acquisition and evolution of experience from the

recent spate of major disasters including Hillsborough, the Association

urges the Inquiry to build into its report and recommendations positive and

forward-looking views on a ninber of issues:




        (a)   The powers, practices and systems of local authorities' planning

              for major disasters and responses to them.     These are addressed

              in detail in two documents accompanying the covering letter,

              "Local Authorities and Peacetime Emergency Planning: A Review of

              Current Arrangements and Proposals for Improvement" (November

              1988) and an amended version of the Association's final submission

              (June 1988) to the Home Office in an endeavour to influence

              the latter's Review of Peacetime Disasters;




        (b)   Counselling and support for victims and carers/rescuers:    the

              Association firmly believes governmental initiative and

              commitment are necessary in two major areas.    First, there is

              a need for guidance and training packages to be promulgated to

              local authorities and District Health Authorities (the

              Association is represented on the Department of Health/CRUSE




                                      -5-
      Working Party)..    Secondly, long term victim and rescuer/carer

      support is expensive.     The Association understands Liverpool

      City Council's additional commitment is around £2 million; and

      other Merseyside authorities will also have heavy costs in this

      area.   The Association therefore urges the Inquiry to recomnend

      prompt and full reimbursement by government to local authorities

      faced with the consequence of disaster among their people,

      families and communities.     The Association is aware that the

      Local Government and Housing Bill, clause 133 at Report Stage,

      enables the Minister to codify the so called "Bellwin Rules" but

      is unconvinced that government has any commitment to meeting in

      full the financial costs of disaster.




(c)   Major disasters generate public appeals.     The law's complexities

      and .inequities are well known from the experiences of recent

      disaster funds.     The Association does not consider it necessary

      for every local authority to have a Disaster Appeal discretionary

      trust on the shelf, updated as experience and case law develop.

      However, the danger of buying in the state of the art after the

      next disaster is that irrevocable decisions can be made early on.

      The Association accordingly believes it would be sensible and

      prudent for government to issue guidelines on the establishment,

      administration and termination of disaster appeals.




(d)   The Association is aware that currently some building control

      departments in local authorities are moving by virtue of their

      responsibilities for safe structures and buildings into the area

      of training stewards and assisting the police on crowd movement

      and dynamics.      Because these departments know how crowds behave




                                     -6-
              //
                   in tight spaces, before during and after a major event (like a

                   semi-final or a Michael Jackson concert), the Association

                   considers this emerging trend should be encouraged by Government

                   and standards approaches promulgated.      Equally, on-site match
/•
f                  day "spot checks" by appropriate officials from building control

                   and fire prevention should also be encouraged.      A vital issue

                   is the need to drastically review the recommendations of the

                   method of calculating the safe ground capacities for terraced

                   areas and viewing slopes as outlined in the Home Office guide to

                   Safety of Sports Grounds.      The term "peak viewing" area should
     (   ')
                   be further defined and given a maximum size and arrangements made

                   for a maximum number of persons based on 54 per 10m2 to occupy

                   that part of the faciliites.     All other areas should be

                   classified as requiring a substantially lower density factor

                   (possibly 40 per 10m2) yet maintaining the need for 6kn/m tests

                   to be achieved on all crush barriers.      (This maximum calculation

                   should be reduced, as in the current guide, depending on the

                   state of the terrace or viewing slope).




     (             The figure of 54 per 10m2 is used throughout the terrace and

                   therefore must be an average figure.      This average is exceeded

                   in peak viewing areas and therefore any safety factors are

                   reduced proportionately.




                   It is also important in the light of Hillsborough, not just to

                   calculate terrace capacities but also to ensure that there is on

                   the spot monitoring that the capacities are not exceeded or at

                   least to keep a close eye on the crowd to ensure that they are

                   not too tightly packed.




                                               -7-
            In self-contained terraces it might be possible to monitor

            capacities by means of a turnstile.   Where the terrace is not

            self-contained and there is the possibility of movement by fans

            in and out of the terrace or to other parts of the terrace the

            only control possible would seem to be effective supervision by

            Police or stewards whose task is to ensure proper "packing" of

            terraces. .




            Where the playing area is considered to be a safe place for

            evacuation from stands, and there is a standing paddock or

            terrace area between the stands and the playing area, the

            packing density for this terraced area should not exceed the lower

            figure of 26 persons per 10m2 to reduce the risk of crushing in

            the event of forward evacuation from the stands towards the

            playing area.




     fe))   The incoming calls at Casualty Bureaux and hospital switchboards

            frequently cause the system to collapse.    This is because the

            public telephone network does not have the capacity to absorb a

            huge and'unanticipated increase in calls.   The Association

            recognises that the perfect answer is unobtainable but recommends

            the Inquiry to take evidence on forthcoming proposed improvements

            and assess their likely effectiveness.




8.   ini conclusion, the Association believes that public safety and public

order can be exercised to a high degree of compatibility in football

sfcadianss provided that the principles set out above are applied to the

particular circumstances of each individual ground and each event.

Improved standards of construction and training should assist the control




                                      -8-
stadiums provided that the principles set out above are applied to the

particular circumstances of each individual ground and each event.

Improved standards of construction and training should assist the control

of each match, but this will need funding.    The funding required could be

provided by using a small percentage of the duty currently collected by the

Treasury from football pools.   This is a small suns to pay for ensuring

public safety.




The Association will be pleased to present more detailed technical or other

arguments to the Inquiry as appropriate.
                                                                                                  j ^ ? 7 - £ " 8 L,cr



    (i     ^



                   u                                  -    ?                              C c tK ... <3             C&u


          Hcmcux                                      cue           Jb^                !/c             I M /-



 fs s tiM              k o i                                                                                                                       /e

                                           ]i f f M            CM C                       c o f




          cm                           A M d                    5       S




              ai         y^m 4 M ^-              ^ M ^ r tu           U U % j‘f<-ta 'U>      <^T     /c Q Z C C ^ f




                                                           i     <?' U /M t
                                                                 IIM                K)                       (W M W lU &



         (C )                                                  lu A /l£ $ ^ £ is i Z //C £ u & !> v~ -7 /             I caJt eu



                                  ^ M iS >                U U ^ e d id ^           A Iom I / /           J   q      jM d M & t


        L O               S M        i ^         Jld W ^M i- litfS tfo A                 ($wLfSS/ ^ ^                      ^j£> /o     S& M &

                   j ~ ~ '- - - '^ k t M .                C IS -                      llM k e J l     .(fJ & o M lo c ^ ^            b L iU M ..

( lij                          f i /X JA JX ^^k^& ^v ’.                                              J o d $ u }& h


                                Oz     K M a b                         .                     __ ..               ..... .



                       ,mewj         cu      a            OzuhztJ               d A / M $ t            t f                                         y
ttd .   c m   .-    a J iC u t d .         2l                 M


                          fit




                                                              outtm



              •H * rr   J&   S b llo H l$ & ls \>




                                                              m       0H




                                                    ■*   p-
               _ (d m c\ f t A       w               b e& * .


  \0 4 i




fjm        ^




                                                                  C t w u W




                          (o {           <£i a j J    jn < g cs



tKyeuUd               f     A    m
                                        (r

< r
                                                 Ulcia

W L                                                                    *talu,M!          cM                     & ^€M      a a   .   C jja U t


k>-CLMJ) il                   C9| & ^                  S g HG_             C'CM.leU^kr . " °lh                                             a,
                                                  to                                                                 Iheut'          A&&-


 *      *   M            h       w                                 ^             |) ( X ) ^ H                             H 4 l-e i ^ h %       1



                h^t/KiL                C J L O C 6 U s iX A r                       U   3e   _ .u A          C f > tA o l/A ^ t^



 ctv^l                ^tiuak^U                     ?   1                      1W
 ]&2.                M^cdbl                                                                      W> U©               ^
                 jik.                                           C A iA .       ( l |j ) l C h ^ c           G » C < J 2- c ) - l


                                                                                                      d W             U              W 2



  CCU       m s *-           U U ^ U    j    :




                 S<Q24-*J2                   l\A Q £ A A C i^ © io ^          Lm                 IWe.          lA         vuo

  o l
                                     ^ u x X      a u ^ e                       ^   V        .    C U u i           ^ U    a J



  W A           uxl I                                       , /1 W ^                             <x^          ^ U d Lu ^
                     A                                                       tA-A                           CfiJK-'H.         C---


      ^              ^Va-xAXji                     \^_




                              Sr0L>e                        ^         aoiU.                           ^          £0iM-£


      \& * e             ls & u js 4                                                                           c<j         K)


                     ULbe                              %    '/V>«JE5T''       Ia c S- v _x^
             Mr R M Whalley                                 SSB/RGM/11B

             Secretary to the Inquiry

             Home Office

             Queen Anne's Gats

             London   SW1A OAT                              20 June 1989



             Dear



             HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
    ( )



             In response to your letter dated 23 May, inviting the Association to

             submit evidence to Lord Justice Taylor’ Inquiry into the Hillsborough

          ... disaster, I attach a Memorandum of Evidence on the Association's

             behalf with an appendix, "Football Violence:   The Metropolitan

             Viewpoint".



             I have been asked to add that the Association has been giving

             consideration to the wider issues of peacetime emergency planning for

    [1       some time now;   and to let the Inquiry have a copy of AMA document

             "Local Authorities and peacetime Emergency Planning:   A Reviettf of

             Current Arrangements and Proposals for Improvement".   This document

             was adapted by the Association following wide consultation within the

             AMA and with concerned outside bodies.   It sets out the results of a

             review which detected serious gaps in the present arrangements, and

             contains proposals which are designed to place peacetime emergency

             planning by local authorities on an aceptable footing. Unfortunately,

             its relevance has been highlighted by a number of peacetime disasters,

             and most recently by Hillsborough.




\
The Association would also like to submit a paper prepared by the Emergency

Planning Unit of Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence Authority which builds

on the document referred to above.   The Paper emphasises the need for

legislation tr establish a statutory general peacetime plan which v;ould

require local authorities to draw up comprehensive emergency response

procedures. These would involve co-ordination of local authority service -

including liaison with police and fire services - adequate 24 hour call-out

and stand-by systems for minor emergencies, and hazard appraisals which

would list all major risks in the area.   The AMA believes that

metropolitan districts and London boroughs - normally in the frontline when

it comes to coping with emergencies - should each have at least one

full-time peacetime emergency planning officer to complement those at

county level.   Their work would be backed up by the creation of an

Emergency Planning Inspectorate and an Advisory Committee on Emergency

Planning, whose role would be to investigate disasters, publish their

findings and provide training packages and models.



The Association is very vfilling to provide Lord Justice Taylor with

any further information that might be required during the course of

the Inquiry.
                      Dr.AFT MEMORANDUM TO THE TAYLOR INQUIRY




 1-   The Association :f Metropolitan Authorities represents the 36

Metropolitan District Councils, 31 London Boroughs, the City of London,

 the Inner London Education Authority and the Joint Authorities responsible

 for Police, the Fire Service and Public Transport in the Metropolitan

 Areas. The Association's role is to promote and protect the interests of

 its member authorities and the community they serve, to provide a forum

 for member authorities to discuss and act collectively on matters of

 common concern and to provide a service to member authorities, including

 the dissemination of good practice.         The County of Merseyside includes the

 districts of Knowsley, Liverpool, St. Helens, Sefton and Wirral where the

 majority of the dead, the injured, their families, friends and neighbours

 lived   The County of South Yorkshire includes the districts of Barnsley,

 Doncaster, Rotherham and Sheffield.         The district councils appoint the

 elected members to the Fire & Civil Defence Authorities and Police

 Authorities.



 2.   Since March 1983, the Association has maintained a Working Party on

 Football, which is now called the Football Development Working Party.            In

 1934, the Association published "Football Violence : The Metropolitan

 Viewpoint" (copy appended) and the Association also gave evidence

 before Hr Justice Popplewell in 1985-         The Association provides joint

 secretariat services for Football's Family Forum which will also submit

 evidence to the inquiry.



 3.   The Association recognises that it would be possible for the Inquiry

■*to interpret -narrowly-i-fes-second term -of- -reference-"to. -make......     ■.• . .

 recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports

                                         \
grounds".    The Association urges the Inquiry to adopt the broadest

approach because



(a)    "the needs of crowd control and (crowd) safety" go beyond issues of

       movement, density, policing and building materials into areas of

       public policy such as responsibility for organisational procedures,

       co-ordination and liaison in the aftermath of disaster and medium to

       long-term commitments to victim support; and



(b)    "at sports grounds" interpreted narrowly would preclude the Inquiry

       from making recommendations on crowd control and safety at other large

       scale events such as pop concerts held elsewhere than in sports

       grounds.



4.    The Association recognises the necessity to balance the maintenance of

public order at large scale events with preserving the personal safety of

individual spectators.   While recognising the difficulties, faced by the

police and against the background of the police's commitment to maintain

public order and control during the causes celebres of the 1970s and 1980s

from Saltley Coke Depot through the "Winter of Discontent" and the inner

city disturbances to the miners' strike, the Association believes these

experiences may have bred an atmosphere in which order and control

considerations have predominantly flourished at the expense of

consciousness towards the safety of people as spectators.    The emphasis on

control and order detracts from a full awareness of public safety issues.



The Association also accepts that the operational considerations relating

to any sporting event are unique.    Not only is each football ground

different in terms of construction and environment, but crowd size and

demeanour are affected by many different factors such as the weather, the
         s'f
    //
%




importance of the natch, and the relationship between the clubs involved.

In these circumstances local knowledge is as crucial as any set of

centrally agreed guidelines.           Nevtp'tr.eless, principles relating to the

growth of community involvement in football set out in "Football Violence:

The Metropolitan Viewpoint" remain as valid today as they were in 1984

and the document was publicly endorsed by the then Minister for Sport,

'leil KacFarlane MP within weeks of publication.           The Association would ask

the Inquiry to give due weight to these principles in any recommendations

which it makes about the general context of the Hillsborough tragedy.



Furthermore the Association has long held, and will continue to take, the

view that any member of the public should have the same expectation of

safety at a public event whether this be an enclosed premises (such as a

theatre) in the-open air, (a pop concert for example) or a sporting

stadium (football, cricket or rugby eg.).



5.       With specific regard to the circumstances at Hillsborough, the

Association’s position is quite clear and was stated to Mr Justice

Popplewell.            At any football match, the playing surface constitutes a

major place of safety for spectators in theevent of an emergency.               Whilst

recognising the need to maintain public order, the Association said that:



(a)            there should be a choice of alternative means of escape from a stand

           which would provide so far as is reasonably practicable, for spectators

           to turn their back on the source of the fire or other problem and

               travel to a place of safety;



(b)            each exit should have direct access to open air and should be

               separated from other exits to avoid funnelling people into a congested

               area;
(c)       many seated stands are constructed so that people have to move

          forwards and downwards in order to get out.   This means that they may

          have to go towards the source of danger before reaching safety.       This

          is contrary to the interests of public safety, and the guidance

          document, (Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds) should be updated to

          limit the forward travel distance where there is no alternative means

          of escape at the rear of the stand;



(d r)--   the training and number of stewards at public events requires

          scrutiny.   Most are casually employed.   Measures are necessary to

          ensure that their knowledge of the ground, its safety systems and the

          correct procedures are of the highest order because of the public

          responsibility which they carry;



(e) specific measures which should be taken in respect of enclosure fences

          include : the siting of emergency gates in fences at least at the same

          frequency as gangways; such gates to be secured by panic bolts or

          electronic switches; such gates to be manned by sufficient stewards;

          stewards to be trained (see above); stewards to have independent

          communication with a central control point (this is now much easier

          with the development of radios and portable telephones or possibly a

          number of on-line call points fixed at strategic points).



          These points, which arose from the Bradford fire disaster are equally

          applicable to the Hillsborough tragedy.



6.        Since Hillsborough, the Association's secretariat has inspected the

anti-panic barrier now installed at the municipal stadium itisfisitaf'in

.operation, at-a-match- .Although .the..sys.tem ha£ only, recently .been...

introduced, it does appear to provide a means of maintaining public order
and safety at the same time. The Association would hope that the system

could be given an early trial in England to see if it is appropriate to

conditions at an appropriate ground.         The cost of installing a complete

system at an English ground would be about £100,000.            Partial installation

on existing fencing is estimated at around £40,000,.           In addition, the

system at Nimes includes other features which are worthy of consideration:



(a)     there is far less casual, pay on entry, admission for matches.

        Tickets are a constant feature even for the standing enclosures,

        this means that for major events the police can turn away spectators

        in vehicles who do not have tickets at some distance from the ground.



(b)’    public responsibility for the event rests on the promoter.            Stadium

        proprietors are under an obligation to act swiftly in the event of

        problems.    In addition, a designated official of the municipality is

        also present who has the power to direct the proprietor to act in

        the interests of public safety.



7.     At this stage in the acquisition and evolution of experience from the

recent spate of major disasters including Hillsborough, the Association

urges the Inquiry to build into its report and recommendations positive

and forward-looking views on a number, of issues:



(a)    The powers, practices and systems of local authorities' planning for

       major disasters and responses to then.         These are addressed in detail

        in two documents accompanying the covering letter "Local Authorities

        and Peacetime Emergency Planning:       a Review of Current Arrangements

        and Proposals for Improvement"       .(November 1988) and an amended

      ' Version Of the' 'Association '"s' final -submission '(Ju'ne 1989') t o ’the’Home

        Office in an endeavour to influence the latter’s Review of Peacetime
        Disasters.




(b)     Counselling anc support for.victims and carers/rescuers:                                                                        the

        Association fimly believes governmental initiative and commitment

        are necessary in two major areas.                                               First, there is a need for

        guidance and training packages to be promulgated to local authorities

        and District Health Authorities [the Association is represented on

        the Department of Health/CRUSE Working Party.                                                                      Secondly, long term

        victim and rescuer/carer support is expensive. The Association

        understands Liverpool City .Councl's additional commitment is around

        £2 million; and therefore urges the Inquiry to recommend prompt and

        full reimbursement by government to local authorities faced with the

        consequences of disaster among their people, families and

        communities.                    The Association is aware that the Local Government and

        Housing Bill, clause 133 at Report stage, enables the Minister to

        codify the so called "Bellwin Rules" but is unconvinced that

        government has any commitment to meeting in full the financial costs

        of disaster.



(c)     Major disasters generate public appeals.                                                             The law's complexities and

         inequities are well known from the experiences of recent disaster

         funds. The Assocition does not consider it necessary for every local

         authority to have a Disaster Appeal discretionary trust on the shelf,

         updated as experience and case law develop.                                                                  However, the danger of

         buying in the state of the art after the next disaster is that

         irrevocable decisions can be made early on.                                                                  The Association

         accordingly believes it would be sensible and prudent for government

         to issue guidelines on the establishment, administration and

..."   -• t e r m i r t a t i o n - i o f • • d i s a s t e r - a p p e a l s r ;   .................................................         - ....................   ••



                                                                      Id
(d)   The Association is aware that post -Popplewell, building control

      departments in local authorities are moving by virtu e of their

      responsibilities fc-r safe structures and buildings into the area of

      training stewards and assisting the police on crowd movement and

      dynamics. Because these departments know how crowds behave in tight

      spaces, before during anc after a majcr event (like a semi-final or a

      Michael Jackscn concert), the Association considers this emerging

      trend should de encouraged by government and standard approaches

      promulgated.   'pjually,.on site match day inspections by appropriate

      officials free building control and fire prevention should also be

      encouraged.    A vital issue is the need drastically to review the

      recommendations of the method of calculation of safe ground

      capacities for terraced areas and viewing slopes as outlined in

      Chapter 16 of the Home Office Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds.     The

      "higher” figure of 54 persons per 10m2 for good terraced areas

      (paragraph 222(a) leaves no safety margin.   High priority should be

      given to researching and reassessing this guidance.    The figure of 54

      persons per 10o2 can produce crowds with a very high packing density

      which provides no factor of safety whatsoever.    It is suggested that

      a factor of safety of at least 25% should be built into this figure

      thus producing a new "higher" figure of 40 persons per 10m2.



      Where the playing area is considered to be a safe place for

      evacuation from stands, and there is a standing paddock or terrace

      area between the stands and the playing area, the packing density for

      this terraced area should not exceed the lower figure of 26 persons

      per 10m2 to reduce the risk of crushing in the event of forward

      evacuation from the stands towards the playing area.



!e)   The incoming calls at Casualty Bureaux and hospital switcboards
      always cause the system to collapse.




      This is because the public telephone network does not have the

      capacity to absorb a nuge and unanticipated increase in calls.    The

      Association recognises that the perfect answer is unobtainable but

      recommends the Inquiry to take evidence on forthcoming proposed

      improvements and assess their likely effectiveness.




8.   In conclusion, the Association believes that public safety and public

order can be exercised to a high degree of compatibility in football

stadiums provided that the principles set out above are applied to the

particular circumstances of each individual ground arid each event.

Improved standards of construction and training should assist the control

of each match, but this will need funding.   The funding required could be

provided by using a small percentage of the duty currently collected by

the Treasury from football pools.   This is a small sum to pay for ensuring

public safety.




The Association will be pleased to present more detailed technical or other

arguments to the Inquiry as appropriate.
                      a. m .a


       V & M d S i   Id                                    w u m >

       n_3fe
                                                   H U ~




f c tde<   3_    / W      >7
                               M th b ii^ A                t&Z                              c e u A

                     Cc
           m




                                                    tfcrv OcuK Y «T
                                 f^ tc   J   - y   lQ   lftv   e   » k g   o   l   c   o    q   o   J


                                                                           C   l           «J &      u ia t'—
                                                                                                £ 2 ^1

                                                                                   %   l    Q   c   * ~
    L u x * J L
     w                             -                II      —


                                                                                                  :
                                                                                                  --------------------- J--------

                          a w l                 t o .                                     ,       f th   £   ili&     s      L   e   n   U   t^ \


         q   k   u   m    I    o    - —         I


         ' ( J ) c < F

                                                                                          m       .




                                   '3   h   L       -J L        M   j k   f a o


    ■o   —
     Q J jd & M
                 Q M W i', f
                              u x u iU c i                                    u e+ y          U x a ^ tA l-




                                                                                    K U U 6 A :                M&ds
                                        < £X A H                                                             ( M t u e ~ j G u £ .

                                            to           6^e.                            &5T             sah - of fitktfi*

                                                                     ‘l                                                      _____________

                     3/        to                                                                                     a t M      * c t e t

                                                                                  iqU   c l   ■       ’S k e u J L d i E S j e .

                                                                                                                     H - i L k & t o ____

                                                                                                                    !C-C_—    £ h L i4 4 -




                                                 ■ m                      o
                                                J jl Z .
                                                M          fi




                                                                                ()*j    — flfe-
\
                                                                          u x u d s i


         a           w       a       *   *                                                          ( f T             ^         ~           -       ^    f       T       .J   b -




                                                                                                                                        in              cJkdk}#£~                   —




                                                                                  m         c       ^       ^        X        d             j       u        ^
                                                                                  ^fZ/ji                        t A s a * J)si                           Lp/tfL/UjJ             [j£

                 ■tn                                                                                        <J CJLtlr aaal'fr <~
             ^           h       t       T           ^                                 t    t               n                                   \                         r




t^       y                       C O                 &       u ] Q            d jju q           C       a   t tl h   a    flS       ?           o b ijX k J fh * A &          * * J >       *




                                         l       d l p M f '

s a      \o                      tK£             tyt o d                              o f                                                               euAjQi                          ^

                                                                itr ^
^
                                                               U LlLo— Cl
                                                                       /o


                                             )uf\i£M it~ W ^li%ijLaiAX3M2-
5                *               *               “                ^
                                                                          U       ^         -           j       a         h             M           L     ^          M

             A /Y > /y /z ,                          V                    J b tX -J tZ ^ -fG U O L

     O       h   d       fa      Q               c       u       id               U         -w £                     c u      n     .




    *    T       l       f       e           T           "       '                                                                                                            (__

                     fo4                                                              a^/                            ^spdf~ C w c fe 1’
                             "       U       k       -       O        l       -



                         «--r                      » ___
                       . &e, H U k cu g r' Tv ojJu& a^ la
                 o k tJh az- — |IL        -----------------------
M U k f c            t o            C A l u i H a t Z '                                   & H t H b U L                         < % u x i u i i k j >                        —



'b    j \ r              ctup.                        f<J          e t u u u t ,                           / (
                                                                                                             f k i £ t ~                                                 —




      u-        f i A j f e . —                       '^ p         d        t' M               O       r i( ( a fu i0                       fw J C r              fife.

                                                  &   j       L            t u

                               ^£2-— JC<2t2fi                               CL U lQ A I^ e U &                                                     ClA 'IJ u i
                                                                                          «                                                                ^ L / e _____

  A    d       t L       i a   a    —         i                        u             f t o     a       &        a   . .              ~      _   J -------------------------- a   _

                                                                                               ___________                           fefjtlUJb*H ~

                                                                                               f<2              M O ru X O J ~
                                                                   fW LQ uiA jQ (Xf (& T L L + *.~ ~ ___ _
                                                                                          Lo           A jO         ^                                      Qj^aujiad

                               d e ,t e                                                                                                      b J           I O V ^           u u     T

                                                                  C L i l S t u J t




                                   W & & 1
                                         Q J ^ s B Z i S B S o b Q

                               vo fep esbML/^ pttyses- yaifafr^r.*'.
           V    U        t&    A   J U    b




                                                                                          U    1           Q    M   Q       j   M

                                                                                                                M   Z C          M      "




                                                                            -    J    z    x       &        y           V       tiZ a              iW       &




                     *




                                                          %
          O                                  o
    VJAIZ- KX-S.          H T   t   EM-S .


    U/o   T i A - f C O




o
 10 4d-AS   ;S.S'— *20        J Vr~H*.'vSztZ/~S.K-^-yO S&l'«''V>*Q/0
                              ■j       ickA.~v\K^ c^rda
                                   / q££1---
                              ---
                                       C ev^lrr cA-v&/n S v.-vf'-? t-ev\<2^-o            &    CyAa—
-o                                 ^   < 2 4 ^ a s )* > i   ii-e   pr«_- A^o~teU        <£>/’^\Lov^
                               -+-fyc\M>— wf Hsc®<*-- 'f=i-eWcfcte---------


                                   J jto-vV /tN J lV i'
                                                                    CRFCTSrr^d-                                 — )t(ft-CC-VH^VCo-hoVVip^CrC£jd2jC\V©S;'




                         v/               uSWc              cslw l e l       tog.   ^     cuAa^Sov^               X                cu~<o.

                                          M-UM 2<— 30-fi                 ^      <3a-VVv {^"O^-yU' *5—   fl_/n ia-a—~o~-QX ^ ____

                                             lt>
                                               'sv\a           to .^^ca_~-=-cL...............                  &i-__




■o
                         lV\V<M'w-v


                                    C oe                         G s ^ i . ^ l 'f c v h 'c ^ /               +\     ^ - fx Q -c ~f-   ffcfc

                                           (Jla,-^C*~,   focdvC.       «..<.vlfcx'v^K Q-'J       Cuo
           Ccd-V^N' ca/'\ p*cvS/Q             / COvVv^cx^4)^.-'-'Coa Uc^-'              ffe.iV    f    p-e^ofSSSviS    -f- /".




                     oLax o—                             Us2L-                                                           (■^.wAovrc^




    Kir>o0<iL




                                                 Me/^o

                                                                                                         t    2^\




                    iLfiTJL.   SkAgx            Q)                                                C^U




o




                                f
     (/ w \ . m u f pi-i




     { /     ft   , !& U .\ r'-CJST


  v y q >         *s u ~       iff


  » / ic £>

           C\ L m j * J ^

 J


 S _____________

  i/" !v\. ui ^'Ccchx

     y     C -


           3, f-vw*.

            F     k!   W j »(/v \

         <T S       vc K sl-T

           f", o                      £,"-..cA .

s / \
  Community Charge Rebat'es?

ig of the Personal Charge should
 arrangements for rebating domestic
          There will however be the


 or unmarried couples) who is liable
1 apply for their own rebate
be any need for deductions to be made
of non-dependants.
                                 t
  couples living together one partner
:nt will be assessed on the basis of
  needs and joint resources and then


be needed in the case of the partners
 exempted from the Charge.




                                        r




  ^     -         ■   :   "    - - •
      1
      “ ^       icj               io                        cc^.vf                    ^<5            Cp-vv^j cAs r ^ o d                                                     j!>o»t'wl*           *v>              e-i^v.

    Q/M £UO\OAAtA^                      ■>-a -<- f ''- 1'.A/~l l ^ i                           ^           -----—m v-Vl4,ajl'                            "^ C -            «Aft,     ?J

                         C/i              StA V »Sw v'“*~ ®V                          ‘^ V j           ’TRq.          4/$~asJ *jC A /V <^                     S t/k v O K O ,




                                                                                      S<*
                       I ; 2.


                       |M-1                                    30"                     1-1


                                                               l    \       '
                       ['•I -tb


                                                                                                                                   ,/r?
                                                                                                                                  /f
O                     Iwbtw'aU.                                                                      iit-Z


                                                             p/Cvvs&vKK                                 jlvvU-^<^vv^4^^                                ?.                                          .               c^v^We^
                                                        Vo.. .SftJt                                                 lVnSiAa-vji-'^- ’£ ■                      d.\ftf^>ck             O . W - f t ' > w?
                                                        'j\,?"'-'*-s S* I   ^   **>         . ..l^-.W Vw w,,^^               { A ^ ilW               iffi ><v—S ^ v st „




                                                                                                             c\(V>jai.-v.u                                                                                                  c^c..>C(                   *T",
                                                              \oc5Vv                               cS-cm -x          ,?<              •4'*'jv--C..                ^HcU-




O




                       ^ V \P lC u          |o                                         —*“      X X - r B_.                                                                  io-^A        ^^>©v4
                                                                                                                                                                                                            )
                                                                                                                                                                                                  W'-A.fc (*»*

                        ^VvKfl-%/f-x5i                                                  <V)S OCa              tjl^                ^iC (a                             -v
                                       ^^y22        c)^            ^v"0*—               ^ <^4rt<^v.^yLA-^u^                             f&cJbCoC<4jZ                   J-tC^KO            c—       J>S-^/l ' C^-yJc^r
                                                                   az                   y?                             j
                                                             Q. 1^ j&VvcC\r^f C^S^Q                                                             ^E vr^C,.,                    kz>                           . ..




                          C pax-^N c A a j C ^/ V a c —I —                  ^ U ^ 2 ^ A -^ (           <xC oO              jo ?                                                              ^ i2 o v ^ j            O a        c / l 'V *   C-


            7
o                        Wx%^/-CU^O
                          i.^          C>vO’
                                           —1                                                      >v —*                   bflA... i*^--,
                                                                                                                                        prv£'V"€_^\,
                                                                                                                                                              UsCUr            fy{             £>'/VnJ£. ^             Jso




                          Tir t w ^                 ouUo                bt.                                                                      f        *        c ^ u l f e U ^ ^vc^p                                Q*w.iS»^
                              ^        ^UCjg t fvT€, ^>l^ 1 & ./                         U«-eJlM4(hr^JaSlwi&Zjo                                i^       a/W U hc^                    " tte       c^oiU-r                          S t^~0
                          '                ■----- -—^                   —'■" 1         ........ .—              .—w—7--           r        "T—-———r-r^--------------------- -                    -■ '."^ ------------- ■:....n™-                  vV'ffgyflW—
     ■
     Iirtrn'V'l'rflq'i 'I
                        l'
                         l




U    ' -z-
                                                                            i
                              ^_\d 1'"'^                ^   (x sK j^

                             £ j ^                             ,




                                                             ■Kcvfca-*^®^
"3E> Kr>                             r ^ y j^ o         ^y

                                                  bz>
    OU
y




                                     \
                                    Sheffield S1 2HH




itter please ring.......................
243 (Administration & Legal)
3.    vV
            X   ua    ^-^




T
                        f c ^ 2 _ ,£s>

     ■(.        d jfy
                     ($a^igv\      h r^~

     W     a c c j)  •
                  *-sf
                 J3  p<M'H&       ^UA      >^V U ^ a t e p
                           I
ain "Capping"?

£ke local authorities more
 imposition of an arbitrary limit on
 local electorate’s wishes. The
he grounds that it will take some
  ° bear on the big spenders. This
little  ^ . s e v e r a l years to grow in
 xttle political opposition.




O
    o
      c'




         U^-         U                    '


                                      ■



      P^cU                                                    .

 |)cL>ra         £ -■

 te        .     ^                                ^




W-v                                  s^ocfoW^                     \ vl U
 Wfe-                       j    W >              Hfc£
t^2-                        O , o a ^

                                              \           .juLS.-dli*
 ^             -Hfe         p   ^




                          ^7(X^2-             •

     ,
     J-cj-oc             ^t>-£ CX.
                                      ?   *




 v       1 u                          4   ^           ^   ’
"?

i powers to cap charges

/eminent's view on the grounds that
authorities may seek to levy an
nding.

ment's principal argument in favour of
 t will ensure the accountability of
  a direct stake in financial
»" will take away the right of the
■ increased spending on local services.

to designate authorities to limit
ther these, or increases in them over
nsidered to be excessive. Authorities
 financial year may be re-designated


 notified of the lower maximum charge,
 Secretary of State. The authority
 to the Secretary of State, or accept
posed maximum the Secretary of State
g an appeal the Secretary of State
   ion, may either confirm the charge,




Q
   rity or fix a level higher, or


. increased charge or precept is
.1 have power to impose conditions
    cO

                           <fNT                             4 ^ 1
                           <&2-vw i
 -ffe          c u c ^ c A lifegggg          ^          j2*c j ^ i—   .




*              1                         '
               b \ < —i    c j^ a -e -            c*        o c f ~ <*.


 ^jh'sWcv^                > Sc^          ^

{$u)u?_2. .




      ■(4

 Uu,u»>                       s>-^               A jU     ^

p   c u   A4         ivvdoAci            'VO^A fct .



3<2.C_                    °V/X     toeJ2s>-^e_sa-_
                                                  C*       f***-

,v,         Waj-B 'fao^                      •
y; In Council Expenditure On the


 5uncil spending in Sheffield will
ant paid by the average household,
the cost to the average household of
xisting system and the new system.

ending in 1987-88 is in the regiou of
  (£3m) would lead to loss of
ving a total to be raised through
cost under the present system is
on-domestic ratepayers because both
   The additional rates required to
  in the £ which would result in an
If £8 per household.

%, in spending (£3m) would not affect
the additional cost would have to be
hrough the Community Charge. The
about £9 per adult or £18 for the
ed to £8 per household as at present.

icfeation
  Estimation of Space Capacity - Terraces

  Under the present '^juide", terraces in good condition can be calculated as
  capable of holding a maximum of 54 persons per 10 ffiquaro tncrtrgST"throughout
  the available terraced area. It is, however, accepted that some parts of
  that area are "peak viewing areas" and as such will achieve in practice a
 egreater population density due to their popularity. The figure of 54/10
M msfeges squared is therefore an average, without the peak viewing parts being
  given a maximum packing density.
                                      Z-.
  It is considered that the 54/10 metres squared should be treated as being
  the maximum and therefore only be applied to the areas of‘'peak viewing.
  Other areas of the terrace should be calculated as having a lower packing
  density, say 40/10 aetres ■squared.

  In order to practically achieve the consideration set out in the above
  paragraph, it would be necessary to:-

   (a)   Define the size and position of’'peak viewing*'areas')

   (b)   Surround the areas of’'peak viewing'using radial—offences-^-   ^   O* „
                                                   A                *
   (c)   Calculate the maximum population of each peak viewing area and
         adequately steward to see that this is not exceeded.

  Flowr Rates

  Throughout the Inquiry* the flow rate of 40 and 60 persons per minute per
  unit of exit width have been heavily criticised as being based on
  inconclusive research. A practical lesson that has been learned is that
  when people are very tightly packed, their ability to flow through exits is
  dramatically reduced. Until the outcome of further research is known, it is
  suggested that flow rates are reduced to the following

   (a) l(Peak viewing area"of terraces - 30 persons per minute per unit of exit
         width.

   (b)   All other areas - 40 persons per minute per unit of exit width.

  It is considered that the emergency evacuation time should remain at 2h
  minutes.




  MS1/AA
  MS1ABR
  Safety Manaqment and Safety Planning

  Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as essential
  aspects of their business and not an < xc^pi& drto it. It is essential for
  safety responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of
  accountability to be included. Any regulations or the "Green Guide" could
  usefully develop this theme. The tern safety planning is preferable to that
  of emergency planning in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
  safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should
  promote better safety standards. All relevant agencies should be included
  in the planning process. Safety planning is aimed to prevent disasters as
  well as providing contingency plans to ensure emergencies and disasters can
  be coped with.

  Ixnprovement/Prohxbition Notices

  The 1975 legislation (as amended) makes provision for the issue of a
  Prohibition Notice to the holder of a certificate. It is suggested that
  consideration should be given to including an intermediate course of action.
  The Health and Safety at Work, Etc. Act 1975 makes provision for the issue
  of Improvement Notices and Prohibition Notices. An Improvement Notice
  requires the employer to carry out certain works within a given time. If
  the employer fails to comply with the Notice, they are guilty of an offence.

  The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a useful intermediate step
  where a Prohibition Notice is not appropriate, but where some formal notice
  is required.

  The Advisory Group

  The Police and the Building Authority and, subsequent to Local Government
  Reorganisation, the Police and the Fire Authority, have to be consulted in
^ certificating authority by virtue of the legislation.

  The legislation therefore, provides the basis of expert opinion on which the
  local Authority makes decisions.

  The decision making process can take a number of forms, but perhaps the two
  extremes are:-

  (a) where all the experts are in agreement that decision is delegated to an
  officer of the Council, where one or more experts differ - that decision is
  delegated to an appropriate committee of the Council;

  (b) the appropriate committee considers all matters relating to works
  carried out at the sports ground.

  Further guidance could be given over and above that contained in the interim
  recommendations as to the preferred course of action.

  In relation to the statutory consultees, consideration should be given as to
  whether any other bodies should be involved in the Advisory Group, other
  than the Ambulance Service, the Club and the recognised Supporters' Club,
  e.g., Health and Safety Executive.




  SD2MN/JJJ
Resource Implications - Fees

At present it is suggested in Circular No. 72/1987 that the statutory
inspection should not result in significant resource implications but that
in general inspections are not expected to take more than about two -Mondays
per ground. This point is made in the context of emphasising the scope of
inspections, together with associated report work are not intended to be as
detailed or extensive as that often required by the holder of the
certificate.

Clearly, more time is spent on safety of sports grounds than the Heme Office
anticipates. The resource implications involved for local authorities and
their advisers from other services to implement the old law and the new
requirements must be recognised.

Although the certificating authority is allowed to charge fees in respect of
dealing with applications for the issue or amendment of a certificate (by
virtue of the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) no express
provision for fees for ongoing work enforcing the provisions of the Act and
dealing with inspections that have to be carried out at least once a year.
The Inquiry may wish to consider whether express provisions should be made
to allow a certificating authority to make sane reasonable charge. There
are many examples of legislation where local authorities are empowered
to charge a reasonable fee Which covers the cost of administering and
enforcing a particular licensing function.

football Membership Schemes - I.D. Cards

The Popplewell Report recommends (at paragraph 4.128) that consideration
should be given to scone form of membership scheme for football league clubs
in England and Wales.

However, in view of the experiences at Hillsborough, careful consideration
needs to be given to any national football membership scheme. It would
clearly be undesirable if any such scheme resulted in significant delays at
turnstiles.

There are other practical considerations which must be taken into account,
e.g., patterns of attendance, different method of entry, space required for
a complex admission system, i.e., two turnstile systems, number of
turnstiles required, additional policing/stewarding required to control the
crowd and eject individuals, where to eject individuals from and how,
reducing further the ground capacity.

All Seater Stadia

Consideration should be given to Whether all seater stadia should be
mandatory. Alternatively, the legislation could be used to prescribe a
minimum percentage of seated capacity for stadia. Such a percentage could
differ for various sizes, types and uses of the stadia.

All Ticket Entry

In order to increase the speed of ingress of spectators, consideration could
be given to requiring all ticket entry for events where greater than, say,
70% of the total available capacity could be expected.




SD2AAN/JJJ
Periodic Certificates and Inspections

The Popplewell Report recommended (at paragraph 3.68) that there should be
(i) annual renewal of safety certificates issued under the Safety of Sprats
Grounds Act 1975; (ii) a duty on the local authority annually to inspect the
premises prior to re-issuing the certificate; and (iii) power for the local
authority to revoke the certificate.

The interim recommendations compliment the first proposal; the second
recommendation was irrplemented in recommendations after the Popplewell
Report; the third recommendation has not been acted upon.

With regard to the first recommendation, annual certificates focus the
parties' minds on the whole situation and not on a particular application or
inspection. It tends to promote an overall review of the circumstances
surrounding the re-issue of a certificate.

With regard to the second recommendation, this is suggested that prior to
re-issuing the certificate there should be an inspection, but that there
should also be inspections on a half-yearly or quarterly basis with guidance
given as to timing, e.g., prior to renewal, end of season, start of season,
during season (obviously this is less relevant to multi-use stadia where
"seasons" are not as clear cut.

The Advisory Group should visit the ground whilst empty and during use but
the limitations on during use inspections by their very nature must be
recognised.

Introduction

These recommendations and suggestions have been drawn together from
representatives with various interests within Sheffield City Council.

They are submitted having taken time to assess the effect of the
Hillsborough Disaster, the Inquiry and the Interim Recommendations of Lord
Justice Taylor.




SD2AAN/JJJ
                 -   STATUS AND CONTENT OF THE "GREEN GUIDE"


A comprehensive review of the status and content of the Green Guide is
required.  The present guide to safety of sports grounds is predominantly
written for football single use stadia. Multi use stadia/^becoming more
popular and it is suggested that the guide be expanded to cover spectator
safety requirements pertainin^g to a wider variety of sports, e.g., speedway,
stock car racing, hockey,^etc.

In addition, either by expansion of the guide or by the creation of a
similar document, requirements for spectator safety of fully enclosed stadia
should be created.

"Flexibility"

The 1986 edition of the Green Guide, paragraph 6, states as follows:-

"Deviations from individual guidelines are possible without necessarily
detracting from the overall safety of the ground.  The variety of type,
function and layout of sports grounds means that a flexible approach should
be maintained to take account of the particular circumstances at individual
grounds".

And paragraph 8 states: -

"It should be borne in mind when using the guide to assess whether existing
circumstances provide adequately for the safety of spectators the criteria
to be aimed for is that of a reasonable degree of safety.  It would be
unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the absolute safety of
everyone attending a ground".

And, again in paragraph 11:-

"The principles referred to in paragraphs 4-10 above should be kept in mind
by both ground management and, where applicable, by the local authority when
applying the guide to an individual ground.   The guide is an aid to, not a
substitute for, professional judgment and common sense".

There is a problem in affording the Green Guide this kind of status. What
is "flexibility" to one mind may be slap-dash permissiveness to another.
Clearly, emphasis on flexibility was and is well intentioned, but the effect
is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where non-compliance
can be justified as falling within the scope of some flexible discretion
allowed to the relevant authority.

For the future perhaps the Inquiry would wish to consider recommending that
the approach of the Green Guide should move away from that of "flexibility"
to, for example, an approach of the following kind:-

"That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the club itself,
should always seek to establish whether there is some reasonable cause why a
relevant guideline is not complied with, and that in the absence of some
such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the guideline should be
achieved or insisted upon".




SD2AAN/JJJ
As stated under "Clarification and Codification of Legislation" parts of the
existing guide could become regulatory and other parts embodied in "Approved
Documents" c.f. building regulations or an "Approved Code of Practice" c.f.
status of an approved code of practice under the Health and Safety at Work,
Etc., Act 1975.
,            .   .   .
(Recommendations in relation to the structural and deo-fre requirements for a
sports ground are set out in a separate section.)

Specific Recommendations in relation to the Structural and Design
Requirements for a Sports Groundj[General Fabric^      ,
                  '            ""
It is recommended that the head room for tolls be increased from 2.4 metres
to at least 3 metres to facilitate overhead viewing of any crushing or other
problems occuring along its length.

So as to dissipate pressure build up from the rear, long tunnels should be
successively widened in the direction of maximum flow (i.e., means of escape
routes).

To cater for different speeds of travel through tunnels or restricted
passageways longer than, say, 5 metres, a minimum of 4 units of exit width
should be provided.

Ingress

Segregation of entrances for supporters of opposing teams is recommended as
a permanent design criteria.

Permanent unobstructed access to the pitch area for emergency vehicles to be
provided in at least two positions, and these being at opposite ends of the
ground (whenever possible).

The "guj.de" states a maximum notional rate of 750 persons per turnstile per
hour^ Sowever^ it does not state the design time. It is suggested that a
revised code should state a maximum ingress design time of say, 45 minutes.
                                                        t&«. c.rfV-o
Terraces    ^                                                        ^
---------                                                                      VCKj   <2^\^

Where terraces are to be sub-divided so as to avoid major migration and
sideways surge, each section should be formed by inserting radial barriers.
Radial fences should be avoided.

It is considered that spectator accommodation should not be lower than the
pitch level or pitch perimeter path level (whichever is the higher).
                                              St   -fhfcn     &            f
In the present "guide", it states "gradients peeper4 l:2 (26 degrcc-c , 34
minutco-) could be dangerous" (paragraph 94) . In Table 1 barrier
requirements are specified for terrace gradients of up to 30 .dogrcc-s- or
1:1.7, therefore contradicting the previous statement.    From a graphical
interpolation and extrapolation of all the relevant data it is recommended
that the maximum gradient should be 31 degrees, 3 0 -minutes . This equates to
approximately 1:1.63.

Crush Barriers - Design

To avoid resting in unseen and non-maintainable places, overclipped barrier
rail supports should no longer be acceptable.  All parts of barriersshould
be capable of direct inspection and maintenance.


SD2AAN/JJJ
Welding of all joints would achieve the aims set out in the above paragraph
and will create a structural continuity where the failure of an individual
element would minimise the risk of collapse.

Consideration should be given to the application of horizontal, (in addition
to lateral) forces.  This could be taken as 5% of the horizontal force as
resisting torsional and secondary effects.

The recommended heights of the barrier rails should be re-assessed.
Clarification is also required^(preferably by sketch) to show where this
measurement should be taken from.  The present'guide'* appears to take an
assumption that the barrier rail is in the same vertical plain as the
 terrace riser. When these vertical plains differ^ Jije method of height
measurement may also differ.  The acid test being^wnat level a normal person
would stand who was comfortable, immediately behind the barrier.
                                                 KLqOlfW
The opportunity should be taken to re-appraise the^-desigjte.test and design
loads. An increase would achieve a greater resistance to collapse but may
increase the risk of injury due to resisting greater crowd pressures. A
decrease, however, may result in earlier collapse, yet may prevent fatal
inj ury.

Crush Barriers - Testing

It is suggested that each barrier span should be tested separately (for rail
strength) and then adjacent spans be tested together to determine rail and
support strength.

The specification of the test should be modified to clearly state how
recovery deflection is to be calculated.  Such a modification should be in
accordance with the testing procedures in BS 5950 and other similar British
Standard documents.

To avoid any further doubt, a standardised test specification and procedure
is now required. This should include a specification of a standardised
testing rig and a standardised test results sheet.

Stands with seated accommodation

Although steeper gradients can create better forward viewing for the
spectators, very steep gradients will have the effect of creating equally
steep radial gangways and may create a domino effect during an evacuation
where all persons may be stood - instead of being seated.    The maximum
gradient is directly stated in the present guide for seated areas; the only
tenuous reference being to the maximum calculated gradient for stairways in
paragraph 73 as being 34 degrgasr 9 minutos. It is considered that seated
accommodation greater than 30 d egreee^ should have intermediate crush
barriers at approximate 5 metre centres.

Pitch Perimeter Fences

The Popplewell Report (paragraph 4.136 to 4.138 and also Appendix 'E',
paragraph E29) recommended that consideration should be given to the design
of a standard efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.

Whether by design or otherwise, forward escape onto the pitch from all sides
of the ground is highly desirable.




SD2AAN/JJJ
If pitch perimeter fences are to remain, it is suggested that at least 50%
of its linear length is openable and such openings are evenly spaced so as
to provide maximum benefit for spectators' safety.

Where pitch side police or stewards require access into the spectator area
through relatively small doors or gates, these may be provided as additional
openings or as wicker gates in the large opening panels.

So as to avoid sudden forward movement, all such gates should be vertically
multi-hinged and open towards the pitch.  Collapsible panels should not be
acceptable. It is a further pre-requisite that the release mechanism should
be:-

a) capable of being operational remotely in tandem with others;

b) capable of independent opening whilst under crowd pressure, by the
   operation of a quick release, manually operated catch;

c) all opening devices must be capable of uaittg -febe crowd loading
   conditions.

In order to simplify any new designs of catch for pitch perimeter gates and
bearing in mind the fact that there should be no spectators in front of the
opening sections of the perimeter fencing, test loading on perimeter fences
could be reduced to, say 3 Kn/m.




SD2AAN/JJJ
                        The Hillsborough St^etlu^ Disaster^— 15th April,

            Recanmendatipf^ yo tl^'lnquiry on behalf of Ighqifielii CjtyCouncil


    Stewards

    Training of Stewards should be carried out by people who have experience in
    training and safety. Training should be regular to remind existing Stewards
    of procedures and ensure that new Stewards receive appropriate training.
     .                                                              blovja)
"Ua ."Acceptable age range for Stewards should be specified as^between eighteen
      and sixty five years, in addition to the current requirements relating to
      fitness etc.
                (o f    t>elUieje_
    A Steward/vCarrying out isolated tasks, e.g. ^eternal gate duty, should be
    provided with an efficient means of communication with the Safety Officer^

    Public Appeals

    The legal issues surrounding public appeals are complicated, e.g. charitable
    status, tax etc. Guidelines are required on the establishment,
    administration and termination of disaster appeals to ensure that funds are
    distributed as fairly, quickly and effectively as possible.

    Counselling and Support for Victims
         *JUZJO( ■foe
     In-each of—the* guidance and training for those professionals involved in
     counselling and support for victims in the aftermath of a disaster requires
     investigation.

     In conjunction with that, the issue of long term support needed by victims
     of the disaster, t-he-issuo of loftg torm -support needed by-vietime of-the
     disaster also requires consideration.

     Both issues need to be discussed by a variety of agencies including

     Social Services, The Health Service (including GPs), organisations assisting
     the bereaved, Samaritans etc.

     Definition of Roles

     The Popplewell Report recommended that there should be urgent consultation
     between the Health and Safety Executive and the Fire Authorities and Local
     Authorities as how best to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and
     reports(paragraph 3.95).

     It has again become clear during the Inquiry that a lack of clarity in the
     definition of roles, as well as a lack of communication, can cause problems.
     This is particularly relevant in relation to the Police who are involved in
     the safety of sports grounds in a number of roles, e.g. a member of the
     Advisory Group, upholders of law and order and their role inside and outside
     the Ground.

     Clarification, following consultation7is required of the different roles
     Authorities are required to fulfil.
Pooling of Information

Sore consideration should be given to pooling information on a national
basis to improve the flow of that information.

Information should be available to all ^ert ificating Authorities and their
statutory consultees. This •would assistjJTciegree of uniformity throughout
the country and enable all Authorities to learn frcm each others
experiences.

This is particularly relevant to regional level where the emergency services
will cover a number of District Authorities.

National First Aid Guidelines

There is the need for practiea-1 first aid guidelines which are drawn up with
particular reference to occasions when large numbers of people are likely to
be present, e.g. football matches, pop concerts etc.

IVtodel Safety Certificate Conditions

The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety
certificate conditions should be drawn up. A standardised form of
conditions could form the nucleus of all certificates. Additional
conditions could be added to cover local conditions. This would enable some
degree of national uniformity of application of conditions. It would seem
appropriate, that the Hone Office draw up the standard conditions as it has
done in respect of by-laws for example.

Clarification and Codification of Legislation

If the Inquiry is minded to recommend amendments of or additions to the
existing legislation then the opportunity could be taken to codify and
clarify the legislation.

The provisions, which are currently contained in the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975, the Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987,
various Regulations and statutory guidance could be remodelled to create one
Act and Regulations (with functional statements) requiring certain minimal
standards to be met. The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds could then be
re-issued (in a revised form) on a similar basis to that of the majority of
the Approved Documents to the Building Regulations. Compliance would
therefore not be necessary, yet failure to comply with the Guide could be
taken as being evidence tending to show that the requirements had not been
met, unless it could be demonstrated by the party concerned, using other
means, that the requirements of the legislation had been satisfied.




MS1/AA
