           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                           21

                                              Meeting held 14th May, 1990

Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore (Chair), Butler, Crowder, Godber, Hussain, Lamb, Moore, Mrs.
Mulhearn, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.

1 General Purposes Panel
resolved  : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General Purposes Panel,
the following minutes, be approved—
      Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 30th April, 1990. Present— Councillors Butler
    (Chair), Ms. Fiore, Hussain, Mrs. Mulhearn, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.
★   ( 1 ) SA FET Y O F SPORTS G R O U N D S
    Meetings with Supporters Association
      Resolved: That, with reference to the decision of this Panel at its meeting held on 2nd April,
    1990, (page 1530 of the printed minutes) to authorise the Chief Licensing Officer (Sports
    Grounds) to arrange appropriate regular meetings with representatives of the two Sheffield
    professional football clubs and the Supporters Associations to discuss general issues relating to
    the safety of sports grounds, arrangements also be made for meetings to be held twice yearly, to
    be attended by representatives of the National Football Supporters Association and the Chief
    Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds) and chaired by the Chair of this Panel.
    (no t e : In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act,

    1972 as amended, the Chair of the Panel (Councillor Butler) decided that the above item should
    be considered as matter of urgency in view of the importance of the matter and the need to make
    early arrangements for meetings.)
    Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
      The Panel received and noted the minutes of a meeting of the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Advisory Group held on 22nd March, 1990.
★ (2) T A X I SER V IC ES IN S H E FFIEL D
    The Panel received reports of (a) Leeds University Industrial Services Limited on a recent
  survey into the quality of taxi services in Sheffield and (b) the Head of Administration and Legal
  Department on the findings of the survey.
      At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were excluded from the meeting while the
    Paiiel were given legal advice by the Head of Administration and Legal Department on the
    matter under consideration. Following receipt of the advice, the public and press were then
    re-admitted to the meeting.
     The Panel then considered the reports of Leeds University Industrial Services Limited and the
    Head of Administration and Legal Department.
      Mr. S. R. Pells, co-author of the survey document and Mr. D. Woolhouse, Secretary of
    Sheffield Taxi Trade Association attended the meeting and addressed the Panel on the contents
    of the survey document.




    (3) E X C L U SIO N O F T H E P U B L IC A N D PRESS
       Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting during the consideration of
    item 4 on the agenda relating to individual hackney carriage and private hire licensing cases on
    the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
    were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs
    7 and 12 of the Local Government Act, 1972, as amended, relating to the financial or business
    affairs of other persons and legal matters and advice.
22           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE A N D GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

★      (4)   H A C K N E Y C A R R IA G E A N D P R IV A T E H IR E L IC EN SIN G




        At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were re-admitted to the meeting.
★    (5) N U R SE S A G E N C IE S
       The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application from
     P. A. Sayer Associates Limited for the grant of a licence to run a nurses’ agency at Regency
     House, 73/77 St. Mary’s Road, Sheffield.
        Resolved: That the application now submitted be granted.
★    ( 6 ) P U B L IC E N T E R T A IN M E N T
       The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on nine applications for
     the renewal of public entertainment licences in respect of premises in the City.
       Resolved: That the public entertainment licences issued in respect of the following premises be
     renewed for a period of six months from the date of expiry of the respective existing licences—
         Josephine’s Night Club, Barkers Pool
         Kiki’s Night Club, Charter Row (to include both ground and first floors)
         Rebels Night Club, Dixon Lane
         Hallam Tower Hotel, Manchester Road
         Crucible Theatre, Norfolk Street
         Baldwin’s Omega, Psalter Lane
         Whitley Hall Hotel, Elliot Lane
         Sheffield Union, Nelson Mandella Building, Pond Street.
     (7) R E P R E S E N T A T IO N ON O T H E R B O D IE S
     Sheffield Community Health Council
       Resolved: That (a) a person to be nominated by the Chair of this Panel be appointed to serve
     on the Sheffield Community Health Council for the period ending 31st August, 1990, to fill a
     vacancy arising from the resignation of Councillor Lamb; and
       (b) seven persons to be nominated by the Chair of this Panel be appointed to serve on the
     Sheffield Community Health Council for the four-year period commencing 1st September, 1990.
     South Yorkshire Valuation and Community Charge Tribunal
       The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that, under the authority given
     by the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee at its meeting held on
     12th December, 1988 (page 988 of the printed minutes), Mr. Joseph Sheedy of 48 Rodman
     Street, Woodhouse, had been appointed to serve on the South Yorkshire Valuation and
     Community Charge Tribunal for the period ending 31st March, 1992, to fill a vacancy.
★    ( 8 ) F IL M C E R T IF IC A T IO N
       The Senior Film Officer submitted a report on the classification of the short advertising film
     “ME Action Campaign” and on action taken by him to reject films which contravened Council
     policies.
        Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
       (b) authority be given for the film “ME Action Campaign” to be exhibited in the category
     “Sheffield PG ” .
     (9) E X C L U SIO N O F T H E P U B L IC A N D PRESS
       Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
     place on the remaining item of business on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business
