Sheffield Libraries and Information Service!
                             REPORT
         Report to:      Policy Committee


         Report by:     Director of Libraries and Information Services


                Date:   23rd May, 1989


           Subject:     The Hillsborough Tragedy: The Libraries Response


          Purpose:      To inform Members of the involvement of Sheffield
                        Libraries and Information Services and to make
                         recommendations for the future




 Recommendations:

           1.   To note the arrangements made by Sheffield Libraries and
                Information Services to operate the Hillsborough Helpline

           2.   To investigate the potential for developing arrangementr,
                for establishing a "Helpline" as part of the Plan for
                Peacetime Emergencies




Report prepared by:     Owen McDowell
           Position:    Information Projects Co-ordinator

        Telephone:      734257


Background papers:


                                                   For full details of what
                                                   constitutes Confidential Exempt,
                                                   please contact the Departmental
                                                   Agenda Officer, Tel 734708.




                                                   C J   U N   c
                                                                     1
                                                                     I
                                                                       Libraries
                                                                     and Information S er/icas
               The Hillsborough Tragedy: The Libraries Response


1.   Following the tragedy at Hillsborough Football Ground in which 95 people
     were killed and many more were injured there was an urgent need for
     Council Departments to work in a concerted effort to assist those who
     had been involved. To this end this Department approached Family and
     Community Services with the offer of running a telephone service as a
     way of coping with the many demands being put upon it for information
     related to the tragedy. Family and Community Services accepted this
     offer, and this Department's Information Projects Co-ordinator was
     requested to bring it into operation as soon as possible. This report
     provides a brief review of this service after two weeks of operation.

2.   On Tuesday, 18th April - three days after the tragedy - a meeting took
     place between officers from the F & CS Divisional Office and from
     Libraries Department. This decided what form the telephone information
     line should take and it drew up a list of key telephone contact numbers
     between the two Departments.  It was agreed that the service would be
     based at Hillsborough Library and that it would be called the
     "Hillsborough Helpline".

3.   Publicity for the Helpline was of paramount importance so this
     Department circulated a news release to the two local radio stations,
     "The Star" and other newspapers, and the two regional television
     services. Posters and leaflets were produced and sited in shops in the
     Hillsborough area and throughout the Libraries service. Besides the
     initial publicity "The Star" agreed to carry a daily free advert
     inviting readers to call the Helpline.

4.   For the first three days the Helpline was in operation it was extremely
     busy. Requests for help fell into the following categories:

     (a) People wanting to find out if relatives or friends had been involved
         in the tragedy;

     (b) Survivors wanting to re-establish contact with people who had helped
         them in the aftermath of the tragedy;

     (c) Requests for counselling services from people who had suffered
         trauma from the event;

     (d) Enquiries from bereaved relatives in relation to the Disaster Fund;

     (e) Many calls from all over the country asking about methods of making
         payments into the Disaster Fund;

     (f) Many offers of assistance - people offering free transport between
         Sheffield and Liverpool for survivjrs and bereaved families, offers
         of accommodation.

     The Helpline was staffed by volunteer helpers who usually staff the
     Department's annual Winter Hotline and by staff at Hillsborough Library,

5.   To ensure that as much information as possible was provided to callers
     close liaison between this Department and other agencies was maintained.
     The co-ordinator attended the daily F & CS Task Team meetings which
                                      2


     consisted of Hillsborough F & S staff, hospital social workers and a
     representative of South Yorkshire Police. The co-ordinator also met
     with voluntary agencies in the city which were providing counselling
     services for those who had been deeply affected by the tragedy.

6.   After two weeks of operation the Helpline is now much quieter, dealing
     mainly with requests for information concerning donations to the
     Disaster Fund. The Helpline will be kept open for the next couple of
     weeks, and the decision to close it down will be made in consultation
     with F & CS and with relevant voluntary groups.

Conclusions

The experience described above demonstrates that the City Council does have
the ability to set up and operate a Helpline Service very quickly and
effectively. With foresight the "Helpline" could have been operating from
the evening of the tra:gedy. This suggests that arrangements for setting up
an emergency Helpline should be specifically written in to the Planning for
Peacetime Emergencies.

Recommendations

1.   To note the arrangements made by Sheffield Libraries and Information
     Services to operate the Hillsborough Helpline.

2.   To investigate the potential for developing arrangements for
     establishing a "Helpline" as part of the Plan for Peacetime Emergencies.




May 1989                                     Patricia M. Colemai
                                             Director of Libraries
                                             and Information Services
