        ENVIRONMENTAL. HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                              913

    been investigating the complaints received from local residents regarding noise nuisance and
    discussions had been held on site with representatives from the University, following which a
    letter dated 1st December, 1992 had been sent to the University detailing the concerns which had
    been expressed in general and in particular in connection with certain incidents which had
    occurred since the start of the new term. The representative of the objectors then addressed the
    Sub-Committee and stated that whilst they recognised that the facility was a necessary part of
    student life, the noise and other associated nuisances was, on occasions, intolerable and in an
    endeavour to forge a relationship with the students, links had been made with them and meetings
    held to discuss the residents objections. The applicant’s solicitor then addressed the meeting and
    stated that the Manager of the Totley site was aware of the need to keep noise levels to a
    minimum and on the occasions when a disco was used he made regular checks on noise levels
    outside the premises, ensured that windows and doors were closed and positioned the PA system
    on the floor as opposed to the stage because it had been found that this reduced noise levels. He
    stated that the Manager was anxious to remain in contact with the Residents Association and
    local residents generally and a number of meetings had been arranged with them in an endeavour
    to address their concerns. This had culminated in a letter being received from the Chairman of
    the Totley Residents Association stating that they would support the renewal of the Certificate
    subject to efforts being made to limit noise levels. The representative of the local residents stated
    that he was unaware of the letter from the Totley Residents Association.
       Resolved: That the public and press, the applicant and his solicitor, the objectors and officers
    of the City Council involved in the application relating to the Sheffield Hallam University be
    excluded from the meeting before further discussion takes place on the grounds that, in view of
    the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a
    disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Local
    Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985,
    relating to (i) legal matters and advice; and (ii) proposed actions under any enactment by the
    Authority.
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
    aspects of the application relative to the Sheffield Hallam University.
      At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
      Resolved: That, in the circumstances now discussed, a Certificate of Suitability be granted to
    Sheffield Hallam University, Communal Building, Totley Hall Lane to operate on Mondays,
    Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Sundays between the hours of 11.00 a.m. to 10.30 p.m. and on
    Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 11.00 a.m. to 11.00 p.m. respectively.
    ( n o t e : (A) Councillors Mrs. Midgley, Harthman, Pratt and Ms. A. G. Smith left the meeting
    after consideration of the above item and (B) Councillor Webster occupied the Chair for the
    remainder of the meeting.)
    Cairo’s, Bank Street
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application received
    from Cairo’s, Bank Street for the renewal of a Public Entertainments Licence in respect of those
    premises.
      Resolved: That the application now submitted for the renewal of a Public Entertainments
    Licence in respect of Cairo’s, Bank Street be granted for a period of 12 months.
    (n o te:   At this point in the proceedings Councillor Ms. Bullement left the meeting.)
★    (5) NURSES AGENCY LICENSING
      Resolved: That in the circumstances outlined in the application now submitted on behalf of the
    applicants by the City Solicitor and Head of Administration, approval be given for a licence to be
    granted for the use of premises as a Nurses Agency to (a) Allied Medicare Nursing Services
    Limited, 209 Twentywell Lane, Sheffield S17 4QB and (b) London and Provincial Nursing
    Services, Children’s Hospital, Western Bank, Sheffield 10.
    ( 6 ) OUTCOME OF LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
     The Sub-Committee received and noted a report submitted by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration on the outcome of two recent appeals which had been heard by the Rotherham
    Magistrates Court, both of which had been dismissed.
914    ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 23rd December, 1992. Present— Councillors
    Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Mrs. Askham, Ms. Bullement, Harthman, D. Jones, Pratt, Saunders, Ms.
    A. G. Smith, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. P. M. Smith and Webster. Also in attendance— Councillor
    Mrs. Fleming.
★   ( 1 ) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS—SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB-CABLING TO FLOODLIGHT
    TOWER
     The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
  consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
  submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
  replace the main feeder cables to the floodlight towers at the Hillsborough Sports Stadium
  following a failure to the lights on the north west corner pylon. He stated that as a consequence of
  the short circuit, the current electrical certificate would be re-examined by the Director of Health
  and Consumer Services and that on completion of the work a Completion Certificate would be
  required.
     Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration in approving the proposal now reported to replace the main feeder cables to the
  floodlight pylons at the Hillsborough Sports Stadium; and
     (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to submit a further report to
  this Sub-Committee when the Director of Health and Consumer Services has concluded his
  re-examination of the electrical certificate for the premises.
★ (2) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS—SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB-VISUAL INSPECTION OF BARRIERS
     The Sub-Committee received and noted a report submitted by the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration on the outcome of the annual visual inspection of barriers at the Bramall Lane
  Sports Ground which indicated that the majority of maintenance work was either ongoing or had
  been completed whilst the Spion Kop comer section had been closed to the public by the Club
  pending redevelopment of the area.
★ (3) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS-SPECTATOR CAPACITIES OF FOOTBALL GROUNDS
     The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report indicating the procedure he
  had followed in responding to a request from the Football Licensing Authority for details of the
  capacities for each designated football ground in Sheffield and the method of arriving at those
  capacities. He stated that the Football Licensing Authority had also asked what account the
  Council had taken in their assessment of the Club’s ability to manage safely a given number of
  spectators and that guidance on this issue was awaited from the Football Licensing Authority
  before it was to be considered by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group.
     Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
     (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to report back to this
  Sub-Committee on any further correspondence that relates to spectator capacities at football
  grounds.
  (4) POLICE FOOTBALL CLUB-CHAIN OF COMMAND
    Pursuant to the decision of this Sub-Committee of 11th September, 1992 (page 502 of the
  printed minutes) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report and
  correspondence which had been exchanged between Mr. Pendry, MP and the former Minister of
  Heritage, the Right Honourable David Mellor, QC, MP, on the subject of the chain of command
  within football clubs on match days, following two cases cited to Mr. Mellor where there had
  been confusion on this issue between the Club’s Safety Officer and the local Police Ground
  Commander which could have compromised safety. The report stated that the confusion had
  arisen due to the fact that prior to the start of the season, Statements of Intent, which were
  co-signed by the Police and the Clubs, had not been finalised in all parts of the country although
  in Sheffield, Statements of Intent in respect of both Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday
  Football Clubs had been agreed prior to the start of the season.
    The Sub-Committee noted the information contained in the report and accompanying
  correspondence.
  (5) TERMS OF REFERENCE AND DELEGATION OF POWERS TO LICENSING SUB-COMMITTEE
    Resolved: That consideration of the report now submitted on the terms of reference and
  delegation of powers to the Licensing Sub-Committee be deferred until the next meeting of this
  Sub-Committee.
