                                   INVOLVEMENT_




■ - ■.   .   v   .   ...........
        PurDose of Report


The purpose of this report is to provide an update on the work of the Task
Team, identify likely future needs, and to seek approval for staffing changes.


2.      Background


The Team was set up following a report to Programme Committee on 10th May,
19S9.     The primary objective was to undertake work with Sheffield residents.
The secondary objective was to support Liverpool Social Services. The Team
comprises 3 social workers, 3 clerks, an Administrative'Assistant and a Team
Leader.     A senior clinical psychologist is attached to the Team from
Sheffield Area Health Authority.


3.      The Work of   the Team


The Team has undertaken a wide range of work:


3.1     IndividualReferrals


Over 50 referrals have been received. Some of these peoole simply required
reassurance about the effects of the disaster on them, whilst II required
ongoing casework assistance. Common problems have been depression, irritability,
nightmares, inability to sleep and flashbacks to the disaster. For those wno
were on the Leppings Lane terraces, a fear of crowds is common.


Team members are currently working with 11      individuals on a one to one
counselling basis. These include survivors, a bereaved person, rescuers,
stewards, helpers and the partners of some of these people.


3.2     Case Work


One team member      has been working over a three month period with a group of
Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Stewards who were on duty during the disaster.         A
group of approximately 10 Stewards      have met fortnightly. Several other
Stewards are in touch with this group.     They began as a therapeutic group
helping the Stewards to come to terms with their experience.      This is still
an important element, but the focus of the      group has shifted to look     atthe
conditions under which stewards are employed and to build links      with     stewards
and supporters from Liverpool.     This has been important in order to overcome
2


their fears of animosity or blame being attached to them by survivors
and Liverpool fans.


3.3      Community Work


Contact has been established with residents in the Leppings Lane triangle.
A residents' action group is in the Drocess of forming as a result of this
work.    The grouD is now pressing for improvements to the quality of life in
their area by negotiating with S.W.F.C., the Police and the City Council
to provide better facilities. The Group held a very successful public meeting
chaired by Councillor Helen Jackson in early October which was attended by
approximately 90 people.       Contact has also been made with a local Traders'
group who have erected a memorial stone to those who died.        The Task Team
has been instrumental in linking these Traders with the Liverpool Survivors
Group.    This work has highlighted the importance of forging links between
the two communities.


3.A      Visits to the Ground


Over 30 visits, involving 89 people, have been made to the ground since
July, principally by bereaved ana survivors from the Liverpool area.        For
the bereaved,    these visits nave been extremely important. They have
allowed many to see tne pi ace where their relative or friend died.       It must
be appreciated that this is particularly important when a friend or relative
is last seen fit and heal thy, but then suddenly disappears from one's life.
Coming to terns with a loss in tnese circumstances is especially hard, and
a visit to the scene of the disaster has therefore been particularly
valuable.    For survivors, it has been important in helping them to simply
understand what happened to them.       There will be more of this work in the
future. For many people, months must pass before the desire to return to
the sround is matched bv the emotional strength to do so.


3.5 '    Publicitv


Preventative mental health work was an original objective of the project.
A substantial effort on this too>< place in July and August by producing
and distributing publicity and literature about the team and its work,
and to reassure members of the public about the feelings which followed
their experience. Specific material was produced for local communities,
health workers       and the general public.   As well as leaflets, the local
3


press and radio were used.        This work has now come to an end.   Future
publicity will be concerned with specific events such as the first occasion
that the Liverpool team return to Sheffield, the Inquest and the anniversary
of the disaster. These can be used to continue to inform the public of the
availability of help.


3.6       Attending Matches


Members of the team attended the Sheffield Wednesday v Everton match in
September, and will attend the Liverpool v Sheffield Wednesday match in
November to assist any distressed individuals.


3.7       Liaison with S.W.F.C.


Regular liaison with S.W'.F.C. management has been necessary on a number of
issues such as access to the ground for the bereaved and injured, and
meetings between S.W.F.C. and the ground's stewards.


3.8       Liaison with Liverpool City Council and other Local Authorities


Close links have been maintained in order to answer enquiries such as who
rescued a particular survivor, or which helper was involved with a survivor
on the day of the tragedy.


Administrative staff on their own       dealt with enquiries like this between
April and July {when the Task Team was established) by using the computer
facilities they developed at that time and have since maintained.        Liaison
has also occurred on matters such as access to the ground, sharing helping
techniques, and planning the provision of future services.


3.9       Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry
      i
The work of the inquiry was monitored in order to offer heln to those
witnesses giving evidence who were distressed. At the inquiry, volunteer
counsellors were present.


3.10      Co-ordination


It has been important to co-ordinate the Task Team's effort with that of
other agencies such as Occupational Health workers, voluntary groups, and
the local clergy.     A Steering Group has now been established for the Team,
but has met only once so far.
4


3-11   Coroner's Inquest Training;


A very successful study day was organised by the Team for social workers
working with bereaved, primarily from the Liverpool area, but also from
other parts of the country, in preparation for the Inquest.     Representatives
from the Family Support Group, a self-help group formed by the bereaved,
also attended.


3.12   Area Health Authority Survey


The Area Health Authority has undertaken a survey into the effectiveness
of the support that was offered to staff involved in the aftermath of the
disaster.


Team members offered advice in the compilation of the Survey and administrative
support has been given.     A commitment has been given to accept any referrals
generated by this survey.


3.13   Miscellaneous Tasks


Staff in other Departments have been debriefed.     This involved bringing
people together in groups in order to allow them to talk about their
experiences, actions and feelings in a structured, planned and guided way.
This is a specialised technique which research has shown to be very
effective in preventing future mental health problems. Other tasks have
included copying and distributing video material presented to the Taylor
Inquiry, giving casework advice to other F & CS staff and liaison with
Sheffield Education Dept.


u'     Comment on tne Work Uncertain


^ .i   Immediately following the disaster, there was a need for counselling
services which was met by the Helpline and voluntary agencies. This need
quickly declined and subsequent referrals to the Taks Team have tended
to be from people who experienced severe and direct exposure to the
disaster, and continued to suffer     distress as a result.


The presence and publicity generated by the Team has hopefully had a
reassuring effect on individuals.     As a result of these factors,   we   have
not exDerienced an overwhelming number of requests for one to one or group
counselling as was originally anticipated.       However, it should be noted
that offers of assistance to the largest group of front line personnel
involved in the disaster, the Police, have not been accepted.       It is
believed that a substantial number of Police officers remain seriously
affected.       Neither have referrals been received from the other rescue
services.       This may be due to effective help having been offered at an
early stage.       Alternatively, cultural and organisational factors may have
prevented people seeking help as yet.       In the future, individuals who were
affected by the tragedy who do not resolve that experience may well absorb
these problems into their general life and might have to have them
'unpicked' by non-specialist staff later, when it will be much more
difficult.


4.2         It is particularly noteworthy that the Team has been able to use a
range of approaches in responding to the aftermath of the disaster.
INdividual casework, group work and community work techniques have been
adopted with success. The Coroner's Inquest Study Day required organisational
skills of a high order.


4.3         In summary, it is clear that essential and effective work has been
done with seriously distressed individuals and groups who would not other­
wise have been helped.       Hopefully, the residents' action group will be
firmly established and continues to press for positive improvements in the
area.


It is important that all this work is continued.


5*         Future Needs


Specialist resources will need to remain in order to undertake the following
tasks:
       i

5.1        Continuing existing work with individuals


This is demanding, specialist work which requires experienced staff with
existing knowledge.


5• 2       New Referrals


The Area Health Authority Survey       may well result in new referrals.
6


To a large extent, the number of new referrals obtained will depend on
the degree to which the Team is pro-active.     New referrals may also be
generated by future significant events e.g. match on 29th November.


5.3    Group Work


The work with the Stewards will need to be maintained.


5.4    Community Work


The Residents' meeting should be followed up by staff assisting this group
to build on their success, and press for the improvements in community
facilities and policy that they are seeking.


5.5    Liaison with S.W.F.C.


This work should focus on continuing to ensure good access to the ground
for bereaved and injured, and planning for the Liverpool v Sheffield
Wednesday game   on 29th November.


5.6    The Anniversary


Preparation for this event will involve continuing liaison, planning and
co-ordinating with Liverpool, S.W.F.C., the bereaved and their support
agencies.


5-7    Liaison with Liverpool and other Local Authorities


Specific enquiries will be received, joint work during visits to the ground
will be necessary and joint planning for future events will be needed.


5.8 / Liaison with Education Department


This work' has yet to be started.    It is envisaged that the Team can be
instrumental in encouraging positive links between the young people of
Liverpool, Sheffield and Nottingham.


5.9   Coroner's Inquest


A range of social work tasks will be required to be performed, before,
during and after the Inquest.   It is difficult to predict the extent of
7


this at this stage, though Sheffield residents will be involved.     It will
be necessary to maintain liaison with the Coroner, Dr Stefan Popper, to
assess the level of need required to provide staffing support at the
Inquest.


6        Recommendations


It is recommended that:


1.       Social Work Posts
The present Hillsborough Task Team be reduced in size to two social work
posts from 30th November, 1989, and to be attached to an appropriate team
at Division 2.


2.       Administrative Posts
The present administrative support team should be reduced in size to one
scale    2/3 clerical posts from 30th November, 1989, and the postholder
should be accountable to the Administrative Assistant Division 2 there­
after.


3.       The Hillsborough Task Team as constituted in 1 and 2 above, should
continue in existence until 31st May, 1990.    Director of Family & Community
Services should be requested to review the work levels of the Team by
March, 1990 and report again to the Staffing Sub-Committee of the Family
& Community Services Programme Committee if, in his opinion, further
changes in staffing levels are necessary.




     /


13.10.89
It is anticipated that 2 social work staff, one clerk and associated
running costs will be required for the next 6 months to perform these
tasks.


Finance


Assuming 2 social work staff:-


2 Level 3 social workers                         £30,233
1 Clerk, scale 2/3                                £9*000
Printing, stationery,postage & telephones         £2,500
Computer costs                                    £2,000

Total full year costs
including 'on costs'                             £43,733


Six months' costs                                £21,866


N.B.     These costings assume replacement of Task Team staff   in their
         original posts - this has not happened in all cases.
         Actual costs will therefore be even lower depending    on the
         staff appointed.




13.10.39
    /
        f

        INTRODUCTION

        The remit of the Task Team as stated in the report to Programme Committee
        on 10th May, 1989 consisted of:

(i)         a primary focus of working with the people of Sheffield;

cn)      a secondary focus of supporting Social Services Departments in the
        North-West.

U ir\    the possibility of supporting families from outside of Liverpool who
        chose to work directly with Sheffield.

CD       Researchs and our own work, shows that many 'survivors' do not recognise
        that they need help, or cannot seek help, for many months after the
        event. We, therefore, must work from the premiss that there is still a
        need amongst the people of Sheffield, which includes helping professions,
        police, rescue workers, residents and supporters.

(11)     It is clear that the specialist teams on Merseyside have valued our
        support so far, and would wish this to continue as their workload expands.
        Workers in Nortn West Local Authorities without specialist teams have
        used the team for information and support.

(iiil       The third aspect of the team's brief has not yet been fully explored.

        Lessons learned from other disaster work, and our own experience, tell
        us that social workers concerned with the mental health of the corsnunity
        can only fully engage with those in need via ongoing pro-active outreach
        work. This will involve various sorts of community work which are no*:
        quantifiable. The following attempts to estimate working hours .spent cn
        specific pieces of work do not take into account the less formal, but still
        important, work which surrounds meetings and visits.




        1 6 . 11.89


                         ( fVV\.(^cHi>u30adi Tv/txduLvA . c A sl<t o ^   ** ocSV o vc^ ^
TASK   TEAM TIME     R5QUIREM5MTS:      Per person     per week


Supervision/Staff support

Writing up (general) e.g. reports, referrals, ground visits.

Duty, dealing with telephone calls, callers.

Team meetings x 2 per week.

Steering Group preparation.

Maintaining contact with substantive post.       -*• <1 c wllo.

Reading and keeping abreast of disaster work.

Travelling tine.

Final report writing and preparation

Research work - involves contact with various organisations
authorities - is necessary for obtaining advice and informst
for new and existing projects.

Computer work - checking and finding information.
This amount of time varies from week to week.

Admin staff support, liaison and discussion re work requeste
- aLSO VARIES

Publicity - with the general public and other Local Authorit




This is £          vorx    a coe     m c j uce    special projec.
that the .e am i ;    dertakins*   s -work tc     apDroxiraatel v
RESIDENTS GROUP

Work with the residents will continue after November, 1989. It is
anticipated it will need to continue at least until April, 1990.
Through working with them as a group, individual residents have used
visits from the social worker as an opportunity to talk through their
own feelings about the 15th April. This worK is not identified as
individual casework.

Developing this group has already involved a significant amount of time
of two workers in meeting with key group members to discuss with them
the development of the group, the decision making process within the
group, the group's relationship with other agencies, possible funding
for the group. The role of the Task Team in relation to the group, the
group's future development and goals. Running alongside this development
work, has been the necessary organisation around planning for a public
meeting. This included how the meeting would be organised, who should
be invited, issues to be raised, deciding an agenda and drawing up of
minutes. Another public meeting is planned for January, 1990, which
during December and January will average 2 hours per week.

In the future development work will need to continue with key individuals
involving two meetings per week of at least 2 hours, inducing planning
time for meetings.

Attending regular meetings of the group once a fortnight for approx.
P.-3 hours. Individual work with those who have been allocated tasks
within the group. These tasks will include letter writing and liaising
with the club, the Local Authority, the Police and the media, as well as
other similar community groups. This could well involve a further 2-3 hr
per week.

It must be appreciated that guiding and supporting groups to do things
for themselves is more time consuming than doing it yourself.
GROUND VISITS

Each visit can take 2-3 hours, with preparation work taking anything
up to an hour. The last 7 weeks have seen 36 people visiting the ground,
with 3 more coming next week and other visits yet to be   arranged.

Social workers in Liverpool inform us that as their caseload expands,
so do the demands for visits to Hillsborough, although many feel that
it will be some time before they are ready to do so. This area of work
had peaks and troughs and this pattern may continue, although there is
no good reason to expect the demand to cease until after the anniversary.
This is supported by the impressions of some social workers from
Liverpool, Knowsley and Wirral.

A full week of visits r (usually three, but occasionally more) can mean
12 hours' work, and more on occasions when two social workers are required.




STEWARDS

Meetings with the stewards group are 3 weekly and last approximately
3 hours.

Other contact with group members to discuss and help with organisational
tasks, and other meetings, as well as preparation for these take
approximately an average of 7 hours per week.


8 hours weekly




VIDEO SHOWING

This has been useful as , one-off or as part of ongoing work. Such
sessions generally last 3 hours. Work before and after can take 2 hours.

Five showings in the last five weeks has meant

5 hours' work per week.
CASEWORK

It is good professional practice that contact should be offered in
such cases until the first anniversary. At present, individual casework
takes approximately

10 hours per week.

In the last month, we   have received 8 new referrals or re-referrals.

There is good reason to believe that new referrals will come out of
pro-active community work, specific trigger events, the A.H.A. survey,
and the increasingly evident fact that people's own 'timetables' may
only now make or allow them to seek help.

Initial interviews on average take two hours. They are time consuming,
intensive and draining. It would not require many new referrals to
swamp and drain one worker already involved in other areas of 'Hillsborough’
work.




POL I C E

        •s report to Programme Committee on 10th May estimated that there
were-257 Police in the ground. There is no question that a substantial
number of these remain seriously affected. If only a small fraction of
these were to approach the team for help it could create 50 - 100
hours of work for first sessions alone.

This area of work could develop as a result of increasing pressure on the
Police, various triggers already mentioned, and our increasing face to
face contact with members of the force through other aspects of our work.

Two policemen have recently contacted the team anonymously.

The above may well apply to the rescue services as well.
THE   INQUEST   - FUTURE WORK


The Task Team agreed to document information from the Training Day.
This work has not been done due to the pressure of other work. It is
likely to take each member of the Team 15 hours - this is 60 hours
total.

Regular liaison with Dr Popper to discuss issues arising around the
inquest. Meetings should take place initially on a monthly basis,
increasing in frequency as the inquest approaches. Initially this will
involve 1\~2 hours per month, increasing to 2 hours per week as the
inquest approaches.

Regular liaison with the Hillsborough unit of the West Midlands Police
for the ouroose of gaining information and discussing issues arising.
This will involve li-2 hours per month, increasing to 1| hours per
week as the inquest approaches.

Regular liaison with the Medico-Legal Centre staff to prepare for the
inquest. It was agreed earlier with Dr Popper that the Task Team would
interview his staff again to find out how they are feeling after
Hillsborough. This piece of work has not yet been done, but will take
about 10 hours in total (planning, letters, phone calls, interviews,
etc.}.

Support for Medico-Legal staff is very important and regular contact
should be taking place with them to prepare for the inquest. Regular
involvement of 1\ hours per week is required.

Follow up Training Day was agreed at the Training day on 6.10.89,
which will involve Dr Popper, West Midlands Police, social workers
and the Hillsborough Family Support Group. This will take one person
3-4 weeks to arrange: this is much less time than was allocated for
the Training Day on 6.10.89 because we now have a lot of information
which we did not have available to us before.

The Task team members will need to meet regularly to discuss the
progress of the inquest. This will involve members still within the
team and those who have returned to other worksites. The meetings will
need to increase in frequency as the inquest approaches. The duration
of the meeting should be li- hours per month, increasing to 1 \ hours
per week. This does not allow time for any special meetings that may
need to be called.

Planning meetings will need to take place between team members and
Liverpool workers and H.F.3.G. members. These may involve travelling to
Liverpool, each meeting nay therefore require 7 hours.

Organisation of duty rotas to cover the inquest. This will involve
the recruitment of extra staff and decisions will need to be made
about the number and type of support workers required - it is difficult
to estimate how much work this will involve.

The Task Team will need to plan how they will co-ordinate the Inquest
and this will involve discussion and meetings which will increase in
frequency and duration as the inquest approaches.
  2


  It is very difficult at this stage to estimate the amount of work that
  will be involved in the preparation for the Inquest because we do not
  know the type of Inquest that we will be dealing with, and we have
  never co-ordinated support at an inquest before.

  An indication of planning time for this can be gleaned from examining
  planning time for the Liverpool v Wednesday match. Despite being only
- a one day event, this has required a variety of work over the past
  3 week period totalling over 40 hours work and there remains a
  substantial amount of work yet to be done.

  According to Aileen Walker-Smith, who co-ordinated the Kings Cross
  Inquest, planning for an inquest following a major disaster is extremely
  time-consuming and should not be underestimated. There is at least
  2 months' solid work required prior to the Inquest and a necessity to
  maintain regular communication with bereaved families, solicitors, the
  Coroner, the Police and witnesses,for many months prior to the Inquest.




  16.11.89
 LIAISON WITH S.W.F.C.

  Liaison with S.W.F.C. has been necessary to arrange visits to the ground
  and to plan for significant events. Relationships with the club are at
  a point now where work with an increasing number of staff at the ground
  is considered possible. They now understand the role of the Task Team
  and how we may meet their needs. The staff there are particularly
- sensitive to key events such as the match cn the 29th, the second report
  from Lord Justice Taylor, the Anniversary and the regular visits by
  bereaved and injured. It is not known as yet how many individuals
  may need ongoing support but social worker time does need to be available
  to continue building relationships with individuals at the club on a
  face to face basis, e.g. a social worker will be with the club's
  receptionist while she deals with the public on the 29th November
  as she has expressed anxieties about the reactions of Liverpool fans on
  that day.

 Liaison at the moment is taking more than 2 hours per week, but it is
 strongly believed that the time required to respond to the needs of
 staff will increase now that individual needs are being openly
 acknowledged.
EDUCATION   PROJECT


The Task Team h a s b e e n planning to facilitate the development of links
between Sheffield, Liverpool and Nottingham's educational institutions.
We believe that it is important to include the children of these cities
in joint work following on from links that were established through the
Hillsborough disaster. At a meeting of Chief Officers of Education in
July, it was acknowledged by Sheffield headteachers that they wish their
schools to be involved in developing links with Liverpool and Nottingham
schools.

Unfortunately, due to the pressure of other work, it has not been
possible to engage in further discussions with the Education Department.
This project remains to be started and will therefore require a
substantial amount of work, e.g.

(1)   Meetings with local headteachers to discuss favoured projects.
(2)   Liaision with Education Departments in Liverpool and Nottingham.
(3)   The facilitating of joint educational activities, e.g. exhibitions
      of artwork from children of all three authorities, exchanges of
      4th year work experience students between the three cities, joint
      sporting events, etc.

This work is likely to be intensive initially and a lot of the groundwork
will have to be undertaken by the Task Team to assist the setting up of
the projects, after which time the Education departments of the three
cities will assume overall control.

This work will involve numerous telephone calls, letters, meetings to
be arranged and interviews with Education Dept, staff in the three cities.
After the first few months, when the work will be intensive, it will be
possible to reduce the amount of work providing that the projects are
getting under way and there are no holdups or hitches.
THE A N N I V E R S A R Y


This work will begin in earnest in the New Year, although some
foundation work is being done now in connection with planning for the
match on the 29th November. Liaison will need to take place between
Sheffield Wednesday F.C., Police, local churches and organisations
and social workers in Liverpool and surrounding authorities. As
with the 29th, extra volunteers will need to be recruited, briefed
and then debriefed after the event.

It is extremely difficult to estimate the work that will be necessary
because of the Anniversary. However, as a team, we have spent well
in excess of    40  hours in joint planning for the 29th and at least
a further 20 hours is anticipated. We expect the anniversary to be much
more demanding.
       FAMILY   4 COMMUNITY   SERVICES


       As stated in the F & CS Services Development Committee report dated
       10.5.89 we believe that the Task Team has a specific role in relation
       to F & CS staff in terms of providing counselling and support.

     - The impact of the disaster on F & CS staff was significant and a need
        for a follow up review is necessary. This is not only the opinion of
        the Task Team: many of the F & CS workers that we come into contact
        with feel strongly that a review should take place (and is already
        overdue). Also, research on disaster work has established that this
        is good practice.

       A thorough review of staff by the Task Team would serve two purposes;-

1.    We are aware that some F & CS staff are still in contact with families
       and individuals that they met at the disaster and during the following
       weeks. A review would enable us to locate these workers and offer them
       advice, information and support.

2.    The Review would highlight any need or desire for counselling amongst
       F & CS staff following their experience at Hillsborough.

       Reviews of the staff involved would take a considerable amount of time
       given the numbers of staff involved (it is well over 100 people).
       There is the possibility of well over 200 hours work involved.

       IF a member of staff requested counselling they should be given a
       choice of whom they wish to fulfil this role. The Task Team should be
       included in this choice because of the specialist knowledge that we
       have accumulated. It could be anticipated that counselling sessions
       might be required on a fortnightly basis: each interview taking
       between one and two hours. IF only 10 staff requested counselling,
       tnis would result in 7-10 hours per week counselling time.

       We believe that the team also has another role in relation to F & CS
       numbers. This involves the passing on of information. It has been
       brought to the attention of the team that F & CS staff know little
       about the work of the team and requests are frequently being made for
       information. In response to this, the team should be visiting major
       worksites and keeping the Department fully informed of the work that
       we are undertaking - this work would take 3 hours per week of one
       worker's time.

       local work required for above.

       (1!              Review - 200 hours or more over 3 months - 1    per week.

       (2)              Counselling - depends on the number of people
                        requesting it.

       (3)              Information giving - 3 hours per week.
We argue that a need still exists in Sheffield and that it is still
possible that those in need will seek assistance. This requires a
team working pro-actively in the community and alongside other
professionals.

Consideration must be given to the support needed by workers. At
present, this happens within the team. One social worker?, even with
supervision, would be isolated and inadequately supported.
                      to       -KoO                                -tl o U ^     C W ^        /sk

   1/Ocx/vJt^         i ^ j ju S          |)fQ a W u 4             0^     y w o -^ tA j   JoaAAS)     jV ^ & o J ^ y

               -ft!                         -to       O   lo   ^   CX^v   VSH- vjcxWv ,




AP+C-V"      1st      3a.rv         ^«JL|aMU\SLOVc ^                    6^ V
                                                                           CM^ '




    Ct^&'u*^               *rfc*S«
                          ^   J                   A         i. r Kr/V      A*'' + -ft£>v."-    AV_   (^tccWCi^C^
     (fo^sed           hwui-se^                           rcU.cK<yv

  \jtjZX\-   CrAs—w ^ jz X 'g-g-           i/ V ^ o ^ '

                p^ > i i ° 5              (v>W»j               —           ■




! U>JotTX»^

F^c^.^.          K    c^   T   vj^JLO   C^Q-C-L-o              .
         2A_a C ^ o / L -




                     K X .        (\£




                                                       V i o ^



      4\/-\vA—■
              V-*.    iaaAj \_^             10      C\ b          CjS/UA)y\y ^ OVl^
ee-
                                                                 1 04^71..




               ^2— i y ^ k r f    Co^   —
                                            C£\S^
                                Dl   i



\(c    a         -
                          f                    ^   _________________ * -SL».     a^>*

                                           { u/vfe ^\r {Js$ ^ >                ? ^A      .*J.V

                                                             uJL   ^                    -V U a^«-cA_ c\<y*->^
                                                                                                        C\
           -ko



<L                              "h___

                                                    ^ W 3<




■\£-




                                .       c
                     (J^\^<aA sJ-®~S»"5 V c-

                              C\a^ /? ?

                                                                             ^tPvc^W,'

                                                                       *1.
                 ^ fV M
 \(fsi( ^ 4 c r i    t      A (P     —

  & X T ^ 0 ) ^ ...fW O ^S                   “

  1 ^ 4)- Q > ^ W - ' p ^       ^vuov\f i    -p    L-A,.




     i^S,^,'iO^>j<r?r^      <^('t<§!vu"




     M d U     Of^S




                          y-                      ( ^ m    u     ^



                     H U )f S



     s .\


                    V ^     ^\>\J r       \&i<\    ^ ( ' V W ^




     XrHj^^ts               \      virtP



 M     a




fWjAsrfs\1&/L-.
