                                                % 2 .W Z    L f




     IN THE HISH COURT OP JUSTICE                      CO 1009/92
     QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
     CROWN OFFICE LIST



                                          Royal Courts of Justice
                                          Tuesday. 6th April 199 3

                               Before:



            THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON OF CLUNY




                              THE QUEEN
                                    -v-

                HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                      EX PARTE STRINGER AND OTHERS



     (Computer-aided Transcript of the Stenograph Notes of
     John Larking, Chancery House, Chancery Lane, London WC2
                     Telephone No: 071-404 7464
                        Fax No: 071 404 7443
               Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)




MR   e FITZGERALD (instructed by Malcolm J Gregg & Co, Liverpool,
                   L2 RG) appeared on behalf of the Applicants.

THE RESPONDENTS did not appear and were unrepresented.
                     SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPLICANTS
                  JUDGMENT (As Approved by the Court)
     IN THE HIGH COURT OP .’
                           TTTflTTP'c*
     QUEEN'S BENCH PIVIfiTnw                                                CO 1009/92
     CROWN OFFICE LIST



                                                   Royal Courts of Justirp
                                                   Tuesday, 6th April 19

                                       Before:



            THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON OF CLUNY




                                      THE QUEEN

                                          -v-

                 HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                       e x :t s k t e s t r i n g e r a n d o t h e r s -




    S n PS J £ :aid0l,TranSCript of the Stenograph Notes of
    John Larking, Chancery House, Chancery Lane, London WC2
                      Telephone No: 071-404 7464
                         Fax No: 071 404 7443
                Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)




HE ^F ia SS IB au j (instructed by Malcolm J Gregg 4 Co, Liverpool,
                        RG) appeared on behalf of the Applicants.
THE RESPONDENTS did not appear and were unrepresented.

                    SUBMISSIONS BY THE APPLICANTS
                 JUDGMENT (As Approved by the Court)
                                  1
                                                        Tuesday, 6th April 19 93
m             MAC^HERS0N:.Mr Fitzgerald, I see that there was an
      adjournment suggesting other representations; what has
      happened about that?                         '      as

MR FITZGERALD: My Lord, what happened was, that once my
    instructing solicitors had a date all the other parties were
    notified in accordance with the directions given by May J
    and none of them have indicated that they wished to attend
    Indeed, my Lord, I can hand up to you a JpecifJc l2t?er ?r^m
    the Coroner saying that he did not intend to aroear to bJ
          ??       issue of leave or the extension of time, but if
    the matters went further he would wish to be represented
    All the other parties, presumably the interested parties"
    were served with notice of these proceedings (Jndindied'an
    indication would be on Form 86A) and none of them have
     S£de?standaPP0ar ^                   t0 bS rePresented so far as I


    ^ ^ t h L i ^ 05112113011'
                             ’        HaVS y°U had any communication from any

MR FITZGERALD: No, not from the others. My Lord, I do have a
    thS°lastgY      OI\ 5 y S°iicit2fS dealin9 with the update since
         last..... (game handed). You will see from that that
              iCatl°n f°r leave was adjourned last May with
    fhe 5 ■ ° restore after the Attorney-General notified us of
    the decision on the application for I fiat, but then copies
    _
    of _^he P roceedings were served on the Coroner. i-h<= w*»ai-
          t       _     ,   -------       wj.jvianj.re lMYieect]r o p o l i s
                                                  j.

    Ambulance Service.         Then in August 1992 the
    Attorney-General1s Office advised by letter that a fist-
    Lordd notJ?0i-gra?ted f°r an aPPlication to bemade.~My
    Lord, no particular        reasons were given. There was a
    recitation effectively, o£ the statutory formu™ that it
    to     f ’J beJ V st        desirable in the interest of justice
    to be a fresh inquest,        in September 1992 there was a
     urther affidavit exhibiting Doctor West's report which
    deals with the question of inevitability of dlath in these
                        in Mar°h 1993 a lining date was riSe“ Jd
    and notification was sent both to the Coroner and to the
    Lord°rthitSi^h?£ Ma^ J ^ad indicated should be notified. My
                           P°slt;LOn and one assumes that the
     tor^r^SrdsSp^?                                ^      ^     ^     the matt^

    ^ ea^ y fy ea fa g o !            ^    ±S          & P±ty because that was

MR FITZGERALD:        My Lord, precisely.


                                            2
“* ^ o ICf n ^ ? h » E?S°N:   ™ es* terrible ev®°ts were a long time
     c filfo v ir                3CSS “        '-hS 1SSS      it   i s -_o.....

MR FITZGERALD:      I entirely accept that, and one of the
     was,
       M 0rth??tnnIe^
           that one of O?S
                        the frreasons
                              OICl the point
                                        why it of view
                                                was    of the family
                                                    adjourned the last
                        thS Coroner could ^ represented, and he
     thft h^0rt?r|indlSa^ei1,when t h e y provided the last application
     S J ? 2       W1       be Present and represented. When I out
                Y/ ' hS ad^ rned it: .so that everybody could be
     notified and present if they wished.

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON:        How far had you got to in the
    application?

1111 FSo?Gb S ^ D: ^ LSrd’ at that SCa9e' of c°urse, the fiat had
      not been reviewed. It may be that the Coroner chanqed~his
      - m d in the light o£ the fiat.                    3   nls

m Justice MACPHERSON:         What is the positionso far as the fiat
     is concerned?                                              ±±ax

MR FITZGERALD: The Attorney-General refused to grant this fiat.
MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON:        What has that do to with this
    application?

^   Argument ? ’    ^          1 h°P8 Y°Ur LordshiP has a skeleton

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON:        Yes,       I have.

MR FITZGERALD: My Lord, can I just hand up a list of
     authorities and a bundle of authorities? (Same hanripr] \  Tha
              !s this that there are two alternative g ^ e iles
    The first being the statutory remedy under section 13 of the
    Coroners Act, which I hope your Lordship will have at the
    front of that bundle. There the Attorney-General grants his
    fiat and then the High Court has a wider discretion to look
    Jneo Si          ' deluding new evidence, than the Court
    does on judicial review. However, the fact that the
    Attorney-General, has refused his fiat under section 13 does
    not preclude the exercise by this Court of its jurisdiction
    which i(3 the common-law jurisdiction, and indeed that
    :ommon-law jurisdiction is preserved by section 33 of the
    -oroners Act. Can I just read out 33(b):

                 (1) Nothing in this Act shall prejudice or
                affect....
                    (b) the jurisdiction of the High Court in"

                                     3
                           "relation to or over a coroner or his
                            duties."

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON:        I suppose you accent t-hst- -It- ■
    strong indication?                    Y   accept that it isa very


^   FC o S r t h ^ :,-nMy ^ ' v , it: iS obvlously something that the



     Attorney-General had been refused, but nonJthilisS the
     Divisional Court granted leave.        ^neuneiess the

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON:        Are they here?



"    saSK,*S5K“S.fsiHS™jss.*
“   ^ o S fo f^ p e a ^ ^ a s^ fn :^      8d“ ” B r 0 m L J’S CaSe in
MR FITZGERALD:      Yes, he was in the Court of Appeal             That-

    S  E H K of
    assistance  F a 1^seventeen-year-old asthmatic
                                              ^    t The ^  to d°
    Divisional Court held that that could render''the death

    f f c o S     s ^ p i t ; o       ^   ^   i ^   “        ^cuaL ^ ; ^         •




         f      death into an unnatural death.          My Lord, those are

    in a ^ a S y i r ^ u S L S ! f ^ e w aL d eb e e r r e lu s e a nfo r ns S
    ca“ ' oS“L                                       b o t h ^ ^ f i;° s .


    2nd s e c tio n 13 of t h i^ A c t ? SSC ti° n 6 ° f the (JBSUiUiU) Act


     -^urt has only one choice and that is to o S S i freSh
    inquest. That is primarily what these si£ f S l k u S seek- »
    fresh inquest. But there may be cases where the rmi-rt- t-=L-
    the view that the verdict was i n a p p J ^ r l a S or ?i2°ed b f
    procedural impropriety, but nonetheless it is necessary or
    appropriate to order a fresh inquest and this c t u t t l i e n
                                  4
      operating under common-law power can simply strike down t-hp
      verdict without necessarily ordering a f?esh i ^ J s? so to
      that extent the Court operating in judicialreview has a
      greater flexibility than the Court ----     review has a

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON:           That is not what the Applicants want, is

MR FITZGERALD:        No.

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON: They want to find out, they say
    understandably what occurred and to have worries pSt to

MR FITZGERALD: That is it essentially, but may I say this that
    nonetheless, they do, as a secondary submission say that
    //hatever else his death was, it was not an Ic?idenSl Sjath
    and it would be some assuation of their feelings if the
    verdict was struck out.

m   * other
       2 5 ? verdicts
              ^ P H E R S Oavailable.
                           N : • Th0Y Want to stress that there were

MR FITZGERALD:        Yes, they were other available ___

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON:           What is position about civil
    proceedings?

MR FITZGERALD: My Lord, the civil proceedings have all been
    terminated. In some of the cases offers have been qiven and
    accepted and some have not been concluded.

    JA p p ^ c a « s ? HERS°N:   "ere thSre Civil               by all six

MR FITZGERALD:       Yes.

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON: Those that have been disposed of -- I do
    o? wha?\h ^ the cause of them were, what the allegations
    or what the decisions were or what the settlements ___

^                MY L°rd' ne91;L9ence has been accepted by the
     police authority in the course of the proceedings but in
     many cases the acceptance of the offer^ for o b v f ^ r e a s S n s

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON:           Yes, they would be.

MR FITZGERALD:       One of the problems about the civil proceedings
    [198TM    i mk
                 1 ^ ° W    a£e t o t a l l y aware ° f Ex p a r t e H i J L
    liabilitv h L 5      t?e H°USe of Lords' but the questionof
      ability has been dealt with on the basis that death was
                                     5
    ?i»2It^ nSpa n .?°SOUS' am? that is the verV Premise which
    these six families question, with the knowledge that thev
    have of what happened to their particular relatives. In at
          four cases there is evidence that they were aiive well
                me J      the Pathologist said they should have
    died within, and therefore that raises the second question

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON:   Were they all represented at the
    inquest?

MR FITZGERALD: Not all of them were represented, but the
    majority of them were. Certainly at a mini-inquest one of
    them, Mrs Williams, was not represented.

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON: Was there a challenge to the proposal
    that there should be a cut-off time?

                .,'?,here was* In Appendix 2 of the bundle your
    _..-„dship will see that there are submissions m a d e ---
MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON:   Where is that?

MR FITZGERALD: At page 3 7 Appendix 2 there is a reference to
    S j questions; perhaps I can read out what Mr King, counsel
    for the family said at D:

                     Putting it very simply to you, sir, most
             of the families I represent feel there has been a
             complete blanket (not a deliberate blanket) been
             held down over what happened after they were
             brought off the terraces and before individuals
             were certified dead and there has been no effort
             made systematically to analyse what was the
             organisation at the time of the rescue, what miqht
             have been and what could have made a difference.
             A very simple example again is that I am
             instructed there is evidence of Dr Gumpert given
             at the Inquest that without an electrocardiogram"
              (that would be at the mini -inquest) "we can never
             be sure whether or not there is a pulse and when
             dealing with individual loved ones taken off the
             terraces and simply dealt with by lay people, the
             absence of such sort of equipment means that one
             would never know whether or not that individual
             was alive or dead at that stage."

        There was discussion and then the actual ruling of the
    50A°nSr °n thS matter-   Perhaps I can read it out at page

              "I do understand the anxiety which a lot of the
              families have about this issue, but as I have
              already said the overwhelming medical evidence
              the pathological evidence, and that is the crucial
                  J am interested in, is the damage that caused
              the death was done due to the crushing.

              Now I picked the arrival of the first ambulance
              not because there is anything magical about that
              but because when we look at the videos we can
              actually see that and it is a convenient m a r W -
              , ^ 1S a11-      the first ambulance arrived at
              3.30 I would have picked that time. It is simply
              intended as a marker, but, and this is an
              important point, I considered the medical
              evidence. The medical evidence was at once - I am
              not quoting verbatim - but since the sense of what
              Professor Usher said, and, indeed the others as
              well, was that once the chest was fixed so that
              respiration could no longer take place, then
              irrecoverable brain damage would occur between
              four and six minutes. That is the point."

    Lord           th?.basis °f that Pathological premise, my
    Lord, that the ruling was made. The dissatisfaction of
    these six families is that if that was correct, the
    timescale of the subsequently crushing injuries were
    sustained before 3 or 4 pm.

m          MAC^HERS°N: Is there information before me now that
    there was further evidence that could have been led in
    respect of the individuals?

MR FITZGERALD: My Lord, yes. There is information before your
    Lordship m the Memorial as to the survival beyond that time
    by these six Applicants, and you will find that from page

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON: Let me just read it to myself. That is
    that point. The other point is the question of evidence
    which was given at the mini-inquest?

m              ■ That t S Particularly relevant in the case of
    c    ?     n     where there is some of evidence which was
    crucial to the question of survival. All evidence was done
    by way of summaries and some of the evidence which was
                  thf statement was not read out and only came to
    the attention of the families in February 1992; that is to
    say two months before the application was made. That was as
                             7
    a result that once the police had taken that there would be
    no disciplinary proceedings, they felt it was free to
                      statements' and it was at that stage
        Williams discovered for the first time the contents of
    the statement made by Police Constable Bruder and Special
    Constable Debra Martin. I do not want to put the cltl too
    statement^            ?eference that had been made to those
                   ^   mini’mquest that the plaintiffs -- that
     5        been (Inaudible) in such a way that the full force
    of the evidence that Kevin Williams was still alive had not
    been brought home. In any event, in the context of a
    hearing, which is essentially done by oral evidence, crucial
    evidence of that sort should not have been done by someone
    summarising and then when the matter becomes important
          bac]5 a“d ^-interviewing witnesses and summarising the
    quality of the evidence. In our submission, that was
     nsatisfactory. Mrs Williams is entitled to feel that she
    ^nould have heard the evidence from Special Police Constable
    Debra Martin and from Police Constable Bruder and heard the
    questions, because it did go to the question of whether
    Kevin was still alive well over 3.15 pm, and whether there
    was a possibility that he could have been successfully
    resuscitated.

          Of course, once one has evidence, and there is other
              ^ . S he ca?e of Paul Carlile and of Michael Kelly,
    that they did survive beyond the time the pathologist was
    suggesting that they should have been dead by on their
    pathological theory, there should have been an inquiry of
    that ^issue (Inaudible) the attention by the emerqency
    services to save these lives. That is where the general
    evidence of Dr Glyn Philips and Dr Ashton comes in, which
    again the Coroner ruled to be inadmissible.

MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON: I do not know how desirable it is that
    these agonies should be prolonged, because they may lose in
    the end and be disappointed. There may never be any chanqe
    ~utif your clients feel terribly strongly about this and '
     tavised by you and your solicitors that it is an arguable
    case   and the Coronerhas not come to say that it is not I
    do not think I will stand in your way. I will give short a
    decision.                                       a        L A


MR JUSTICE MACPHERSON:   This is another page, if that is the

    right expression to use, in the book of the history of the

    terrible disaster at Hillsborough.    An inquest was held in
    this matter and the verdict that was returned was one of

                             8
 accidental death.    Six of the families are plainly, from the
 documents, bitterly unhappy,    with the verdicts to some

 extent, but also with the way in which the evidence was

allowed to be led publicly at that inquest.     There are

various matters which could, I suppose, come within the

rubric of procedural impropriety which are alleged against
the Coroner, and it is suggested that, as a matter of law,
principle and of general exposure of all that happened,

 "*ere should not (I simply take these as examples) have been
a cut-off time fixed by the Coroner at which he drew the

line, so to speak, beyond which investigation would take
place.   He also decided not to call two doctors whose

evidence could have borne upon the condition of one or more

   these young dead people, and he decided not to leave the
verdicts of "lack of care" and "death aggravated by lack of
care" to the jury.



     It should not be thought that my decision to give leave
is any more than that.     I hope that everybody, particularly
the parents and families involved, realise that I am not

giving any fair wind to this application other than allowing
it to be argued,     it seems to me that where emotions and
feelings are as strong as they obviously are in this case

and where highly responsible legal advice is given that it

is an arguable case, I should not stand in the way of the
matter being heard fully by this Court.


                          9
        The Coroner was given an opportunity to be here and so
were others who might be involved; they have chosen not to

be here.     I draw no conclusion against the Coroner from that
at all, save that it may be that those who advise him

realise that there was certainly a possibility that leave
would be granted.



        At this stage the only matter that has to be

established before me is that there is a case that can be
 -=nsibly argued.    I am convinced that in this case that
hurdle has been leapt, but it must be realised by the

parents that this is the lowest of the hurdles that they

face.     It may be that, in the end, they will be disappointed
and that this matter would not be reopened.     They must

realise that what I have done today is not any indication of
the strength of the case eventually, which will be, of

-ourse, argued on both sides, assuming that there is
resistance to the application.



        Furthermore, there may never be a fresh inquest because
it is in the discretion of the Court as to whether the

matter is to be reopened, and the passage of time may very
well bear upon the judges who have the burden of deciding
this case when it eventually comes back to Court.



     I am indebted to Mr Fitzgerald and his lawyers for the

                          10
way m   which the case has been prepared.    I should simply

add this, that the Attorney-General's fiat was not given for
the matter to be considered in accordance with the

provisions of the Coroners Act 1988.    That is no final bar

to the jurisdiction of this Court.     It is an indication of

what the Attorney-General felt, but not a bar.    But I have
taken that into account as well in deciding that these

families should not be barred from the judgment seat at this
stage, so leave is granted for the matter to be argued.
