          MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                             811

i f (10) STREET COLLECTION
      Resolved: That the following application for a street collection permit be granted—
   Applicant                       Organisation                                   Location   Date
   R. Hallatt                      Southern Africa Resources Centre               Fargate    25.11.89
   (11)    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
   Visits to Sports Grounds
     Resolved: That (a) arrangements be made for members of the Panel and the Council’s
   representatives on the South Yorkshire Police Authority to visit the Hillsborough Sports
   Ground, Bramall Lane Sports Ground, Owlerton Stadium and Don Valley Stadium, on dates to
   be arranged by the Chair of this Panel; and
      (b) attendance on such visits be recognised as an approved duty for the purpose of the payment
   of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act, 1972.
   Safety o f Sports Grounds A dvisory Group
    The Panel received copies of the minutes of meetings of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory
   Group held on 11th and 19th October, 1989 and, arising therefrom, the P a n e l-
     Resolved: That (a) arrangements be made for members of the Panel and the Council’s
   representatives on the South Yorkshire Police Authority to hold an informal meeting with
   representatives of the South Yorkshire Police to discuss matters relating to the Safety of Sports
   Grounds in Sheffield; and
    (b) attendance at such a meeting be recognised as an approved duty for the purpose of the
  payment of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act, 1972.
i f P roposed Alterations at Sports Grounds
    Resolved: That approval be given to the proposals now reported by the Head of
  Administration and Legal Department for (a) the replacement of timber fencing by steel
  handrailing and mesh at Tunnel Exit V to the Spion Kop terrace at the Hillsborough Sports
  Ground; and
    (b)   concrete and tarmacadam ramp and pavement repairs in various areas at Bramall Lane
  Sports Ground.
   Owlerton Stadium
     With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 15th September, 1989
  (page 672 of the printed minutes) to issue a notice under Section 10 of the Safety of Sports
  Grounds Act, 1975 prohibiting the entry of spectators to the Owlerton Sports Stadium, the Head
  of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on the principle of the Council’s
  issuing, when appropriate, a general safety certificate or an amended prohibition order in respect
  of the Stadium.
     The Panel noted the information reported.
  (12) HOLLIS HOSPITAL CHARITY
     Resolved: That Mrs. Yvonne Crane of 56 Stumperlowe Crescent Road, Sheffield, be
  appointed as a representative trustee of the Hollis Hospital Charity for a period of four years
  from 29th November, 1989, in place of Mrs. K. Circuit who has resigned.

2 International and Anti-Apartheid Panel
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes be approved—


   Meeting of the International and Anti-Apartheid Panel held 27th October, 1989. Present—
  Councillors Pye (Chair), Crowder, Ms. Fiore, Godber, Hussain and Lamb; Mr. K. Maddock.
  (1 )    in t e r n a t io n a l u n it   —work   p r o g r a m m e r e v ie w

    The Principal International Officer submitted a report reviewing the work programme of the
  International Unit in the Publicity Department and drawing attention to the Unit’s position as a
  central Council resource providing advice and support for the activities of other Council
  Departments.
    Resolved: That the report now submitted be approved and the attention of Chief Officers be
  drawn to this resource.
812    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  (2) TWIN n i n g a c t i v i t i e s — l e g i s l a t i o n
    The Principal International Officer submitted a report on legislation affecting the participation
  of Local Authorities in twinning activities.
    Resolved: That consideration of the report now submitted be deferred pending the receipt of
  further information.
  (3) CHINA SEMINAR
    The Panel confirmed the action taken by the Chief Publicity Officer, in consultation with the
  Chair of the Panel, in authorising the Principal International Officer to attend a Seminar for
  Local Authorities with Links in China, which was held in Swansea on 13th October, 1989, and
  received and noted a report of the Principal International Officer on the proceedings at the
  Seminar.
  (4) OPERATION ROM ANIAN VILLAGES
    Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 13th July, 1989 (page 359 of
  the printed minutes), the Principal International Officer submitted a further report on
  “Operation Romanian Villages” , a campaign for the protection of Romanian villages from the
  systematisation programme allegedly being undertaken in Romania.
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted and its attachments be noted;
    (b) a contribution of £10 be made towards the running expenses of the Campaign “ Operation
  Romanian Villages” ; and
    (c) this Council expresses its serious concern at media reports of a government systematisation
  policy which would result in the destruction of 8,000 Romanian villages by the year 2000 and
  would wholeheartedly deplore any such systematisation policy.
  (5) SPORTING LINKS WITH SOUTH AFRICA
     Further to the receipt by the Panel at its meeting held on 29th September, 1989 (page 675 of the
  printed minutes), of letters regarding the Council’s resolutions of 5th July, 1989, relating to sports
  links with South Africa, the Panel received and noted a letter from the Private Secretary of the
  Minister for Sport, pointing out that the Government was fully committed to the Gleneagles
  Agreement and that the Minister for Sport had written to both the President of the Rugby
  Football Union and the Chairman of the Test and County Cricket Board restating the
  Government’s position and seeking to discourage cricketers and rugby players from going to
  South Africa.
      The Panel noted the contents of the letter now submitted.
  ( 6 ) LOCAL AUTHORITIES A G AINST APARTHEID
   The Panel received the minutes of a meeting of the National Steering Committee of Local
  Authorities Against Apartheid held on 22nd September, 1989, and, arising therefrom—
    Resolved: That authority be given for (a) the flag of the South West Africa People’s
  Organisation to be flown on the Town Hall on the days in November when the first free elections
  are to be held in Namibia; and
     (b) the Chair of this Panel and the International Officer, or their nominees, to attend a meeting
  with representatives of other Local Authorities, to be held at a time and place to be arranged, to
  discuss the relationship between the National Steering Committee of Local Authorities Against
  Apartheid, the Local Authority Resource Unit on Apartheid and the Anti-Apartheid
  Movement.
  (7) BRITISH-SOVIET TWINS TOWNS CONFERENCE
    The Principal International Officer submitted a report on the financial outcome of the
  British-Soviet Twin Towns Conference held in Sheffield from 14th-16th July, 1989. The report
  indicated that a net loss had been incurred of expenditure over income and that it had been
  agreed at a subsequent meeting of representatives of the Local Authorities and Twinning
  Associations concerned, that each of the Local Authorities represented at the Conference, with
  the exception of Sheffield City Council as host authority, should be asked to contribute £100
  towards covering the deficit.
      Resolved: That the report now submitted be approved.
