          ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                   715

    safety of sports grounds activities and would be attended by certain officers within the City
    Council and (b) a similar seminar was likely to be held in February 1994 and he would report back
    on its relevance to members of this Sub-Committee.
      The Sub-Committee noted this information.
★    (4) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    Visits to Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report stating that (a) it had been
    the practice of the Licensing Sub-Committee to nominate its members (two at any one time) to
    visit the two football clubs in the City on a match day and (b) following substantial upgrading
    during the 1993 closed football season, the Hillsborough Stadium was now a fully seated football
    stadium and members of the Licensing Sub-Committee might wish to consider visiting the
    stadium to inspect the completed work they had previously approved.
      Resolved: That the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to arrange for
    members of this Sub-Committee to visit (i) Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday Football
    Clubs to inspect the stadia on match days during the current football season when he receives a
    request so to do and (ii) the Hillsborough Stadium to inspect the upgrading works now reported
    and that attendance on the visits be regarded as an approved duty for the purposes of the
    payment of appropriate allowances under the Members’ Allowances Scheme.
    Sheffield United Football Club—Additional female toilet block
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
    submitted by Sheffield United Football Club to site an additional female toilet block within the
    South Stand Concourse of the Bramall Lane Stadium.
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported to site an additional female toilet block
    within the South Stand Concourse at the Bramall Lane Stadium.
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club—Relocation o f Ladbrokes Betting Kiosk
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken to
    authorise the relocation of the Ladbrokes Betting Kiosk serving the Spion Kop Stand at the
    Hillsborough Sports Stadium, following advice received from the Council’s Safety of Sports
    Grounds Advisory Group that during the 1992/93 Season, some problems had been reported of
    crowd congestion around the betting kiosk which was caused by the geography of its location.
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported to relocate the Ladbrokes Betting Kiosk
    serving the Spion Kop Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Stadium.
    Don Valley Sports Stadium—Pop Concert
      Pursuant to the decision of this Sub-Committee of 18th May, 1993 (page 220 of the printed
    minutes), the City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on the outcome of a
    pop concert held at the Don Valley Stadium on 6th June, 1993. The report stated that (a) the
    event had attracted approximately 38,000 spectators, with no reported breaches of the licence
    conditions, (b) in general the car parking provision and traffic management scheme worked well
    but following the event, complaints were made to the Acting Director, Recreation and Amenities
    Department, about the use of Mather Road Recreation Ground as a car park and (c) a
    preliminary licence fee of £10,000 was set but final calculations indicated the cost to be £10,303
    and the licensees had been asked to forward the outstanding amount.
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration stated that following the pop concert, two
    meetings of the Sports Grounds Advisory Group had been held to review the event, one of which
    was attended by the Stadium Managers and Promoters and the Advisory Group was to prepare a
    guidance document to aid the Group, Stadium Management and Promoters should similar events
    take place in future at the Stadium.
      Resolved: That (i) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
      (ii) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to (A) pursue as a matter of
    urgency, the question of car parking in respect of future events with the Acting Director,
716       ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Recreation and Amenities Department and report back to the appropriate Programme
    Committees and (B) submit any applications which are received in future to hold similar events at
    the Don Valley Stadium to this Sub-Committee for determination.

    ( n o t e : Councillor Wigfield left the meeting following consideration of KiKi’s, Charter Square,
    Councillor Harthman left the meeting following consideration of The Palais, London Road and
    Councillors Mrs. Barton and Mrs. Walton left the meeting following consideration of the
    relocation of Ladbrokes Betting Kiosk at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.)


      Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 29th October, 1993. Present— Councillors Mrs.
    Midgley (Chair), Mrs. Fleming, Harthman, Mrs. Leek, Miss Mitchell, Ms. A. G. Smith, Mrs. E.
    Smith and Webster.

    ( 1 ) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
      Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
    place on the following item of business relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing on
    the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
    were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs
    7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local
    Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to the financial or business affairs of
    other persons and legal matters and advice, respectively.

★   (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
      With reference to the decision of this Sub-Committee of 15th October, 1993, the City Solicitor
    and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of a private hire operator (Case No.
    59/93) consideration of which was deferred at that meeting to enable the applicants to attend
    before the Sub-Committee. The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally on
    detailed checks which had been made of the Operator’s records and he stated that these were
    found to be in breach of the Private Hire Operators Licence Conditions and in these
    circumstances he recommended that the Sub-Committee should revoke the licence.

      The three partners in the Private Hire Operator’s business addressed the Sub-Committee on
    the issues raised by the City Solicitor and Head of Administration.

     Resolved: That, in the circumstances now reported by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration, the Private Hire Operator’s Licence in respect of Case No. 59/93 be revoked.

      At this point in the proceedings, the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.

★   (3) TAXI AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
    Enforcement
      The Sub-Committee received and noted a report submitted by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration which referred to the decision of this Sub-Committee of 11th December, 1992
    (page 915 of the printed minutes) to approve the terms of reference for the review of enforcement
    activities relating to licensing legislation and stated that following initial work on enforcement
    priorities, it had been found that the highest priority areas were those relating to unlicensed
    hackney carriage and private hire drivers, hackney carriage and private hire vehicles, private hire
    operators and vehicle safety standards and plans were currently being made to deal with all those
    areas of enforcement.

    Identification o f Private Hire Vehicles
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on a request from the
    Sheffield Confederation of Private Hire Companies that private hire vehicles should be made
    more readily identifiable. The report (a) outlined the legal position relating to the signs, etc.,
    which may be displayed on or from private hire vehicles, (b) detailed the reasons for improving
    vehicle identification, (c) listed the options available for the improvement of vehicle identification
    and (d) detailed the proposals received from the Sheffield Confederation of Private Hire
    Companies together with a letter from the Sheffield and District Association for the Disabled
    which requested that permission be granted for private hire vehicles to enter into traffic restricted
    areas of the City when they were collecting disabled passengers.
