         MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                              943

                                     Special Meeting held 8th December, 1989

Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore (Chair), Baker, Butler, Chadwick, George, Moore, Mrs. Nelson
and Mrs. E. Smith.

★C le a n in g of Buildings—Approval of Specifications
  In pursuance of the decision of the Policy Committee at its meeting held on 24th October, 1989
(page 781 of the printed minutes) to give this Committee delegated powers to approve the
specifications for contracts for the cleaning of buildings within its purview, the Director of Cleansing
Services submitted a report on the specifications and draft contracts which were being prepared and
the recommended contract sizes, in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Act,
1988 for the competitive tendering process in respect of the cleaning of such buildings.
resolved   : That (a) so far as they fall within this Committee’s jurisdiction, the specifications
outlined in the report now submitted for the cleaning of buildings be adopted as formal documents
of the City Council and be placed on deposit for public inspection with effect from 18th December,
1989; and
  (b)    authority be given for the Head of Administration and Legal Department to make minor
modifications and adjustments at the assessment stage to the draft contract now submitted, to clarify
ambiguities or points of difficulty.


                                        Meeting held 11th December, 1989

Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore (Chair), Butler, Crowder, George, Moore, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs.
Nelson, Pye, Mrs. E. Smith and Mrs. Walton.

1 International and Anti-Apartheid Panel
resolved  : That the following minutes be approved—

    Meeting of the International and Anti-Apartheid Panel held 24th November, 1989. Present—
   Councillors Lamb (Deputy Chair), Chadwick and Crowder; Mr. K. Maddock.
   ( 1 ) LORD   m a y o r ’s   MOZAM BIQUE APPEAL
    The Panel received and noted a report of the Principal International Officer on the proceedings
  at a meeting held on Monday, 23rd October, 1989, on the planning of activities for the Lord
  Mayor’s Mozambique Appeal which was launched on 27th September, 1989.
  (2) ESTELI, NICARAGUA
    Further to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 29th October, 1989 (page 675
  of the printed minutes), to approve a programme of works for the Sheffield-Esteli Twinning Link
  for the period 1989-1991, the Principal International Officer submitted a report on a proposal to
  send a container of general, medical and educational necessities to Esteli, Nicaragua, for use by
  the community at nearby Puertas Azules.
     Resolved: That the Principal International Officer be authorised—
    (a) to launch an urgent appeal for material aid for Puertas Azules asking for donations by 15th
  December, 1989, of the items listed in the report now submitted or money to purchase them;
     (b) to book up to four cubic metres of space in a twin-town container and arrange for the
  transportation of the materials collected from Sheffield to Rainham, Essex; and
     (c) to organise a similar appeal in the first half of the year 1990.
   (3) BRITISH-SOVIET TWIN TOWNS CONFERENCE
      The Panel received and noted a report of the Principal International Officer on the proceedings
   at a meeting held in the Town Hall on 12th October, 1989 and attended by representatives of the
   British authorities concerned on the British-Soviet “Twin-Towns” Conference held in Sheffield
   in July, 1989.
   (4) BRITISH-SOVIET TRADING LINK
     The Principal International Officer submitted a report on the proceedings at a meeting held in
   the Town Hall on 17th October, 1989, and attended by the Chair of the Panel (Councillor Pye),
944     MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Officers of the International Unit, representatives of the Sheffield Chamber of Commerce and
    the Head of the Department of Russian and Slavonic Studies at Sheffield University, to consider
    a proposed study into the development of trading links with the Soviet Union.
      The Panel expressed their approval of the proposal agreed at the meeting for the Chamber of
    Commerce to fund, with the aid of a grant under the Export Market Research Scheme, a
    one-man study into trading opportunities with the Donbas Area of the Ukraine.
    (5) BOCHUM , WEST GERM A NY— CONFERENCE
      With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 13th July, 1989 (page
    358 of the printed minutes) to approve proposals for the reception of a civic/business delegation
    from Bochum, West Germany, in early 1990, the Principal International Officer submitted a
    report on proposals for the holding in Sheffield in March, 1990 of a joint Sheffield-Bochum
    Conference to be attended by delegates from Bochum, the North Rhine-Westphalia region and
    the Bochum Chamber of Commerce.
      The report indicated that, in addition to the contribution of £5,000.00 already agreed by the
    Panel towards the costs of the programme for the delegation and the contributions of similar
    amounts by both the Employment Programme Committee and the Sheffield Partnership Board,
    applications had been submitted for additional funding from the European Community and
    further reports giving full financial details of the proposals would be submitted in due course.
      Resolved: That approval be given to the proposals contained in the report now submitted for
    the reception of a civic/business delegation from Bochum from 20th-25th March, 1990, and the
    holding in Sheffield of a Sheffield/Bochum Conference with ancillary activities during that period.
    ( 6 ) PITTSBURG H, PENNSYLVANIA
       The Principal International Officer submitted a report reviewing the link between Sheffield and
    its Sister-City of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
       Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted setting out the history and present
    situation of the Sister-City link with Pittsburgh be noted; and
       (b)   approval be given to the proposals contained in the report that (i) any development of the
    link be restricted to specialist areas in which both Cities have a strong interest and (ii) the
    International Unit continue to exercise a co-ordinating and informatory role for the link as well as
    being free to develop appropriate contacts within its own areas of responsibility.
    (7) TELEPHO NE CALLS
      The Principal International Officer submitted a report on proposed arrangements for covering
    business telephone calls made from the homes of Officers of the International Unit.
      Resolved: That the City Council reimburse the Officers of the International Unit with the cost
    of future telephone calls made from their homes in connection with the work of the Unit, as
    outlined in the report now submitted.
    ( 8 ) REQUESTS F O R FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
      Resolved: That a grant of £302.00 be made towards the cost of an educational project entitled
    “Southern Africa: Struggle and Resistance” organised by the Sheffield Anti-Apartheid
    Movement and the Workers’ Educational Association and the necessary associated publicity, as
    set out in the letter now submitted from the Sheffield Anti-Apartheid Movement.

2 General Purposes Panel
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General Purposes Panel,

the following minutes be approved—
      Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 27th November, 1989. Present— Councillors
    Butler (Chair), Hussain, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.
    Also in attendance: Councillor Cromar.
★     ( 1 ) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
      The Panel considered a number of items relating to the safety of sports grounds. The meeting
    was attended by representatives of the South Yorkshire Police, the South Yorkshire Fire
    Brigade, the Building Surveyor, the Director of Health and Consumer Services, Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Club, Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd., and the Consultant Engineers for the
    proprietors of the sports grounds concerned.
                      MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                              945

 and            Crowd Capacities at Sports Grounds
ider               The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on action taken to
                reduce the permitted crowd capacity of the North West Upper Terrace at the Hillsborough Sports
r 0f            Ground (Sheffield Wednesday) as a result of the viewing by Officers of the Administration and
, a             Legal Department, the Department of Land and Planning and the South Yorkshire Fire Service
                 of extracts from a Police video of the football match held there on 21st November, 1989. The
                report indicated that the crowd capacity figure for that area in the General Safety Certficate for
                the Ground of 2,300 had therefore been reduced to 1,500 with the approvel of the Chair of the
aSe             Panel but there remained some doubt as to the correct figure because of possible inaccuracies in
lon             the plans used for the calculations,
d a
um                Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration
,ncj            and Legal Department, in consultation with the Chair, in issuing an amendment to the Certificate
                for the Ground indicating a reduced capacity for the North West Upper Terrace of 1,500;
the               (b) in view of the possible inaccuracies now mentioned in the plans used for the calculations,
lar             and after hearing from Mr. J. Strange of Eastwood and Partners, Consultant Engineers, a further
r(j 5           reduction to 1,400 in the permitted crowd capacity of the North West Upper Terrace be
 ncj            implemented; and
                   (c)                          the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group be requested to issue appropriate gu
Tor         i   for use by the proprietors of sports grounds in the City in the preparation of crowd-capacity
he              plans.
,c*'                   In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act,
                (n o t e :
                1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, the Chair of the
ad              Committee (Councillor Butler) decided that the above item should be considered as a matter of
                urgency, as the matter had arisen after the despatch of the agenda and was of a serious nature.)
nt              Owlerton Sports Stadium
                    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a request from
                 Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd. for permission to reopen part of Owlerton Sports Stadium for dog
                 racing, the Stadium having been closed to the public following the decision made by the Panel at
as              its meeting held on 15th September, 1989 (page 672 of the printed minutes) to issue a Prohibition
                 Notice under Section 10 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, in respect of the Stadium.
                   The report indicated that the part of the Stadium proposed to be re-opened was that
,g              surrounding and including the Panorama Room Complex (the area marked “A ” on the plan
                 attached to the report) and that the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group had not
                 recommended the provision of an ambulance at the Stadium in view of the relatively small
                 numbers expected to attend the events.
■s
        |         Resolved: That, subject to the completion of all necessary works to the satisfaction of the Head
                of Administration and Legal Department, authority be given for the issue of (a) a General Safety
^               Certificate as indicated in the report now submitted and (b) an appropriately amended
j               Prohibition Notice in respect of the remainder of the stadium.
s               First A id and Medical Facilities
                   The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on proposals for
                complying with Recommendation 40 of Lord Justice Taylor’s interim report on the Hillsborough
                disaster, relating to the provision of first aid and medical facilities at sports grounds. The report
                enclosed two memoranda from the Director of Health and Consumer Services giving detailed
                recommendations for such provision.
’                  Resolved: That (a) the two memoranda of the Director of Health and Consumer Services
                attached to the report now submitted be noted;
                  (b) the memorandum of the Director of Health and Consumer Services dated 16th November
                be referred to the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group for their detailed consideration; and
                  (c) the proprietors of Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United) and Hillsborough Sports
                Ground (Sheffield Wednesday) be required to provide at their respective grounds the first aid
                equipment specified in the memorandum of the Director of Health and Consumer Services of
                26th October, 1989, as amended and fully detailed by the report.
946      MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United)
     The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on proposals submitted
  by the Consultant Engineers to the Sheffield United Football Club for the carrying out of works
  at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground consisting of alterations to boundary walls, the construction
  of a new storage compound for liquified petroleum gas, the provision of additional guard rails in
  the John Street stand and alterations to the staircases leading from the back of the Spion Kop
  terraces.
     The report indicated that the Club hoped to increase the crowd capacity of the Spion Kop
  terraces as a result of the latter alterations although no application for an amendment to the
  Safety Certificate had yet been received.
       Resolved: That (i) a further report be submitted when revised proposals are available;
    (ii) the proposals referred to in the report relating to the construction of a storage compound
  for liquified petroleum gas be approved subject to the agreement of the Director of Health and
  Consumer Services and the Chief Fire Officer;
    (iii) the proposal referred to in the report for the provision of additional guard rails in the John
  Street stand be approved;
    (iv) subject to compliance with the comments of the Building Surveyor and compliance with
  the comments of the Chief Fire Officer contained in his letter of 6th November, 1989,
  accompanying the report, the proposed alterations to the staircases leading from the back of the
  Spion Kop terrace as shown on the plans now exhibited be approved for completion by 23rd
  December, 1989; and
     (v) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to report back in due
  course on (A) the proposal of the Sheffield United Football Club Limited to increase the capacity
  of the Spion Kop terrace on the completion of the alterations to the exit routes; and (B) the fee to
  be charged to the Club for processing an application for the amendment of the General Safety
  Certificate for the Ground.
    (b)    the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing a schedule
  of works and measures considered to be necessary at Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield
  United) following the annual inspection of the Ground carried out in the Summer of 1989.
    Resolved: That the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to serve on
  the Sheffield United Football Club PLC a notice under General Safety Certificate Condition 41
  requiring the Club to complete by 23rd December, 1989, the works and measures contained in
  the Schedule of Requirements at Bramall Lane Sports Ground now submitted, with the
  exception of the following items which are to be the subject of further reports to this Panel when
  suitable schemes have been submitted on behalf of the Club and considered by the Advisory
  Group—
  Item No.           Works or Measures Required
  7(3)               The provision of a system of barriers and hand railing to the upper level of the
                     Bramall Lane Stand
  10                 Replacement of defective roof boards over turnstile 69 and making weather
                     proof
  10.1               The stablising of fencing between the main exit gate and turnstile 69 and the
                     provision of barriers as outlined in the Schedule
  13.0               The ramp access to the Kop
  13.1               The removal of debris and details of restriction of access to pylon adjoining the
                     ramp giving access to the Spion Kop
  13.2               Attention to the Spion Kop terracing as outlined in the Schedule
  14.1               Repairs to the perimeter fence in the forecourt area.
  Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday)
    (a)    the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal of the
  Engineering Consultants to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to reinstate the wheelchair
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                               947

ramp which existed between the North Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground and the Spion
Kop terrace, which ramp was removed after the Hillsborough disaster to improve access to the
pitch for ambulances. Attached to the report was a letter from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
Ambulance Service objecting to the proposal on the grounds that if the ramp were reinstated
there would again be restricted access for ambulances at that point. Mr. Mackrell on behalf of
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club indicated an intention to submit new proposals for the
installation of the disabled persons ramp in a different location.

  Resolved: That Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be requested to submit proposals for
consideration by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group at its meeting to be held on 6th
December, 1989.

  (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a letter from the
South Yorkshire County Fire Service on outstanding works required to be carried out at the
South Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground. A copy of the letter was attached to the report.

   Resolved: That the Head of Administration and Legal Department be (i) authorised to amend
Schedule 3 of the Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday) General Safety Certificate
to reduce the maximum capacity of the South Stand upper from 5,567 to 5,120 and of the South
Stand lower from 3,310 to 1,920;

  (ii) authorised to serve a notice upon Sheffield Wednesday Football Club under Additional
Condition 9 requiring (A) an inspection of the South Stand with particular reference to the
comments of the Fire Service in their letter of 24th October, 1989, (B) the submission by
Sheffield Wednesday Football d u b of schemes giving details of work proposed to deal with the
Fire Service comments and (C) Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to specify timescales for the
completion of the works; and
  (iii) requested to report back to this Panel on receipt of the required information.
The Council’s Final Submission to the Hillsborough Inquiry
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing the final
recommendations of the City Council to the Inquiry into the Hillsborough Sports Ground
Disaster.
  The Panel noted the final recommendations now submitted.
Safety o f Sports Grounds Forum
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on proposals for the
implementation of so much of the resolution of the Policy Committee of 26th September, 1989
(page 653 of the printed minutes) as relates to the establishment of a further group, in addition to
the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, to include representatives of the proprietors of
the various sports grounds and recognised supporters’ clubs, to be chaired by an elected member
of the City Council and whose function would be to make representations to the Advisory Group
and through it to the Council on matters of particular concern to the group.
  Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal contained in the report for the
establishment and operation of the Safety of Sports Grounds Forum;
  (b) the Forum be chaired by the Chair of this Panel, Councillor Butler; and
  (c) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to report back to this
Panel in the m atter when the various consultation processes for the Forum have been completed.

Survey o f Football Supporters
  The Panel received the results of a Survey of Football Supporters carried out by the
Communications Unit of the Publicity Department on behalf of the Football Supporters’
Association and requested the Communications Co-ordinator to report further on the survey at
their next montly meeting.

Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
  The Panel received and noted a report on the proceedings at a meeting of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Advisory Group held on 9th November, 1989.
948     MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

★   (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE FARES
    Revision o f Fares
      With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 30th October, 1989
    (page 810 of the printed minutes) to approve a revised table of hackney carriage fares to be
    implemented as from a date to be arranged, the Head of Administration and Legal Department
    reported on objections which had been received to the revised table of fares. The Panel received
    copies of the letters of objection and the objectors and the Secretary and Vice-Chairman of the
    Sheffield Taxi Trade Association attended the meeting to speak on the objections.
     Having considered the representations of the objectors and the Sheffield Taxi Trade
    Association, the P a n e l-
     Resolved: That the revised table of hackney carriage fares approved by this Panel at its
    meeting held on 13th October, 1989, be brought into operation as from midnight on the 27th/28th
    November, 1989.
    Annual Review
      The Panel deferred consideration of a proposal that hackney carriage fares be reivewed
    annually on a particular date.
★ (3) CINEMA EXHIBITIONS
  Confirmation o f Action
    Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration and
  Legal Department in consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in authorising the public
  exhibition in Category “Sheffield 12” of the film “My Left Foot” .
    Film Categories
       Resolved: That the request of the Senior Film Officer now submitted for permission to exhibit
    in Category “Sheffield 15” films bearing an “X ” Certificate of the former British Board of Film
    Censors, be granted.
    Cruelty to Animals
      The Senior Film Officer reported on a 15 minute film entitled “Le Sexe Enrage” which
    included a scene involving actual cruelty to an animal, the public exhibition of which would
    contravene Section 1 of the Cinematograph Films (Animals) Act, 1937.
       The Panel expressed its support of the Senior Film Officer’s declared refusal to exhibit any
    films the production of which involved actual cruelty to animals.
★ (4) GAMING ACT 1958— AMUSEMENTS W ITH PRIZES
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on the following
  applications for permits for the provision of amusements with prizes—
    Applicant            Premises
    A. Surr              Nutwood Cafe, Nutwood Trading Estate, Wadsley Bridge
    B. Ford              Firth Park Bowling Centre, Sicey Avenue
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that, as the premises concerned
    were accesible to the public, they did not comply with the Council’s policy for the granting or
    renewal of applications for permits for the provision of amusements with prizes as set out in the
    resolution of the Panel of the 5th September, 1988 (page 521 of the printed minutes).
      Resolved: That the two applications now submitted be refused in accordance with paragraph
    7(b) of Schedule 9 to the Gaming Act, 1968 as it is the duty of the Council to refuse applications
    which do not comply with the above-mentioned resolution of 5th September, 1988.
★ (5) NURSES AGENCIES A CT, 1957— LICENCES
    Resolved: That the following applications for the renewal of licences under the provisions of
  the Nurses Agencies Act, 1957, now reported verbally by the Head of Administration and Legal
  Department, be granted—
    Applicant                                      Premises
    Allied Medicare Nursing Services Limited       209 Twentywell Lane
    Hestair Management Services                    C.M.A. House, Castle Square
    H. G. Mendelsson and R. Grainger               29 Stumperlowe View
