                      S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y   C O U N C I L

           MEETING OF THE POLICE AND COMMUNITY SAFETY PANEL (POLICY)

                                 held 8th July, 1991


           PRESENT;    Councillors Cromar (Chair), T. Bower, Chadwick,
                       Chaplin, Crowder, Kingham, Lawson, Mrs. Sargent,
                       Mrs. Walton, White and Whitfield.




0   (1)    MINUTES OF LAST MEETING
                     The Panel received the minutes of the last meeting held on
           13th May, 1991, and arising therefrom, it was
           RESOLVED: That the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be
           requested to (a) pursue this Panel’s request for information from
           the Black Justice Forum regarding its constitution and structure
           together with details of how grant aid money is to be spent prior to
           the making of a grant; and
                     (b) contact the South Yorkshire Police Authority with a
           view to arranging for members of this Panel and officers of the
           Community Safety Unit to be invited to the seminar and Working Party
           to be held on 26th July, 1991, to discuss the Home Office Circular
           42/90 on racial attacks and harassment.

    (2 )   URBAN PROGRAMME BIDS
                     The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a
           report containing details of the progress of Community Safety Urban
           Programme Schemes.             .                                    ^
           RESOLVED: That (a) the information contained in the report of the
           City Solicitor and Head of Administration now submitted be noted;
           and_
                     (b) an update on the Community Safety Urban Programme
           Schemes identified therein be submitted to a future meeting of this
           Panel.

0   (3)    TECHNICAL STANDARDS POLICY DOCUMENT
                     The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a
           report containing details of the development of a policy document on
           technical safety and security standards in residential dwellings and
           a proposal to produce the document for distribution and sale to
           interested organisations.
           RESOLVED: That (a) approval be given for £1,000 from the Community
           Safety Unit Budget 1991/92 to be used for the design and print work
           costs for the production of the Technical Standards Policy Document;
           and
                     (b)            any monies recouped from the sale of such document
           be paid into the Community Safety Unit Budget.

0   (4)    COMMUNITY SAFETY SURVEY
                     The Panel received a report of the City Solicitor and Head
           of Administration containing a summary of a community safety survey
           that had been undertaken in the Wybourn area of the City. The
           report indicated that the survey was a follow up to a similar
           exercise carried out during 1988 and looked again at residents views
           after certain improvements had taken place and whether the
           consultation process had been a success.
          Meeting of the Police and Community Safety Panel            Page 2
          (Policy) 8.7.91


          RESOLVED: That (a) the report of the City Solicitor and Head of
          Administration now submitted be noted and welcomed; and
                    (b) the full community safety survey report be referred
          for information to the Wybourn Estate Management Group, the South
          Yorkshire Police Force and Council Departments mentioned therein
          with a request that such departments submit reports to this Panel
          within six months containing their response to the survey report.

0   (5)   EDUCATION AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY PROJECT
                    The Panel received a report of the City Solicitor and
          Head of Administration containing information on the Education and
          Social Responsibility Project.
          RESOLVED: That this Panel (a) notes the information contained in the
          report of the City Solicitor and Head of Administration now
          submitted together with the achievements of the "C’mon Everybody"
          project; and
                    (b) supports the initiatives contained therein for
          continuing the work of the Project following the end of funding for
          the Project in August/September, 1991.

    (6)   DOMESTIC VIOLENCE CONFERENCE
                    The Sub-Committee received a report of the City Solicitor
          and Head   of Administration containing details of the proceedings of
          a Conference on Domestic Violence held in Sheffield on 2nd November,
          1990.
          RESOLVED: That (a) the information contained in the report of the
          City Solicitor and Head of Administration now submitted be noted;
                    (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be
          requested to give further consideration to the proposals to tackle
          domestic violence that arose out of the Conference and to report
          back to a future meeting of the Panel on ways in which the City
          Council can respond to such proposals; and
                    (c) the report be circulated to the South Yorkshire Policy
          Authority for information.

    (7)   CONTEMPT OF COURT - USE OF THE "SUBJUDICE RULE"
                    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a
          reportcontaining information on   the use of the "subjudice rule" and
          the principles of Contempt of Court.
          RESOLVED: That (a) the report of the City Solicitor and Head of
          Administration now submitted be noted; and
                    (b) a copy of the report be circulated to Members of the
          City Council for information.

    (8)   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                    The Chair of the Panel who was also a Member of the South
          Yorkshire Police Authority reported on a meeting of that Authority
          held on 21st June, 1991 and stated that:-
                     (a) the South Yorkshire Police had agreed an out of Court
          settlement amounting to £425,000 plus legal costs against the former
          Chief Constable in respect of claims arising from the industrial
          dispute at Orgreave on 18th June, 1984 and that the cost of
          settlement would be met by the insurers for the Authority; and
                     (b) the Authority would be seeking to recover from
          football clubs the full economic cost of policing football matches
          by 1996.
                    The Panel noted the information reported.
