           S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y   C O U N C I L




            MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
    (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                    held 15th September, 1989


PRESENT:   Councillors Butler (Chair), Ms. Fiore, Lamb, Moscrop,
           Mrs. Mulhearn, Mrs. Nelson and Mrs. E. Smith.




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
           With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its
meeting held on 8th September, 1989, the Acting Head of Administration
and Legal Department reported verbally on the outcome of a meeting
of the Advisory Group on the Safety of Sports Grounds held on 14th
September, 1989. Representatives of the South Yorkshire County
Fire Service, the Health and Consumer Services Department and the
Building Surveyor who were members of the Advisory Group and the
Managing Director and Secretary of Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd.
and the company's solicitor attended the meeting.
RESOLVED: That, in accordance with the recommendations made by
the Advisory Group on the Safety of Sports Grounds now reported
           (a) the Safety Certificate issued by the former South
Yorkshire County Council (as amended by Sheffield City Council)
to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in respect of the Hillsborough
Sports Ground be amended as follows:-
      (i) Schedule 3 shall be amended to provide for a reduction
in the permitted capacity of the Spion Kop terrace from 18,200
to 16,800 spectators;
      (ii) Condition 5 shall be amended to read as follows:-
     "Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act
the Holder shall not cause or permit the Sports Ground or any of
its installations to be altered (which term shall exclude minor
remedial works which do not in any way affect the safety of the
Sports Ground) in any manner whatsoever without the prior consent
of the Council.    In addition, no temporary structure shall be installed
without the prior written consent of the Council. The Holder shall
supply the Council with copies of such plans, specifications and
calculations as the Council may reasonably require to enable any
application for such consent to be considered and shall comply
with any conditions attached to that consent;"
            (b) further to the removal of radial fences and consequential
works at Sheffield United Football Club, Bramall Lane, in accordance
with the Notice of Consent issued on 25th August, 1989 and in view
of the fact that the newly installed barriers have not been tested
 no spectators shall be permitted in the area surrounding the new
 barriers until such time as the barriers have been tested and
 found to be satisfactory; and
           (c) a Prohibition Notice under Section 10 of the Safety
 of Sports Grounds Act 1975 be issued iri'respect of Owlerton Sports
 Stadium ltd. prohibiting the entry of spectators to the Stadium.
