       S H E F F I E L D    CITY      COUNC I L

          MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
  (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                   held 17th August, 1989


PRESENT:   Councillors Butler (Chair), Hussain, Lamb, Kfoscrop, Mrs.
           Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and
           White.



SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
           The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
submitted a report on the issue and amendment of General Safety
Certificates under the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act 1975.
           Chief Inspector Beal of the South Yorkshire Police
attended the meeting to give the Police observations on the
proposals contained in the report and Mr. K. T. Addy, a Director
of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Dr. Eastwood,
Consultant Engineer, attended the meeting to give the observations
of the Football Club.
           The Chair asked for a letter dated 16th August, 1989, from
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club requesting a written ruling
prior to the coning Saturday's match on the question of access to
and capacity in the North Stand at the Hillsborough Football Ground,
which letter had not been circulated to members of the Panel before
the day of the meeting, to be considered as an urgent item.
RESOLVED: That (a) in accordance with the provisions of Section
100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local
Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, the request in the
letter now submitted from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be
considered as a matter of urgency in view of the impending
commencement of the Football Season;
           (b) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Chief
Executive in (i) issuing to the Sheffield United Football Club an
interim Safety Certificate under the provisions of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 and (ii) amending the current Safety
Certificate issued to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, all in
accordance with the details contained in the report and copy
documents now submitted;
           (c) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
be authorised to issue a further Notice of Amendment in respect of
the Certificate issued to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (as
amended) as follows:-
           (i) Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further
amended to state that (A) the maximum capacity for the upper area of
the North West Terrace at the Hillsborough Football Ground shall be
2,300 and (B) the maximum total capacity permitted in the North
Stand shall be reduced to 9,700 and the maximum total capacity
permitted in the Hillsborough Football Ground shall be 43,542; and
          (ii) for the sake of clarity, additional Condition 10 of
the amended Certificate shall be amended to reflect the fact that
only the upper part of the terracing of the North West Terrace shall
be used;
Meeting of the General Purposes Panel                        Page 2
(Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme) 17.8.89



          (d) approval be given to the proposed arrangements now
reported for the upper part of the North West Terrace at the
Hillsborough Football Ground to be used on a contingency basis as
and when requested by the Police.
          (e) having heard the representations of Chief Inspector
Beale on behalf of South Yorkshire Police and the representations of
Me. Addy and Dr. Eastwood on behalf of the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club concerning the use of the North Stand (i) in view of
the need for segregation of football supporters and taking account
of the operational plans of the Police, the North Stand shall be
filled only through turnstiles located in Penistone Road; and (ii)
taking account of the undertaking by the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club to provide two additional turnstiles (currently
serving the Spion Kop Terrace) to serve the North Stand, the
capacity for the North Terrace shall be reduced to 9,700;
          (f) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
and representatives of the South Yorkshire Police and the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club be requested to monitor the operation of the
Hillsborough Football Ground particularly with regard to the
functioning of the North Terrace until the end of September, 1989,
and report back to this Panel on the outcome of such monitoring;
and
          (g) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
be requested to make arrangments for this Panel to visit and inspect
the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Football Grounds and the Owlerton
Sports Stadium in the near future.
