                                         City of Sheffield
                                Administration and Legal Department


                                  C O M M I T T E E            R E P O R T
                                           F R O N T       S H E E T




                       GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE                                               1
    REPORT TO:       . AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE)                                                  !


j   DATE OF COM!*ilT T E E :       13TH OCTOBER, 1989                                                             j


    SUBJECT:          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS                                                                    j

                                                                                                             -i


                    OFFICER:       MRS. F . WOODHEAD                                                              1
                                                                                                                  i


    L IS T OF 3ACKG?.0'J!,T PAPERS (As a p p li c a b le   a n d u n le s s   c o r ifid ie r .tia l/'s x e r n




i
!
!
!




                                      v•




                         * Full details of what constitutes confidential/
                            exempt information are available on request
REPORT OF THE ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
TO THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL________________________________


                          Safety of Sports Grounds



1.   Purpose of Report

     The Advisory Group is to meet on Wednesday, 11th October, 1989, to
     discuss the question of capacity at Sheffield United Football Club and
     the proposals submitted by Owlerton Stadium for use of a portion of the
     Stadium.

2.   Capacity at Sheffield United Football Club

     The current maximum number of spectators which can be admitted to the
     sports ground are contained in the Safety Certificate which was issued
     on the 11th August, 1989. A copy of Schedule 5 of the Safety
     Certificate is attached which sets out the relevant figures by
     reference to the various areas of the sports ground. The question of
     capacity has been given consideration by the Fire Service and the
     Building Surveyor, pursuant to the removal of the radial fences
     authorised by this Conmittee on the 25th August, 1989. The Fire
     Authority have submitted a letter dated the 26th September, 1989,
     concerning the capacity. A copy is attached for members information.
     Of particular note is their view in paragraph 1 that the capacity of
     the exits on the kop is 11,040. Members will note that this is
     substantially in excess of the capacity currently specified in the
     Safety Certificate. The matter is to be discussed at length at the
     Advisory Group meeting on Wednesday, 11th October. The Building
     Surveyor and the Fire Officer will attend the meeting of the General
     Purposes Panel to advise members further.

3.   Owlerton Stadium

     Proposals have been put forward for restricted useof the Stadium.
     These proposals incorporate the use of the area in    front of the
     Panarama Rocm only. Detailed plans have been submitted by
     Eastwood & Partners, Consulting Engineers, on behalf of the Stadium.
     These have been circulated amongst members of the Advisory Group. The
     members of the Advisory Group have also visited the Stadium and the
     proposals submitted are to be discussed at the Advisory Group meeting
     on Wednesday, 11th October, at 2.00 p.m. The plans and full details of
     the proposals will be available for members at the    meeting on the13th
     October.

4.   Conclusion

     Members are asked to note the contents of this report.




MS2/AA
    South-Stand (Seats)          7,948
    Bramall Lane
       Seats                     2,958
       Terrace                   5,660
    John Street
       Timber Section Seats      1,200
       Concrete Section Seats    1,490
       Bramall Lane End          1,340
       Kop End                   2,050
    Spion Kop
       Southern End              3,700
       Main Kop Area            10,850

                                37,196




i     a   -

; HB73WB/JS
SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY .                                                                .    .         ,        :                   ,


South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H. E. Wright, Q.F.S.M., M.I.Fire.E., F.B.I.M.                                                                            Com m and H.Q.,
             Chief Fire Officer                                          ......................................          Wellington Street,
                                                                                                                         Sheffield,
                                                                                                                         South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                                      . -              . Telephone: Sheffield
                                                                                                        x                STD (0742) 727202

Our Ref:    *p 19/2/4b /r g /d g                   Your Ref:                 ,       , ;.         .         '          r . Date:,    26.09.89 .

This matter is being dealt with by . . ?.   P.fV^skaw....................... : ........... .........................       Ext. No. . .   .270.................



  Mr D Bownes
  Licensing Section
  Legal and Administration Department
  Town hall
  SHEFFIELD
  SI 2HH


  Dear Sir

  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - BRAMALL LANE

  Please find listed below, the capacities of the spectator areas of the Bramall
  Lane football stadium which are based on means of escape available.

  1.       Spion Kop - (eight minute evacuationtime)

           The capacity of the exits is 11,040.

           The restricting factor is the design of the escape routes from the rear
           of the Kop down to the John Street/Shoreham Street corner.

           Final exit gates to John Street give 20 units of exit width which
           together with the other exits from the Kop are capable of exiting 14,880
           in eight minutes. The stairs from the rear of the Kop down to these
           gates however, only give 12 units and will only allow 5,760 to use them
           in eight minutes giving a total of 11,040 when added to the other exits
           from the Kop.

            The long walkway towards the Shoreham Street gate is of seven units in
            its early stages and widens out before reaching the final exit gate
            which is only slightly in excess of six units. Owing to the distance
            between the Kop and this gate however, it is considered reasonable that
            this route be counted as being of seven units.

   2.      John Street Stand

   (a)     Timber Section (Two and a half minutes                                       evacuation time)

            (i)           Seated area - capacity 1,200 seats

                         With six units available for egress at the end of a game, this
                         section could be evacuated in five minutes.

                          With 12 units available for forward evacuation in case of                                                                    an
                          emergency, this section could be evacuated in 2.5 minutes.


                               A lt co m m un icatio n s to b e ad d res se d to the Chief Fire Officer.
Standing   area - capacity specified in the Safety Certificate -
1,340.                                            . ...
                                                  *. *
With four units available, this area could be evacuated at    the
end of a game in 5.5 minutes

With the nine units available through' the pitch perimeter
fence, the 2,240 people (1,340 plus 900 from seated section)
could be evacuated on to the pitch in 4.15 minutes. If the
additional two unit exit, from the end of the terrace is brought
into use by provision of a steward and suitable signing, this
time could-be reduced to 3.3 minutes.

HB Whilst the exits can be considered as being capable of
exiting the stated occupancies as detailed above, due to the
convergence of exit routes from standing and seated areas
immediately before exit gates 'J' and 'K', there is actually a
reduction in exit route capacity.

It is recommended that the situation be monitored during games
to ascertain whether this causes any problems.         If so, a
solution will need to be found.

Concrete section (eight minute evacuation)

Seated area - capacity 1,490 seats.

With six units available for both normal and          emergency
evacuation, 1,490 people could be evacuated in 6.2 minutes.

Standing   area - capacity specified in the Safety Certificate -
2,050.

Of the 11 units available via gates 'G' and 'H' to John Street
it can be assumed that six of the units are already accounted
for by people exiting from the seated area, leaving five
available units to accommodate people from the terrace.

The worst situation is evacuation in case of an emergency
because in addition to the 2,050 on the terrace, there will be '
an additional 300 people Evacuating forward from the seated
area of the timber section making a total of 2,350.

With the five available units through gates 'G' and 'H',     2,350
people could be evacuated in 7.3 minutes.

HB   As with gates 'J' and "X" referred to in 2(a) (ii) above,
whilst the overall capacity of the exit routes appears to be
adequate, due to the convergence of -exit routes from the (
standing and seated areas immediately before exit gates 'G' and j
'H', again there is a reduction in exit route capacity which I
should be monitored and rectified should this be deemed j
necessary.  ’

In the above detail, gate 'G' has been calculated as being of
six units when in fact its width is 80mm less than the required
3.3 metres, this being considered acceptable.
                                                            '   : ;V '. :v
                                                                             •• V -..*                              ~'v; A :-

                 3.             Bramall Lane Stand and Terrace (eight minute evacuation time)
*                                   ■■                 ,»           .-
    .   ■-   .        .■    ;   :        :■■■•:

                           ■:• (a)                  Stand - cap acity of seats 2,958

                                                     Means of escape                     are   considered to be adequate for the stand
                                                     accommodation.

                                (b)                 Terrace - capacity specified in the Safety Certificate - 5,660.

                                                     ■ The exit route along gangway No.6 gives slightly less than 1.1m
                                                  >•1. on either side of the centre handrail, but even if this route
                                                        is to be counted as only two units, with other exit routes,
                                                        there are a total of 13 units available which are capable of
                                                        exiting 6,240.

                                                     If the four unit gate to the car park behind the south stand is
                                                     brought into use, as previously recommended, the capacity of
                                                     the exits from this terrace would be 8,160.

                                                     NB     The centrerail   to the stair from gangway No.6 down to
                                                             the Bramall Lane exit is bent over slightly, causing a
                                                             reduction in the width available on one side, therefore
    1                                                        it requires straightening.

                 4.             South Stand

                                Capacity of seats is 7,948.

                                The general means of escape available is considered to beacceptable for
                                the number of spectators specified in the Safety Certificate, subject to
                                satisfactory management     of the family      enclosureentrance/exit
                                arrangement.

                                For the same reason given for the recommendation of alternative means of
                                escape forward on to the pitch at the Hillsborough stadium, it is
                                recommended that similar provision be made from the south stand at this
                                stadium.   Gateways or openings at least 1.1m wide should be provided in
                                line with existing gangways.    Any gate fastenings should have the
                                approval of this department and all the exits should be indicated by
                                signs bearing the words "Emergency Exit" with white letters on a green
    .                           background and of a size to bedetermined on site.

                 5.             Other Matters

                                A further inspection of the ground is to take place to follow up the
                                matters referred to in your letter dated 19th September, 1989 and to
                                clear up any other outstanding items.

                                Your recent letter requesting our observations in respect of crowd
                                capacity following removal of the fence on the Kop, also dated 19th
                                September, 1989, is answered by Section 1 above.

                 The above matters should be brought to the attention of the other members of
                 Advisory Group for their observations but if there are any queries, please do
                 not hesitate to contact the officer concerned.

                 Yours faithfully




                 Chief Fire Officer
