              MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                           673

          Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 2nd October, 1989. P re se n t- Councillors
        Moscrop (Deputy Chair), Ms. Fiore, Hussain, Lamb, Mrs. Mulhearn, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E.
        Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.
    ★    ( 1 ) FILM C E R T IF IC A T IO N
          Resolved: That the requests now reported of the Senior Film Officer for permission to exhibit
        the following films under the conditions relating to Category “ 12” be granted—
        Film                                 Present Category
        “Rebel Without A Cause”              “PG ”
        “Stand and Deliver”                  “ 15”
        ‘‘Young Frankenstein’’               “ 15”
★       (2) T R A C K B E T T IN G L IC EN C E
          The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on an
        application for a track betting licence submitted by Mr. Graham Mackrell on behalf of Sheffield
        Wednesday Football Club pic, in respect of the Hillsborough Stadium. Mr. Mackrell attended the
        meeting with his Solicitor to support the application. The Acting Head of Administration and
        Legal Department reported that he had received no objections to the application.
           Resolved: That the application now submitted be granted.
★       (3) SA F E T Y O F SPORTS G R O U N D S
           The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a number of
        issues relating to the safety of sports grounds which required members’ attention. The report
        enclosed minutes of the meetings of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group held on 24th
        August and 14th September, 1989 and a letter from the Engineering Consultants for the Sheffield
        United Football Club Limited indicating that barriers on the Spion Kop and Bramall Lane
        terraces at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground had now been tested and proved to be satisfactory.
        The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department also reported verbally on a proposal
        of Sheffield United Football Club Limited to permit Sheffield Eagles Rugby Club to hold matches
        at Bramall Lane Sports Ground, stating that the Football Club had given an undertaking that no
        alcohol would be on sale in the Ground when it was open for rugby matches. He added that there
        was also a possibility of rugby being proposed at the Hillsborough Sports Ground although the
        existing safety certificates for the ground did not provide for the holding of rugby matches.
           Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
          (b) no objection be raised for the holding of rugby matches at the Bramall Lane Sports
        Ground;
         (c) the question of the possible use of the Hillsborough Sports Ground for rugby football
        matches be referred for consideration by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group;
          (d) if necessary, the safety certificate issued in respect of the Hillsborough Sports Ground be
        amended to permit the playing of rugby; and
          (e) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to make
        arrangements for the Panel to visit and inspect the Don Valley Athletics Stadium, now under
        construction, on Thursday, 26th October, 1989, at 10.30 a.m.
★ (4) AM U SE M E N T S W IT H P R IZ E S
    The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application
  for the grant of permits for amusements with prizes under the Lotteries and Amusements Act,
  1976 and the Gaming Act, 1968, in respect of premises at the Old Palace Cinema, Manchester
  Road, Stocksbridge.
           Resolved: That the applications now submitted be granted.
★       (5) T H E A T R E LIC EN SIN G
          The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on an
        application for the grant of a provisional theatre licence in respect of the Lyceum Development,
        Tudor Way, Sheffield.
          Resolved: That (a) approval in principle be given to the proposed granting of a theatre licence
        in respect of the Lyceum Development, Tudor Way, on the satisfactory completion of the
        building works: and
674       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

       (b) should a theatre licence be granted, it is not the Council's intention to impose a condition
    precluding the sale of intoxicants, subject to the Council’s approval of the areas where
    intoxicating liquor may be sold and/or consumed in the premises.
    ( 6 ) EX C L U SIO N O F T H E P U B L IC A N D PRESS
       Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting during the consideration of
    the remaining items of business on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
    transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
    information as described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act,
    1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, relating to the
    financial or business affairs of other persons and legal matters and advice.
★    (7) H A C K N E Y C A R R IA G E A N D P R IV A T E H IR E L IC EN SIN G
      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported on five individual cases
    relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing. The applicants in cases 43/89, 45/89, 46/89
    and 49/89 attended the meeting and the applicant in case 46/89 was accompanied by his Solicitor.

      Resolved: That (a) the applicants in cases 43/89, 46/89, 48/89 and 49/89 be given strong
    warnings as to their future conduct;

       (b) the applications now submitted for the issue or renewal of joint hackney carriage and
    private hire drivers’ licences be granted (i) for a period of six months in cases 43/89 and 49/89 and
    (ii) for a period of nine months in case 45/89;

      (c) the applications now submitted for the renewal of a joint hackney carriage and private hire
    drivers’ licence and a private hire vehicle licence in case 46/89 be granted for a period of six
    months; and

      (d) the application now submitted for the issue of a joint hackney carriage and private hire
    drivers’ licence in case 48/89 be deferred to enable the applicant to attend before the Panel.
    Application fo r Permission to Install Television Set
      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on an
    application for permission to install a television set in a licensed hackney carriage. The applicant
    attended the meeting to support his application.
       Resolved: That the application now submitted be not granted.
    ( n o t e : Consideration of an application for the grant of a cinema licence in respect of
    Woodthorpe Public House, Mansfield Road, was deferred at the request of the applicant to the
    next meeting of the Panel.)

3 International and Anti-Apartheid Panel
resolved      :   That the following minutes be approved—
     Meeting of the International and Anti-Apartheid Panel held 29th September, 1989. Present—
    Councillors Pye (Chair), Mrs. Askham, Chadwick, Crowder, Ms. Fiore, Godber and Hussain;
    Mr. P. Blomfield and Mrs. F. Deria.
    ( 1 ) M IN U T ES O F L A ST M E E TIN G
      The Panel received and noted the minutes of the meeting held on 13th July, 1989.
    (2) S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E C H IN A SER V IC ES C E N T R E
      Resolved: That (a) the Chair of this Panel, Councillor Pye, be appointed as the Panel’s
    representative to serve on the South Yorkshire China Services Centre Steering Group; and
      (b) attendance at meetings of the Steering Group be recognised as an approved duty for the
    purpose of the payment of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act,
    1972.
    (3) E S T E L I, N IC A R A G U A
      The Panel received a report of the Principal International Officer on the civic delegation to
    Esteli, Nicaragua in July, 1989, which was attended by the Leader of the City Council (Councillor
    Betts), Councillor Ms. Fiore and Mr. S. Howell (International Officer).
