          MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

                                  Meeting held 13th November, 1989

Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore (Chair), Baker, Butler, Crowder, Godber, Griffiths, Hussain,
Lamb, Moore, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Pye, Mrs. Walton and White.

1 General Purposes Panel
resolved  : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General Purposes Panel,
the following minutes, which incorporate the alteration now made at this meeting, be approved—
     Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 13th October, 1989. Present— Councillors
    Moscrop (Deputy Chair), Mrs. Mulhearn and Mrs. E. Smith.
★    ( 1 ) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    Owlerton Sports Stadium
      With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 15th September, 1989,
    to issue a notice prohibiting the entry of spectators to the Owlerton Sports Stadium, the Acting
    Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal of the
    proprietors for restricted use of the Stadium. He also reported verbally on the recommendations
    made at a meeting of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group held on 11th October, 1989,
    regarding the proposals. The Managing Director and Secretary of Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd.,
    the Engineering Consultant to the Company and a representative of the South Yorkshire County
    Fire Service attended the meeting to speak on the proposal.
      Resolved: That approval in principle be given to the proposal now reported for the use, during
    daylight hours, of the area in front of the Panorama Room at Owlerton Stadium for spectators
    while the Stadium is in use for greyhound racing events, subject to —
      (a) the completion to the satisfaction of the Building Surveyor of all outstanding necessary
    works;
      (b) the crowd capacity of the Stadium not exceeding the figure to be determined by the
    Building Surveyor, in the region of 1,500 persons;
      (c) no use being made of the Panorama Room while greyhound racing is in progress; and
      (d) no admission of spectators to the Stadium outside daylight hours.
    Bramall Lane Sports G round
       The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing a
    letter from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service which drew the attention of the Council to
    the fact that, while the maximum crowd capacity for the Spion Kop terrace at Bramall Lane
    Sports Ground was specified in the relevant Safety Certificate as 14,550, according to calculations
    based on the requirements of the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, the capacity of
    the exits serving the area was 11,040. The meeting was attended by the Engineering Consultant
    for Sheffield United Football Club L td ., and a representative of the South Yorkshire County Fire
    Service and the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on the
    recommendations made in the matter by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group at its
    meeting held on 11th October, 1989.
      The Engineering Consultant stated that the Company wished to ask that the permitted number
    of spectators on the Spion Kop terrace at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground remain at 14,550 for at
    least three months to enable the Company to improve the access to accommodate that level, in
    view of the fact that walkways were somewhat wider than the figures used in the calculation, gates
    onto the pitch were permanently open and current Police practice was to hold certain sections of
    the crowd until others had left the ground.
      Resolved: That, in the circumstances now reported, the crowd capacity on the Spion Kop
    terrace at Bramall Lane Sports Ground be restricted to 11,040.


      Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 30th October, 1989. Present — Councillors Butler
    (Chair), Ms. Fiore, Hussain, Lamb, Mrs. Mulhearn, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton
    and White. Also in attendance— Councillor Whitfield.
          MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

   (1 )   EXCLUSION O F THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
     Resolved: That items 3, 10 and 11 on the agenda be considered at the commencement of the
   meeting and that the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place
   on such items on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the
   public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as
   described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as
   amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, relating to the financial
   and business affairs of other persons and legal matters and advice.
+ ( 2 ) HACKNEY CARRIA GE AND PRIVATE H IR E LICENSING__________________________________________________




i t (3)   CINEMA LICENCE




-A -M     STREET TRADING




        At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were readmitted to the meeting.
   (5) CITY HALL
     The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on structural reports
   submitted by Engineering Consultants and the Building Surveyor following inspections of the
   roof, ceilings and suspended fittings at the City Hall, made in accordance with the conditions
   attached to the theatre licence issued in respect of the building.
     A representative of the Building Surveyor and the licensee attended the meeting and the Panel
   received a copy of a Certificate of structural adequacy issued by the Engineering Consultants in
   respect of the ceiling of the Oval Hall which indicated that the Hall could be used without
   restriction provided that certain works were carried out within a period of three months.
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
     (b) the licensee of the City Hall be requested to comply with all the requirements detailed in
   the reports now submitted of the Building Surveyor and the Engineering Consultants;
     (c) the Building Surveyor and the Engineering Consultants be requested to make a joint
   inspection of the building within the time limit specified in the provisional ceiling certificate now
   submitted with a view to the issue of a final ceiling certificate;
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      (d) the Director of Land and Planning be requested to monitor the structural safety of the City
    Hall roof with a view to reporting back to this Panel on the safety of the structure in not less than
    three months time or at such intervals and periods as he deems appropriate to ensure the
    continuous safety of members of the public using the Hall; and
       (e) the licensee be requested to submit within one month to the Chief Licensing Officer, a
    detailed report on the steps he has taken and will take to comply with the requirements detailed
    in the reports now submitted of the Building Surveyor and the Engineering Consultants.
★    ( 6 ) FILM CERTIFICATION
    Confirmation o f A ction Taken
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration and
    Legal Department in consultation with the Chair and Deputy Chair of this Panel, respectively, in
    authorising the public exhibition in Category “Sheffield 12” of the films “K9” and “Eric the
    Viking” .
    Future Exhibitions
       The Senior Film Officer submitted a report on proposals for the exhibition of uncertificated
    films and certificated films in revised local categories.
      Resolved: That (a) the requests contained in the report of the Senior Film Officer now
    submitted for permission to exhibit the following uncertificated films in the categories indicated
    be granted—
    Film                                                  Category
    The Long Weekend                                      “Sheffield 18”
    Interior Decorator from Hell                          “Sheffield 18”
    Desire: Sexuality in Germany 1910-1945                “Sheffield 15”
    Peking Opera Blues                                    “Sheffield 18”
    Out of Our Time                                       “Sheffield 15”
    Family Turns                                          “Sheffield 15”
    Poetry for an Englishman                              “Sheffield 18”
    Best Wishes                                           “Sheffield 18”
    Elevation                                             “Sheffield 18”
    Beyond Gravity                                        “Sheffield 18”
    Heather                                               “Sheffield 18”
    Fellow Traveller                                      “Sheffield 15”
    Love Me or Leave Me                                   “Sheffield 15”
    and (b) the requests contained in the report of the Senior Film Officer now submitted for
    permission to exhibit the following certificated films in the revised categories indicated be
    granted—
    Film                          Existing Category       Proposed Category
    Night of the Iguana           “X ”                    “Sheffield 15”
    Cat on a Hot Tin Roof         “X ”                    “Sheffield 15”
    The Big Combo                 “A ”                    “Sheffield 12”
    Underworld U.S.A.             “A ”                    “Sheffield 12”
    ( n o t e : In the event of any of the above films being certificated or reclassified by the British Board
    of Film Classification before they are exhibited, such films will be exhibited under the conditions
    appropriate to such certification or reclassification.)
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

★     (7) REVIEW OF HACKNEY CARRIA GE FARES
       The City Treasurer submitted a report on a review of hackney carriage fares carried out by his
    Department in response to an application from the Sheffield Taxi Trade Association for an
    increase in such fares. A representative of the Sheffield Taxi Trade Association attended the
    meeting to support the application.
      Resolved: That the following table of hackney carriage fares be approved and the Head of
    Administration and Legal Department be authorised to take all necessary steps to implement the
    revised fares as from a date to be arranged and in accordance with statutory requirements—
    Where the distance does not exceed 250 yards—80p
    Where the distance exceeds 250 yards—

         for the first 250 yards—80p
         for each subsequent 250 yards or part thereof—lOp
    Extras—abolish extra charges for excess passengers, packages and perambulators, etc.

             —increase the midnight to 6.00 a.m. extra charge from 20p to 40p.
             —retain the Bank Holiday extra charge of 50p.
             —retain the existing waiting time charge.

    ( 8 ) TOWN HA LL AND EXTENSION — SMOKING POLICY
      The Director of Land and Planning submitted a report on proposals for the implementation in
    the Town Hall and Town Hall Extension of the Council’s policy for the promotion of smoke-free
    public areas throughout premises under the Council’s control.

         Resolved: That (a) smoking be prohibited at all times in the following areas—

    Town Hall
    The Council Chamber and Ante Room
    Committee Rooms 1, 2, 3 and 4
    The Conference Room
    Reception Rooms A and B (except when in use for receptions and other functions)

    Town H all Extension
    The Rates Hall
    Second Floor Conference Rooms (Rooms 220, 221 and 222)
    First Floor Conference Rooms (Rooms 119,120 and 121); and

      (b) the Director of Land and Planning be authorised to draw the attention of all Committee
    Chairs and other users of the accommodation concerned to the prohibition of smoking in the
    above areas.

^ (9 )    CERTIFICATE O F SUITABILITY
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application to
    renew the Certificate of Suitability issued in respect of the Sheffield City Polytechnic Students’
    Union Building, Totley Hall Lane, Sheffield. The report indicated that the Certificate was
    necessary to enable the Union to apply to the Licensing Justices for a Special Hours Certificate
    and that the Director of Health and Consumer Services was willing to withdraw an objection
    which he had raised to the application provided certain works were carried out by 18th
    November, 1989.

      Resolved: That (a) subject to the carrying out of the works now mentioned to the satisfaction
    of the Director of Health and Consumer Services, authority be given for the Head of
    Administration and Legal Department to issue an appropriate Certificate of Suitability; and

      (b) in the event of the necessary works not being completed by 7th November, 1989, the Head
    of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to issue a certificate for a period of one
    month with a view to reporting back on the matter to the next meeting of this Panel.
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

★    (10) STREET COLLECTION
      Resolved: That the following application for a street collection permit be granted—
    Applicant__________ Organisation____________________________Location_________ Date


    (11)    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    Visits to Sports Grounds
      Resolved: That (a) arrangements be made for members of the Panel and the Council’s
    representatives on the South Yorkshire Police Authority to visit the Hillsborough Sports
    Ground, Bramall Lane Sports Ground, Owlerton Stadium and Don Valley Stadium, on dates to
    be arranged by the Chair of this Panel; and
       (b) attendance on such visits be recognised as an approved duty for the purpose of the payment
    of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act, 1972.
    Safety o f Sports G rounds A dviso ry Group
     The Panel received copies of the minutes of meetings of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory
    Group held on 11th and 19th October, 1989 and, arising therefrom, the P a n e l-
      Resolved: That (a) arrangements be made for members of the Panel and the Council’s
    representatives on the South Yorkshire Police Authority to hold an informal meeting with
    representatives of the South Yorkshire Police to discuss matters relating to the Safety of Sports
    Grounds in Sheffield; and
      (b) attendance at such a meeting be recognised as an approved duty for the purpose of the
    payment of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act, 1972.
★   P roposed Alterations at Sports Grounds
      Resolved: That approval be given to the proposals now reported by the Head of
    Administration and Legal Department for (a) the replacement of timber fencing by steel
    handrailing and mesh at Tunnel Exit V to the Spion Kop terrace at the Hillsborough Sports
    Ground; and
      (b)   concrete and tarmacadam ramp and pavement repairs in various areas at Bramall Lane
    Sports Ground.
    Owlerton Stadium
       With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 15th September, 1989.
    (page 672 of the printed minutes) to issue a notice under Section 10 of the Safety of Sports
    Grounds Act, 1975 prohibiting the entry of spectators to the Owlerton Sports Stadium, the Head
    of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on the principle of the Council’s
    issuing, when appropriate, a general safety certificate or an amended prohibition order in respect
    of the Stadium.
       The Panel noted the information reported.
    ( 12) HOLLIS HOSPITAL CHARITY____________________________________________________________________________




2 International and Anti-Apartheid Panel
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes be approved—

      Meeting of the International and Anti-Apartheid Panel held 27th October, 1989. Present—
    Councillors Pye (Chair), Crowder, Ms. Fiore, Godber, Hussain and Lamb; Mr. K. Maddock.
    (1 )   INTERNATIONAL U N IT — W ORK PROGRAM M E REVIEW
      The Principal International Officer submitted a report reviewing the work programme of the
    International Unit in the Publicity Department and drawing attention to the Unit’s position as a
    central Council resource providing advice and support for the activities of other Council
    Departments.
      Resolved: That the report now submitted be approved and the attention of Chief Officers be
    drawn to this resource.
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

(2) TWINNING ACTIVITIES — LEGISLATION
  The Principal International Officer submitted a report on legislation affecting the participation
of Local Authorities in twinning activities.
  Resolved: That consideration of the report now submitted be deferred pending the receipt of
further information.
(3) CHINA SEMINAR
  The Panel confirmed the action taken by the Chief Publicity Officer, in consultation with the
Chair of the Panel, in authorising the Principal International Officer to attend a Seminar for
Local Authorities with Links in China, which was held in Swansea on 13th October, 1989, and
received and noted a report of the Principal International Officer on the proceedings at the
Seminar.
(4) OPERATION ROMANIAN VILLAGES
   Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 13th July, 1989 (page 359 of
the printed minutes), the Principal International Officer submitted a further report on
“ Operation Romanian Villages” , a campaign for the protection of Romanian villages from the
systematisation programme allegedly being undertaken in Romania.
  Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted and its attachments be noted;
  (b) a contribution of £10 be made towards the running expenses of the Campaign “ Operation
Romanian Villages” ; and
  (c) this Council expresses its serious concern at media reports of a government systematisation
policy which would result in the destruction of 8,000 Romanian villages by the year 2000 and
would wholeheartedly deplore any such systematisation policy.
(5) SPORTING LINKS WITH SOUTH AFRICA
   Further to the receipt by the Panel at its meeting held on 29th September, 1989 (page 675 of the
printed minutes), of letters regarding the Council’s resolutions of 5th July, 1989, relating to sports
links with South Africa, the Panel received and noted a letter from the Private Secretary of the
Minister for Sport, pointing out that the Government was fully committed to the Gleneagles
Agreement and that the Minister for Sport had written to both the President of the Rugby
Football Union and the Chairman of the Test and County Cricket Board restating the
Government’s position and seeking to discourage cricketers and rugby players from going to
South Africa.
  The Panel noted the contents of the letter now submitted.
( 6 ) LOCAL AUTHORITIES AGAINST APARTHEID
 The Panel received the minutes of a meeting of the N ational Steering Committee of Local
Authorities Against Apartheid held on 22nd September, 1989, and, arising therefrom—
  Resolved: That authority be given for (a) the flag of the South West Africa People’s
Organisation to be flown on the Town Hall on the days in November when the first free elections
are to be held in Namibia; and
   (b) the Chair of this Panel and the International Officer, or their nominees, to attend a meeting
with representatives of other Local Authorities, to be held at a time and place to be arranged, to
discuss the relationship between the N ational Steering Committee of Local Authorities Against
Apartheid, the Local Authority Resource Unit on Apartheid and the Anti-Apartheid
Movement.
(7) BRITISH-SOVIET TWINS TOWNS CONFERENCE
  The Principal International Officer submitted a report on the financial outcome of the
British-Soviet Twin Towns Conference held in Sheffield from 14th-16th July, 1989. The report
indicated that a net loss had been incurred of expenditure over income and that it had been
agreed at a subsequent meeting of representatives of the Local Authorities and Twinning
Associations concerned, that each of the Local Authorities represented at the Conference, with
the exception of Sheffield City Council as host authority, should be asked to contribute £100
towards covering the deficit.
  Resolved: That the report now submitted be approved.
          MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

   (8 )   TOWN TWINNING GRANT
      The Panel considered one application for financial assistance.
     Resolved: That, subject to the receipt of satisfactory details of the proposed visit, authority be
   given for the making of a grant of £15 per person towards the cost to be incurred by not more than
   ten members of the Sheffield Co-ordinating Centre Against Employment who are Sheffield
   residents, in visiting Bochum, West Germany, from 27th May-3rd June, 1990.

3 Cleaning of Council Buildings
  The Committee noted the decision of the Policy Committee at its meeting held on 24th October,
1989 (page 781 of the printed minutes) authorising the delegation to this Committee, so far as it is
concerned, of powers to approve no later than 15th December, 1989, contract specifications for the
cleaning of Council buildings.

4 Administration and Legal Department
D e b t Recovery Section
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal for
overtime working by four officers, including one senior officer, in the Debt Recovery Section of the
Administration and Legal Department in order to clear an existing backlog of work. The report
indicated that the proposal was for the staff concerned to work five hours every Saturday, initially
for four weeks with an option to extend the period if necessary.
r e s o l v e d : That the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to implement the

proposal contained in the report now submitted.
Revenue Budget
 The Committee received and noted a report of the Head of Administration and Legal
Department on the monitoring of his Department’s revenue budget.

5 Publicity Department
  The Committee received and noted a report of the Chief Publicity Officer on the monitoring of
her Department’s revenue budget.

6 Positive Action for Women
  The Chief Publicity Officer submitted a report on issues raised in the report of the Chief
Executive’s Department to the Women’s Panel at its meeting held on 13th October, 1989 (page 774
of the printed minutes), a copy of which was enclosed with the Chief Publicity Officer’s report.
r e s o l v e d : That (a) the contents of the report of the Chief Publicity Officer on Positive Action for

Women be noted; and
 (b) the Director of Land and Planning be requested to report back to this Committee at its next
meeting on the steps being taken to improve the security of women employed in Council premises.

7 Town Hall and Annexes
Town H all Extension—A ir Conditioning System
  The Director of Land and Planning submitted a report referring to the approval by the
Committee at its meeting held on 3rd August, 1989 (page 360 of the printed minutes) of proposals
for the replacement of air conditioning plant in the Town Hall Extension, and indicating that,
because of unavoidable delays in preparatory work, it would not now be possible to adhere to the
original programme for carrying out the necessary replacement works in the late spring of 1990 and
the next opportunity which would occur from the point of view of favourable weather conditions
would be in the following Autumn.
  The Committee noted the information contained in the report now submitted.
Town H all—Fire A larm System
  The Director of Land and Planning submitted a report indicating that work on the replacement of
the fire alarm system in the Town Hall was now complete and outlining proposals for the Council to
enter into a contract with the suppliers of the equipment to cover planned maintenance and a 24
hour emergency call-out for servicing the system at an estimated cost of £3,000 plus VAT for the
period ending 31st March, 1990, when a further contract for long-term cover would be negotiated.
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

resolved : That the Director of Land and Planning be authorised to enter into a contract for
emergency call-out and maintenance in respect of the new fire alarm system in the Town Hall in
accordance with the proposals outlined in the report now submitted.
Revenue Budget
 The Committee received and noted a report of the Director of Land and Planning on the
monitoring of the revenue budget relating to the Town Hall and annexes.

8 Municipal Enterprises
Revenue Budget
  The Committee received reports of the General Manager, Markets, the Transport Manager and
the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer, respectively, on the monitoring of the revenue budgets
of the Markets Department, the Central Transport Service and the Central Supplies Organisation.
The City Treasurer drew attention to the reference in the report of the Transport Manager to the
fact that the recent manual workers’ pay award had been made at a rate some 3% above the rate
provided for in the current year’s revenue budget.
  The Committee noted the information now reported and requested the City Treasurer to discuss
with the Transport Manager ways in which the projected spending on the Transport Service could be
kept within the budget.
Letting o f M arket Stalls
  The Committee received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, on action taken
by him under delegated powers for the letting of stalls in the Market Place, Crystal Peaks Shopping
Centre, W aterthorpe, the Castle Market and the Sheaf Market.
M arkets—Christmas/New Year Arrangements
  The General Manager, Markets, submitted a report on proposed arrangements for the operation
of the Markets over the Christmas/New Year period, 1989/90.
r e s o l v e d : That (a) approval be given to the proposals contained in the report now submitted for
the operation of the Castle and Sheaf Markets, the Parkway Wholesale Market and the Market
Place, Crystal Peaks Shopping Centre, Waterthorpe over the Christmas/New Year period, 1989/90;
and
  (b) the General Manager, Markets, be authorised to decide on the arrangements for the
operation of the Moor and Setts Open Markets over the same period in the light of the results of the
ballot now being taken of traders’ wishes.
Selection o f Tenderers
resolved   : That tenders for the provision of the following supplies and services be invited from the
firms indicated in the report of the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer now submitted—
    M eat—8 firms
    Frozen Meals—8 firms
    B read—5 firms
    Sweets, Nuts, Crisps, Chocolate, etc.—8 firms
    Motor Vehicles—24 firms
    Typewriters and Typewriter Maintenance—8 firms

9 Administration of Justice and Miscellaneous Expenditure
  The Committee received a report of the City Treasurer on the monitoring of the revenue budget
relating to the administration of justice and miscellaneous expenditure.
resolved   :   That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
  (b)    the City Treasurer be requested (i) to continue to discuss with the Clerk to the Justices ways in
which the projected spending on the Magistrates’ Courts can be kept within the budget and (ii) to
investigate further the projected spending on pensions to former employees.

10 Exclusion of the Public and Press
resolved   : That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on
the remaining items of business on the grounds that, if the public and press were present during the
transaction of such business, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in
the paragraphs indicated below of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as amended—
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

Item              Paragraph         Reason
11 and 14         1                 Relating to particular employees.
12                7 and 9           Relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons
                                    and terms proposed for the disposal of property.
13                9                 Relating to terms proposed for the disposal of property.

11 Secretarial Assistant to the Leader of the City Council




12 Parkway Wholesale M arket—Rent Review




13 Land and Property




14 Central Supplies Organisation—Retirement




( n o t e : A report of the Director of Cleansing Services to the Cleansing Sub-Committee on the
subject of “Sheffield Clean City Panel and Clean City Initiatives” was withdrawn from
consideration.)
