   WA* i    i *«_/ V       INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS & PROMOTIONS PANEL
                                                                            \




DATS:
                           25 OCTOBER 1989


SUBJECT:
                           THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: PUBLICITY DEPARTMENT'S
                           RESPONSE


ORIGIN:
                           CHIEF PUBLICITY OFFICER


REFERENCE:
                       -


BACKGROUND INFORMATION:




        j      Full details of what constitutes Confidential/Exempt
        I              Information are available on request
                        THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                      PUBLICITY DEPARTMENT'S RESPONSE




IMMEDIATE RESPONSE: THE FIRST 36 HOURS

1.1   The disaster*occurred around 3.00 pm on Saturday 15th April 1989 and
      the first telephone calls from the media were received by the
      Principal Press Officer at home about 45 minutes later. He consulted
      the Leader and Chief Executive and put out an official press
      statement via the Press Association .just after 4.00. By 6.30 pm, the
      Chief Publicity Officer and Principal Press Officer had set up a base
      in the Town Hall, using the Lord Mayor's and Chief Publicity
      Officer's office (which are joined) and four telephones, 'whichwere
      in constant use until after midnight. Radioand television
      journalists were in pursuit of interviews, plans of the stadium and
      information on safety certificates.

1.2   During the evening it was agreed that the Lord Mayor, then Councillor
      Phyllis Smith, would set up an Appeal Fund the following day, in
      Sheffield Town Hall. Arrangements were made for representatives of
      Sheffield, Liverpool, Nottingham and Nottinghamshire to be in
      Sheffield at noon on the Sunday. Wreaths and floral arrangements
      were ordered through the Recreation Department and arrived on Sunday
      morning.

1.3   The Chief Publicity Officer's office became the focus for media
      enquiries, arrangements for the Appeal and for general enquiries not
      connected with the Police or Medico Legal Centre. This meant that
      their telephone lines could be kept free for relatives and other
      enquiries* as all other-queries were referred to Publicity.   The
      first donation to the Appeal, a beermug of cash collected by
      Nottingham Forest supporters, was,brought into the office on Sunday
      morning.

1.4. A press conference was called to cover the launch of the Appeal. A
     small civic party, without the media, then went to Hillsborough
     football ground to deliver wreaths during the afternoon and then to
     visit the injured in the Northern General and Hallamshire Hospitals.
     The Chief Publicity Officer and Principal Press Officer continued to
     run a limited service until well into the Sunday evening, in an
     effort to respond to the continuing flood of media enquiries. They
     also acted as clearing house for all kinds 'of information, offers of
     help in accommodating relatives etc and ensuring such information was
     passed to radio and television stations.


THE FIRST TWO WEEKS

2.1   On Monday 17th April a small.group of officers went to Liverpool to
      sort out the organisation of the Appeal Fund, as Liverpool F.C. were
      setting up another Fund and we wished to ensure there was no
      confusion. This was satisfactorily resolved and a Sheffield trustee,
      Norman Adsetts 0BE, was nominated.

      The Publicity Department subsequently dealt with all aspects of the
      Appeal from the Sheffield end, including a city-wide collection,
      co-ordination of events, distribution and collection of collecting

                                                        ... cont



                                                                            1
      receptacles (buckets and election boxes were pressed into service as
      well as over 1000 tins), and publicising the Appeal through posters,
      stickers and the media. About 15 members of staff were involved most
      of the time together with a number of volunteer helpers who presented
      themselves at the reception desk and offered to do anything
      necessary. A daily lunchtime meeting was instituted with four
      officers : the Chief Publicity Officer, the Principal Press Officer,
      a Press Officer and an International Officer, to enable us to keep
      track of what was happening. These four officers were fully
      committed on post-Hillsborough work for these two weeks.

2.2   The Press Office continued to answer enquiries from the media and
      also began to put out statements and releases of its own. In the
      first two weeks, the Press Team dealt with a tremendous volume of
      enquiries from newspapers, radio and television, not only in this
      country but also Europe, the'United States ana Australia, dealing
      with all aspects of the Council's involvement, as well as carrying
      out a large number of interviews themselves, both live and recorded,
      on the setting up and running of the Appeal fund.

2.3   A huge quantity of mail flooded in to the Appeal in general and the
      Lord Mayor's office in particular.    (We had arranged for the Lord
      Mayor's address to be published on Prestel since the day of the
      disaster).   This was opened, sorted and donations recorded. All the
      mail had to be read. Donations were paid in by City Treasury, whose
      casncounting machines were invaluable. Staff in City Treasury
      provided an extremely efficient and cheerful service in the face of
      tremendous pressure, and we are most grateful to them for their help.
                                    V .

2.4    A Book of Remembrance was acquired and opened.     With volunteer
       labour and Publicity Department staff, it was available for signing,
       all day in the- foyer of -the Town Hall, including Saturday 22nd and
       29th April. " Arrangements were made for celebrities, football teams-
       and various eminent visitors to sign the book and for this to be
       covered by the press. This helped to provide an antidote to the
      "scurrilous and distasteful stories then appearing in some sections of
       the media.

2.5   The Chief Publicity Officer and the Principal Press Officer attended
      a number of daily briefing meetings where the efforts of various
      different departments were reported on and co-ordinated. This
      assisted with the co-ordination of information and our ability to
      find the right spokesperson at the right time.

2.6   During this period the City was hosting a high level civic delegation
      from our twin town of Anshan, including Anshan's new Mayor. Although
      their programme had to be altered because of the disaster, it was not
      curtailed. The visitors from Anshan signed the Book of Remembrance
      and attended the service held in Sheffield Cathedral on 23rd April.


2.7   The normal working of the Department continued as far as possible,
      with all staff playing their part in spite of constant interruptions
      from camera crews (on a daily basis), volunteers, donors, telephone
      and personal enquiries and VIPs who appeared without warning to see
      how the Appeal was progressing. In the main, staff gave of their
      time voluntarily, putting in considerable extra hours at evenings and
      weekends, and rarely taking lunch breaks.



                                                            cont
2.8    In addition to arranging for a civic party to attend the service in
       Sheffield Cathedral, arrangements were also made to accommodate the
       Deputy Mayor of Bochum, who flew in and wished to attend the service
       in Liverpool Cathedral. He brought a substantial, donation to the
       Appeal.


APPEAL CO-ORDINATION

3.1    Within two weeks of the disaster it was clear that the Department had
       somehow to try to get back to normal working.   Staff were tired,
       stressed and emotionally affected by the work they had been doing.
       Approval was sought and obtained for the appointment of an Appeal
       Co-ordinator and Roy Dixon was appointed to the post on 24th May
       1989, for a period of’3 months.

3.2    This appointment took the pressure off the three st^ff in the
       Department who had been working constantly on the aftermath of the
       Disaster.   The Co-ordinator dealt with all the correspondence, made
       appropriate acknowledgements, provided details to the Leader on other
       contributing local authorities and to the Trust Fund Manager on
       donations of over £1,000 and .passed to West Midlands police letters
       from those who said they were at Hillsborough at the time of the
       disaster and therefore may have been witnesses.

3.3     The Co-ordinator then took on the task of co-ordinating all current
        and future activities in relation to the Appeal and receiving
        presentations of donations in'‘various parts of the country.     The
        appeal stood at £4 million whe*i he arrived and just under £10 million
        when he left at the end of August. He also looked after the Book of
        Remembrance and arranged for 'its presentation to Liverpool FC on 19th
      ■ August, Liverpool's first match o f ‘the 89/90 season, by which time it
        contained 20,000 names.                 '              ..

3.4    Co-ordination with the Trustees was through the Chief Publicity
       Officer, who attended their meeting in Sheffield, accompanied them to
       Hillsborough Football ground and later to a meeting with the Lord
      Mayor and those who had helped with the Appeal.    The media were,
       exceptionally, invited to this event in the Lord Mayor's Parlour, and
       it proved valuable both as a morale booster for staff and an
       opportunity for the Trustees to say on television what they were
       doing with the money raised.   The Chief Publicity Officer has
      .continued to act throughout as unofficial PR and media adviser to the
      Trustees.

3.5    On the termination of the Co-ordinator's contract, at the end of
       August, various separate bank accounts were wound up and consolidated
       into the main fund account and final contacts were made with the
       Trust Fund Manager and the Liverpool City Council Appeals office and
       shop.



PUBLIC INQUIRY

4.1     The Department's involvement with the Taylor Inquiry was small in
       relation to its involvement elsewhere. It consisted of these
       elements.
4.2     The Design Studio produced alarge number of signs, notices, name
       plates and identification at very short notice.

                                                              cont
     4.3   The Conference and Tourism Manager worked with the Home Office
           representatives and Assistant Chief Personnel Officer'(Safety, Health
           and Welfare) on the arrangements for a venue for the Public Inquiry,
           which was finally set up in the Town Hail.

     4.4    The Press Office made all the arrangements with the media and the
           Central Office of Information for all press facilities during the
           Inquiry. Dtaring the course of the Inquiry, the Press Office provided
           an ongoing facility to the media and continued to coordinate the
           Council's response to the media.

     4.5    On the publication of the interim Report of the Taylor Inquiry, the
           Press Office again co-ordinated media relations at the Sheffield end
           on behalf of COI and also issued the necessary press releases and
           statements on behalf of the local authority.


5.   AFTERMATH

     5.1   The Department has identified a number of areas in which improvements
           could be made to procedures to ensure that communication is better,
           quicker and more effective.   While it is not possible to be in a
           state of preparedness for a disaster such as Hillsborough there are a
           number of practical steps to be taken, such as better use of
           telephone answering machines and mobile phones and a 'duty officer'
           system for press enquiries. A review of these procedures is
           underway.

     5.2   In conjunction with this, the Chief Publicity Officer, the Director
           of Libraries and the Acting Head of Admin & Legal, have briefly
           discussed the information and communication aspects of our planning
           for peacetime- emergencies, and,believe there is a further need for
           discussion at a 'corporate ievel on how we approach this.

     5.3   There are a number of lessons to Ije learned on how to deal with the
           public response to such a tragedy, and the Chief Publicity Officer is
           preparing material on this which should be useful if it should be
           needed in the future. Other issues are raised such as the
           suitability of local authority involvement in fundraising for an
           Appeal if, in the final analysis, the authority may be found at
           fault.


6.   CONCLUSION

     6.1   Apart from dealing with the Trustees, and with the small trickle of
           donations still coming in, the Publicity Department's response to the
           Hillsborough Disaster is now concluded.


7.   RECOMMENDATIONS

     7.1   To note the arrangements made by the Publicity Department in the
           aftermath of the Hillsborough Disaster.

     7.2   To initiate corporate level discussion on the information and
           communication aspects of our Plan for Peacetime Emergencies.



Shirley Lanstone                                            9 October 1989
Chief Publicity Officer                                     B :SLJB64
                                A P P E N D I X

                          HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL


1.   The total raised at 25th September 1989 is £10.5 million.        The following
     table shows the tlate at which each million was reached :

          £ million                                Date (1989)

              1   -                                24th   April
              2                                    28th   April
              3                                     2nd   May
              4                                    11th   May
              5                                    23^d   May
              6                                     7th   June
              7                                    27th   June
              8                                    30th   June
             “9                                    27th   July
             10                                    21st   September


2.   Over £0.5 million has been paid-out. Payments are confidential. However,
      the trustees can say that funeral expenses for all but one or two of the
      deceased have been met, and initial payments were made to all the next of
     kin of the deceased and to the seriously injured by the end of May.
      Subsequently, payments have been nujide to those less seriously injured
      where there has been financial hardship and further interim payments have
     been made, where necessary.


3.   .As they were aware of the identity of those killed and seriously injured,
      the trustees have not sought claims from family members. In the case of
      those suffering less serious physical or psychological injury, the
      trustees have had to rely on people claiming. To this end, the Publicity
      Department placed on the trustees' behalf a number of advertisements in
      the national and appropriate local press, inviting claims. To date, 650
      such claims, have been received and acknowledged. About % of the 650
      respondents have made a detailed claim and these are currently being
      assessed by a Medical Assessment Panel.


4.   The trustees' aim is to make a major distribution before the end of 1989.
      This depends in part on the stabilisation of the more serious injury cases
      and the return of completed applications from those who have registered
      claim. Previous funds established after the Bradford and Zeebrugge
      disasters reached finality in two years, but had substantially completed
      their work in about 15 months.


5.   As to the use of "surplus" funds, various ideas have been tentatively
     canvassed, but the trustees believe that this is a matter which can only
     be considered when the major distribution to beneficiaries has been made
     and there is a clearer idea as to what surplus remains.


Shirley Lanstone
Chief Publicity Officer                            10th October 1989
B:SLCH69
