-    19   -




               (iii)   Doncaster Division - Crown Court Office
                       A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and
                       Financial Officer referred to the Doncaster Division Crown
                       Court Office. It was proposed to civilianise 2 constable
                       posts by the appointment of 2 Senior Clerical Officers, Scale
                       3 -


                       In addition in the case of the post of Crown Court Office
                       Supervisor, Scale 3 did not properly reflect the level of
                       responsibility. As the supervision of the 2 new Senior
                       Clerical Officer posts would transfer from the Chief Inspector
                       to the Crown Court Office Supervisor it was proposed to
                       regrade the post to Scale 4. In effect this would involve no
                       change as the post was already being covered by an officer
                       graded Scale 4 as a result of the creation of the Operational
                       Support Unit.
                       RESOLVED -
                       1     That approval be given to the appointment of 2 Senior
                              Clerical Officers, Scale 3.
                       2     That approval be given to the regrading of the Crown
                             Court Office Supervisor, Doncaster Division, from Scale 3
                              to Scale 4 from 11 September 1992.
                       3     That approval be given to the increase of the revenue
                             control budget of £9,100.
70        PURCHASE OF MAIL X-RAY DETECTOR UNITS
          A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
          referred to the post room at South Yorkshire Police Headquarters which
          included a Todd Research      Mail Detector Unit. Any suspect parcel or packet
          had to be transported to the machine sometimes over quite long distances.
          As Police Headquarters was not the only recipient of mail it was proposed
          to install mail detector      units at each of the 5 Divisional Headquarters.
          RESOLVED - That approval      be given to acapital estimate of £11,000 and to
          the invitation of competitive tenders for the supply of 6 Mail X-Ray
          Detector Units.
71        FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR LEGAL REPRESENTATION
          (NOTE - THE CHIEF CONSTABLE LEFT THE MEETING DURING THIS ITEM AND DID NOT
          RETURN UNTIL ITS CONCLUSION)
          A joint report of the Chief Constable and the clerk and Financial Officer
          referred to Home Office Circular 77/1987, which provided guidance to
          police authorities in considering applications for financial assistance to
          police officers in legal proceedings.
          The Authority considered the circumstances in which an officer of the
          Force made application for financial assistance for legal representation
          in proceedings.
          RESOLVED - That the application be refused.
72   CHARGES FOR POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES
     A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
     referred to the charges to be levied for the policing of football matches
     in 1992/93. Following consideration by members the unit rates of charges
     for 1992/93 had been increased by 34%. However, in the case of one club
     the increase would be 50% to take account of the increased deployments in
     1991/92 after the charges had been set. These charges would therefore
     take a further step toward the target of full recovery by 1995/96.
     The Clerk and Financial Officer reported verbally on the current arrears
     situation for the clubs.
     RESOLVED -
     1      That the charges for policing football matches in 1992/93 be
           confirmed.
     2      That in respect of the outstanding invoices for the enhanced charges
           for cup and other games in 1990/91 the offer now referred to be
           accepted.
     3      That concern about the level of arrears be expressed to the two clubs
           now named in notifying them of the 1992/93 charges.
73   COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE POLICE
     The Force Complaints Book was available for members' inspection.




CHAIRMAN




WP020343/SJL
