           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

                                Meeting held 18th September, 1989

Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore (Chair), Butler, Crowder, Godber, H. Knight, Lamb, Mrs.
Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson and Mrs. E. Smith.

1 General Purposes Panel
reso lv ed: That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General Purposes Panel,
the following minutes be approved—
    Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 7th August, 1989. Present— Councillors Butler
  (Chair), Hussain, P. H. Jackson, Lamb, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. E. Smith and White.
  ( 1 ) TOWN HALL EXTENSION — REPLACEMENT O F A IR CON DITIONING EQUIPM ENT
    Further to the decision of the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme
  Committee at its meeting held on 3rd August, 1989, the Director of Land and Planning submitted
  a report on the invitation of tenders for the replacement of air conditioning equipment in the
  Town Hall Extension.
    Resolved: That tenders for carrying out the necessary work be invited from the four
  contractors named in the report now submitted.
          In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act,
  (n o t e :
  1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, the Chair of the
  Panel (Councillor Butler) decided that the above item should be considered as a matter of
  urgency in view of the fact that the information contained in the report had not been available
  when the agenda was being prepared).
  (2) SHEFFIELD COMMUNITY HEA LTH COUNCIL
    The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that (a) under the
  authority given by the Panel at its meeting held on 3rd April, 1989 (page 1558 of the printed
  minutes) Councillor Lamb had been appointed to serve as a member of the Sheffield Community
  Health Council for the period ending 31st August, 1990, in place of Ms. J. Smailes; and (b) Ms. J.
  Duggleby, appointed by the City Council to serve on the Sheffield Community Health Council
  for the period ending 31st August, 1992, had now resigned.
    Resolved: That a person to be nominated by the Chair of this Panel be appointed to serve on
  the Sheffield Community Health Council for the period ending 31st August, 1992, to fill the
  vacancy now reported.
  (3) PROVISION O F INFORM ATION FROM LICENSING RECORDS
    The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that his Department had
  been requested to supply lists of licensees in various categories for use by commercial enterprises.
     Resolved: That the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department be instructed not to
  issue any such lists of licensees without the specific authorisation of this Panel.
  (4) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on the
  publications of the interim report of the Right Honourable Lord Justice Taylor into the disaster
  which occurred on 15th April, 1989, at Hillsborough Football Ground and stated that full reports
  would be submitted to the Panel.
    The Panel noted the verbal report and requested that the written reports be made available as
  soon as possible.
  (5) AMUSEMENT CENTRE
    Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 3rd July, 1989, the Acting
  Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on his investigation into a
  petition containing 48 signatures objecting to the presence of an amusement arcade at 383 South
  Road, Walkley, and to the possibility of any gambling or gaming licences being granted in respect
  of the premises.
    The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that no facilities requiring
  the issue of a licence by the City Council were provided in the premises concerned.
    The Panel requested that this information be commmunicated to the petitioners.
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    (6 )    EXCLUSION O F TH E PUBLIC AND PRESS
       Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
    place on the following application for the grant of Hackney Carriage Vehicle Licences on the
    grounds that, if the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
    information as described in Paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act,
    1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, relating to the
    financial and business affairs of other persons and legal matters and advice.
★     (7)   HACKNEY CA RRIA G E VEHICLE LICENCES




         At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were readmitted to the meeting.
★     ( 8 ) FILM CERTIFICATION
      The Senior Film Officer submitted a report on three films which had not been certificated by
    the British Board of Film Classification and one film which had been so classified in the former
    category “A A ” which he wished to show under the conditions relating to category “PG”.
      Resolved: That authority by given for the following films to be exhibited under the conditions
    appropriate to the categories indicated—

    Title of Film                          Category
    “A Page of Madness”                    “15”
    “Aelita”                               “PG ”
    “Mechanisms of the Brain”              “18”
    “The Animals Film”                     “PG”
    (9) EXCLUSION O F TH E PUBLIC AND PRESS
      Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
    place on the remaining items of business on the grounds that, if the public and press were present,
    there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in Schedule 12A to the
    Local Government Act, 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information)
    Act, 1985, as follows—
    Item         Paragraph        Reason
    10           7 and 12         Relating to the financial and business affairs of other persons
                                   and legal matters and advice.
    11           12               Relating to legal matters and      advice.
    (10)    HACKNEY CARRIA GE VEHICLE LICENCE_____________________________________________________
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

     11)   LEG AL PROCEEDINGS




      Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 17th August, 1989. Present— Councillors Butler
    (Chair), Hussain, Lamb, Moscrop, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton
    and White.
★    SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the issue and
    amendment of General Safety Certificates under the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Act, 1975.
      Chief Inspector Beal of the South Yorkshire Police attended the meeting to give the Police
    observations on the proposals contained in the report and Mr. K. T. Addy, a Director of the
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Dr. Eastwood, Consultant Engineer, attended the
    meeting to give the observations of the Football Club.
       The Chair asked for a letter dated 16th August, 1989, from the Sheffield Wednesday Football
    Club requesting a written ruling prior to the coming Saturday’s match on the question of access to
    and capacity in the North Stand at the Hillsborough Football Ground, which letter had not been
    circulated to members of the Panel before the day of the meeting, to be considered as an urgent
    item.
      Resolved: That (a) in accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local
    Government Act, 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act,
    1985, the request in the letter now submitted from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be
    considered as a matter of urgency in view of the impending commencement of the Football
    Season;
      (b) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Chief Executive in (i) issuing to the
    Sheffield United Football Club an interim Safety Certificate under the provisions of the Safety of
    Sports Grounds Act, 1975 and (ii) amending the current Safety Certificate issued to the Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Club, all in accordance with the details contained in the report and copy
    documents now submitted;
      (c) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to issue a further
    Notice of Amendment in respect of the Certificate issued to the Sheffield Wednesday Football
    Club (as amended) as follows—
           (i) Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further amended to state that (A) the
           maximum capacity for the upper area of the North West Terrace at the Hillsborough
           Football Ground shall be 2,300 and (B) the maximum total capacity permitted in the North
           Stand shall be reduced to 9,700 and the maximum total capacity permitted in the
           Hillsborough Football Ground shall be 43,542; and
           (ii) for the sake of clarity, additional Condition 10 of the amended Certificate shall be
           amended to reflect the fact that only the upper part of the terracing of the North West
           Terrace shall be used;
      (d) approval be given to the proposed arrangements now reported for the upper part of the
    North West Terrace at the Hillsborough Football Ground to be used on a contingency basis as
    and when requested by the Police.
       (e) having heard the representations of Chief Inspector Beal on behalf of South Yorkshire
    Police and the representations of Mr. Addy and Dr. Eastwood on behalf of the Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Club concerning the use of the North Stand (i) in view of the need for
    segregation of football supporters and taking account of the operational plans of the Police, the
    North stand shall be filled only through turnstiles located in Penistone Road; and (ii) taking
    account of the undertaking by the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to provide two additional
    turnstiles (currently serving the Spion Kop Terrace) to serve the North Stand, the capacity for the
    North Terrace shall be reduced to 9,700;
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      (f) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department and representatives of the South
    Yorkshire Police and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be requested to monitor the
    operation of the Hillsborough Football Ground particularly with regard to the functioning of the
    North Terrace until the end of September, 1989, and report back to this Panel on the outcome of
    such monitoring; and
      (g) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to make
    arrangements for this Panel to visit and inspect the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Football
    Grounds and the Owlerton Sports Stadium in the near future.


     Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 4th September, 1989. Present— Councillors
    Butler (Chair), Ms. Fiore, Lamb, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith and Mrs. Walton.
★    ( 1 ) CINEMA EXHIBITIONS
    Confirmation o f Action
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the Acting Head of
    Administration and Legal Department in consultation with the Chair of this Panel in authorising
    the issue of a “Local 12” certificate in respect of the “Batman” film.
    New Category “12”
      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on a proposed
    change in the Council’s cinema licence conditions to incorporate the recent introduction by the
    British Board of Film Classification of a film category “ 12” and the Panel received a copy of a
    press release from the British Board of Film Classification announcing the introduction of the
    new category.
       Resolved: That the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to
    take any necessary steps to alter the Standard Cinema Licence Conditions to incorporate the new
    film category “ 12” , outlined by the British Board of Film Classification, into the Council’s cinema
    licence conditions.
    Film Classification
      The Panel received reports of the Senior Film Officer requesting the reclassification of a
    number of films for local exhibition.
      Resolved: That the requests now submitted by the Senior Film Officer for permission to exhibit
    the following films under local certificates as indicated be granted—
                                           Previous          Proposed
    Title                                  Category         Local Category
    Yield to the Night                     “X”              “ 15”
    Are We All Murderers?                  “X”              “ 15”
    Gorillas in the Mist                   “15”             “12”
    The Elephant Man                       “PG”             “12”
    Nine films by George Kuchar            Unclassified     “18”
    A Song of Love                         Unclassified     “18”
    The Hands of Orlac                     “A ”             “12”
      (Mad Love)
    Kiss Me Deadly                         “A ”             “12”
    Miss Julie                             “A ”             “ 12”
    Rome, Open City                        “A ”             “12”
★    ( 2 ) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    Bramall Lane Sports Ground
       The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a copy of a consent
    issued in consultation with the Chairs of the Panel and the Municipal Enterprise and General
    Services Programme Committee in respect of the removal of three radial fences from the Spion
          MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  Kop and Bramall Lane terraces at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground, together with consequent
  ancillary work proposed to be completed in time for the football match on Saturday, 9th
  September, 1989 and reported that the Club had now indicated that it was doubtful whether the
  ancillary work could be completed by that date. A representative of the Building Surveyor
  reported on the structural aspects of the work.
   Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken to issue the consent on 25th
  August, 1989, as now reported; and
     (b) a time limit of 15th September, 1989, be imposed for compliance with Condition 5 which
  requires (i) the testing of the lengths of barrier which have been altered or were unable to be
  tested previously because of the proximity of the radial fences, and (ii) the submission to the
  Council of reports thereon.
   (n o t e :   A copy of the Council’s letter to the Club will be sent to each member of the Panel.)
  Hillsborough Sports Ground
     The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on proposals of
  the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to carry out alterations to the Hillsborough Sports
  Ground to provide (a) office accommodation for the Young Owls Club and (b) a hospitality suite
  in the North Stand. Plans of the proposals were exhibited at the meeting and the Panel received
  copies of letters from the Club’s consulting engineers and the South Yorkshire County Fire
  Service and a memorandum from the Council’s Building Surveyor regarding the proposals.
    Resolved: That, subject to compliance by the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club with the
  comments of the South Yorkshire County Fire Service, the Building Surveyor and the Director of
  Health and Consumer Services now reported, on condition that the Club inform the Council
  when the works are completed, approval be given in accordance with Section 8 of the Safety of
  Sports Grounds Act, 1975, to the carry out of the alterations at the Hillsborough Sports Ground
  referred to in the report now submitted and the plans now exhibited.
  Urgent Item
    The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported on correspondence which
  he had held with the proprietors of three local sports grounds regarding action to be taken to
  comply with the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report on the Hillsborough
  Disaster and stated that certain of the recommendations still had not been put into effect at the
  grounds.
    Resolved: That the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to
  write to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, the Sheffield United Football Club and
  Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited enumerating the outstanding items now reported and asking
  for an immediate reply.
  ( n o t e : (a) In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government
  Act, 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, the Chair of
  the Panel (Councillor Butler), decided that this item should be considered as a matter of urgency
  in view of the need to ensure the safety of the public; and
    (b)    copies of the letters to the proprietors of the sports grounds will be sent to each member of
  the Panel.)
★ (3) STREET COLLECTION
    Resolved: That the following application for a street collection permit be granted—
  Applicant                                Organisation             Location           Date
  G. A. Christie                           Sheffield Area           Fargate            4.10.89
                                             Chinese Solidarity
  (4) SHEFFIELD COMMUNITY HEA LTH COUNCIL
    Resolved: That Mrs. Ann Hewitt of 3 Drummond Crescent, Sheffield, be appointed to serve as
  a nominee of the City Council on the Sheffield Community Health Council, to fill a vacancy.
  (5)     LEG AL PROCEEDINGS
     TM   -     A .x' - - T T   J   -1?   A J                            i*    j          .      r> V f n
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE




★   ( 6 ) GAM ING ACT 1968— AMUSEMENTS W ITH PRIZES
      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application
    for the grant of a permit for the provision of amusements with prizes in premises at 490 Glossop
    Road, Sheffield. The applicant attended the meeting to support his application. The Acting Head
    of Administration and Legal Department reported that, as the premises concerned were
    accessible to the public, they did not comply with the Council’s policy for the granting or renewal
    of applications for permits for the provision of amusements with prizes as set out in the resolution
    of the Panel of the 5th September, 1988 (page 521 of the printed minutes).
      At this stage in the proceedings, the Panel passed the following resolution—
      Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before a decision is made on
    the item now under consideration and the other remaining item of business relating to hackney
    carriage and private hire licensing on the grounds that, if the public and press were present, there
    would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of
    Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as amended by the Local Government
    (Access to Information) Act, 1985, relating to the financial and business affairs of other persons
    and legal matters and advice.
      The Panel then considered the application now submitted for the grant of a permit for the
    provision of amusements with prizes in premises at 490 Glossop Road.
      Resolved: That the application now submitted be refused in accordance with paragraph 7(b) of
    Schedule 9 to the Gaming Act, 1968 as it is the duty of the Council to refuse applications which do
    not comply with the above-mentioned resolution of 5th September, 1988.
★ (7)   HACKNEY CA RRIA G E AND PRIV ATE H IR E LICENSING




      Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 8th September, 1989. Present— Councillors
    Butler (Chair), Ms. Fiore, Lamb, Moscrop, Mrs. Mulheam and Mrs. Nelson. Also in
    attendance— Councillors Cromar and Whitfield.
    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
      Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 4th September, 1989, the
    Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on replies which he had
    received to his letters to the proprietors of the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds
    and the Owlerton Sports Stadium requesting information on outstanding items of works to be
    carried out and measures to be taken to comply with the recommendations contained in the
    interim report of Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillsborough Disaster. The Panel received copies of
    the letters from the sports ground proprietors.
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

     Resolved: That (a) the information contained in the letters now submitted from the proprietors
   of the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds and Owlerton Sports Stadium be noted;
      (b) a further meeting of this Panel be held on Friday, 15th September, 1989, to consider the
   outcome of the proceedings at a meeting of the Advisory Group on the Safety of Sports Grounds
   to be held on Thursday, 14th September, 1989; and
    (c) the representatives of the City Council on the Police Authority be invited to attend
   meetings of this Panel when items relating to the safety of sports grounds are to be considered.

2 Town Hall and Annexes
Town Hall Balcony
r e s o l v e d : That the request now reported for permission to display a banner on the Town Hall

Balcony in connection with the National Health Service review be granted subject to the Acting
Head of Administation and Legal Department being satisfied as to the legal aspects of the display.
Provision o f Furniture
  The Director of Land and Planning submitted a report on proposals for the financing of the
purchase and maintenance of furniture in the Town Hail and Annexes during the current financial
year.
reso lv ed: That the Project Report Form CP3 now submitted in respect of the proposals now
reported be approved for submission to the Policy Committee.
Revenue Budget
  The Committee received and noted a report of the Director of Land and Planning on the
monitoring of the revenue budget relating to the Town Hall and Annexes.
Town Hall Telephone Service
  The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on proposals for
the acquisition of additional equipment for the Town hall PABX system to facilitate the preparation
of the internal telephone directory for the Council Departments.
reso lv ed : That the proposal contained in the report now submitted be approved in principle
subject to financial provision being available by way of an operating lease and subject in due course
to a further report on the recommended option before an order is placed for the equipment.

3 Administration and Legal Department
Grading o f Articled Clerks
  The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the grading of
Articled Clerks in his Department.
reso lv ed: That, in order to comply with the minimum requirements of the Law Society now
reported, all posts of Articled Clerk in the Administration and Legal Department be regraded as
from 1st August, 1989, from Scale 1/3 to Scale 3, rising to Scale 4 on passing all Heads of Part 2 of
the Law Society Final Examination and to Scale 5 on the completion of Articles and having passed
all Heads of the Law Society Examination.
Four-Monthly Report on Staffing
  The Committee received and noted the four-monthly report on staffing of the Acting Head of
Administration and Legal Department.
Revenue Budget
  The Committee received and noted a report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
Department on the monitoring of the Revenue Budget.
                        o
Council House Sales
  With reference to the decision of the Committee at its meeting held on 15th May, 1989 (page 29 of
the printed minutes) to approve proposals for overtime working for a period of eight weeks from 5th
June, 1989 by staff of his Department in connection with Council House Sales, the Acting Head of
Administration and Legal Department submitted a further report on proposals for certain staff of
the Conveyancing and Typing Sections of his Department to receive overtime payments for work
done in connection with Council House Sales over and above the normal 37 hour week, during the
months of November and December, 1989. The report indicated that the total cost of the overtime
payments involved would be recharged to the Housing Programme Committee.
         MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

reso lv ed    :   That the proposal contained in the report now submitted be approved.

4 Publicity Department
Four-Monthly Report on Staffing
  The Committee received and noted the four-monthly report on staffing of the Chief Publicity
Officer.
Service Planning
  The Committee received and noted a report of the Chief Publicity Officer on service planning in
her Department giving details of target achievement and objectives and the outlook for future years.
Christmas Illuminations
   The Chief Publicity Officer submitted a report on proposals for the provision of Christmas
Illuminations for 1989/90 in The Moor, Fargate, Barker’s Pool, Pinstone Street, the Peace Gardens
and Castle Square with extensions to other areas should further funds become available.
re s o lv e d :   That approval be given to the proposals contained in the report now submitted.
Revenue Budget
  The Committee received a report of the Chief Publicity Officer on the monitoring of the Revenue
Budget.
Lord Mayor’s Secretariat
  The Committee received a report of the Chief Publicity Officer on a review of the staffing
arrangements for the Lord Mayor’s Secretariat carried out by the Personnel Department and noted
that, because of the varying nature of the workload of the Lord Mayor’s Attendants, it was
proposed to bring the relevant posts into line with the NJC Conditions of Service for APT&C staff
without delay and as recommended by the review.

5 Capital Programme Out-Turn 1988/89
  The Committee received and noted a j oint report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
Department, the City Treasurer and the Director of Land and Planning on the out-turn of the
Committee’s Capital Programme for 1988/89.

6 Safety of Sports Grounds
  The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report informing
members of action taken in respect of sports grounds in the City as a result of the Inquiry into the
Hillsborough Disaster, giving details of staffing changes which would be necessary to deal with the
additional demands on the Licensing Section of his Department arising from the recommendations
contained in Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report and outlining other future necessary action in the
matter.
reso lv ed    :   That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
  (b) approval be given to the proposal contained in the report for the creation of two additional
posts of Chief Licensing Officer and Licensing Officer to deal with safety of sports grounds and
other issues, subject to such proposals being discussed with the appropriate trade unions under the
Council’s Responding to Change agreement; and
  (c) the attention of the Policy Committee be drawn to the fact that this Committee has insufficient
resources in its Revenue Budget to cover the cost of providing the two additional posts.

7 Municipal Enterprises
Action taken under Delegated Powers
  The Committee received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, on action taken
by him under delegated powers to let stalls at Exchange Street and The Market Place, Crystal Peaks
Shopping Centre, Waterthorpe.
Four-Monthly Report on Staffing
  The Committee received and noted the four-monthly report on staffing of the Municipal
Enterprises Management Board.
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

 Revenue Budget
   The Committee received and noted reports on the monitoring of the Revenue Budget relating to
 the Markets undertaking, the Central Transport Service, the Central Supplies Organisation,
 Printing Services and the Catering Service.
Printing Services
r e s o l v e d : That (a) authority be given for the provision of a suitable car within the Central
Transport Fleet to be made available for use by the Marketing and Sales Section of Printing
Services; and
  (b) the City Treasurer be requested to advise on the most appropriate method of financing such
provision.
( n o t e : In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act, 1972,
as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, the Chair of the
Committee (Councillor Ms. Fiore), decided that this item should be considered as a matter of
urgency in view of the fact that the new Marketing and Sales Manager was due to take up her
appointment on 10th October, 1989.)
Catering Service—Clerical Posts
  The Catering Officer submitted a report on proposals for the regrading and redesignation of a
post of Clerical Assistant and the creation of an additional post of temporary Clerical Assistant in
the Catering Service in order to ensure the efficient operation of his administration office.
reso lv ed: That approval be given to the proposals contained in the report now submitted for (a)
the regrading and redesignation of a post of Clerical Assistant in Scale 1/2 in the Catering Service to
Clerical Officer in Scale 1 bar 2/3, with effect from 18th September, 1989, subject to agreement on
the relevant job description being reached with the trade union concerned; and
   (b) the creation of a temporary post of Clerical Assistant in Scale 2/3.
Central Supplies Organisation
  The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on proposals for the redesignation
of certain posts, the introduction of trainee grades and the regrading of lower clerical grades in the
Central Supplies Organisation.
r e s o l v e d : That approval be given to the proposals contained in the report now submitted, to be
implemented from 1st October, 1989, subject to management, the Chief Personnel Officer and the
trade unions concerned finalising the respective job descriptions under the provisions of the
Responding to Change agreement, as follows—
  (a) the regrading and redesignation of two posts from Scale 1/2 to the Trainee Clerical Officer
Grade 1 bar 2/3;
  (b) the regrading of a post of Receptionist from Scale 2 to Scale 2/3;
  (c) the regrading and redesignation of a post of Receptionist from Scale 2 to Typist/Word
Processor Operator in Scale 2/3;
  (d) the creation of a new post of Senior Assistant, Marketing Officer in Scale 4 and the
subsequent deletion of a post of Senior Typst/Word Processor Operator in Scale 4; and
  (e) the preparation in consultation with the trade unions concerned of a comprehensive
development scheme for all clerical workers within Scales 1-3.

8 Exclusion of the Public and Press
r e s o l v e d : That the public and press be excluded from the meeting during the consideration of the

remaining items of business on the grounds that, if the public and press were present, there would
be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in paragraphs 1,7 and 9 of Schedule 12A
to the Local Government Act, 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information)
Act, 1985, relating respectively to particular employees, the financial and business affairs of other
persons and terms proposed for the disposal of property.

9 Catering Service—Honoraria
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE




10 Markets
Parkway Wholesale Market—Renewal o f Leases
r e s o l v e d : That approval be given to the terms contained in the report of the General Manager,
Markets, now submitted for the proposed granting of 3-year leases of two sales units and a
warehouse at Parkway Wholesale Market.
Castle and Sheaf Markets
          : That, subject to the advice of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
r eso lv ed

and the drafting of a suitable agreement, (a) approval be given to the proposal contained in the
report of the General Manager, Markets, now submitted, for tenants of the Castle and Sheaf
Market to be allowed, if they so wish, to make payments on account of such interim rent as may, in
due course, be agreed between the Council and such tenants, or fixed by the Courts; and
  (b) the General Manager, Markets, be authorised to enter into agreements for such purpose.
