            ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                   565

                                  Meeting held 1st November, 1994

Present— Councillors Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Mrs. Askham, Ayris, Ms Bowden, Ms Huddart,
Ironmonger, D . Jones, Mrs. Leek, Meade, J. A. Moore, Mrs. Newton, Sangar, Mrs. E. Smith.
Mrs. P. M. Smith, Mrs. Walton and Mrs. White.

1 Apologies for Absence
  Apologies for absence were received from Councillors Mrs. Chadwick, Chaplin and Miss
Mitchell.

2 Councillor David Chadwick
  The Committee and Officers present at the meeting extended their deepest sympathy to
Councillor Mrs. Chadwick on the recent death of her husband, Councillor David Chadwick.

3 Licensing Sub-Committee
r e s o l v e d : That (a) Councillor D. Jones be appointed to serve as Chair of the Licensing
Sub-Committee (Group A) and Deputy Chair of the Licensing Sub-Committee in place of
Councillor Miss Mitchell;
 (b) the appreciation of this Committee be conveyed to Councillor Miss Mitchell for the excellent
manner in which she has chaired the Licensing Sub-Committee (Group A) ; and
   (c) except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Licensing Sub-Committee, the
following minutes be approved—
     Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 25th August, 1994. P re se n t- Councillors Miss
    Mitchell (Chair), Ayris, Mrs. Midgley, Price, Ms. A. G. Smith, Mrs. E. Smith and Mrs. White.
    ( 1 ) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
       Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting during consideration of the
    item of business to be transacted on the grounds that, if the public and press were present, there
    would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of
    Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access
    to Information) Act 1985, relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons and legal
    matters and advice, respectively.
★     (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of eight cases
    relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing. Five applicants and one representative of
    an applicant attended the meeting and addressed the Sub-Committee.
      Resolved: That the applications now submitted be determined as follows—
    Case No.    Licence Type                        Decision
    59/94       Hackney Carriage and Private        Grant for six months and a severe warning be
                Hire Driver’s Licence               given to the applicant as regards his future
                                                    conduct.
    58/94       Hackney Carriage and Private        Grant for 12 months
                Hire Driver’s Licence
    61/94       Hackney Carriage Vehicle            In view of the representations now made,
                Licence                             subject to the City Solicitor and Head of
                                                     Administration completing a satisfactory
                                                    superficial inspection of the vehicle, including
                                                    safety and mileage checks the licence be
                                                    renewed so as to expire on 31st May, 1995.
    62/94       Hackney Carriage and Private        Grant for full term and a warning be given to
                Hire Driver’s Licence               the applicant as regards his future conduct.
    60/94       Hackney Carriage and Private        In the circumstances now reported, defer the
                Hire Driver’s Licence               application to a future meeting of this Sub-
                                                    Committee.
566         ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Case No.    licence Type                        Decision
    44/94       Hackney Carriage and Private        In the circumstances now reported (a) the
                Hire D rivers Licence and           hackney carriage and private hire driver’s
                Private Hire Vehicle Licences       licence be refused on the grounds that the
                                                    applicant is not a fit and proper person and (b)
                                                    the private hire vehicle licences 272 and 335 be
                                                    revoked on the grounds that insurance has not
                                                    been produced in respect of the vehicles and
                                                    that the licensee is not a fit and proper person to
                                                    hold a private hire vehicle licence.
    PHV23       Private Hire Vehicle Licence        Suspend the licence pending the production of
                                                    the relevant insurance certificates.
    PHV24       Private Hire Vehicle Licence        No action be taken to suspend or revoke the
                                                    licence, but the licensee be given a warning as
                                                    regards his future conduct.


     Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 9th September, 1994. Present— Councillors Mrs.
    Midgley (Chair), Mrs. Askham, D. Jones, Miss Mitchell, Mrs. Newton, Ms. A. G. Smith and Mrs.
    White. Also in attendance for the Safety o f Sports Grounds items—Councillor P. Moore.
★   (1 ) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club—Proposed new access to Souvenir Shop and Car Park
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
    submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
    amend the access and segregation fence between the North and Spion Kop Stands and the
    Penistone Road car park serving the new Souvenir shop.
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported to amend the access and segregation
    fence between the North and Spion Kop Stands and the Penistone Road car park.
    Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs—Annual Inspections
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report stating that detailed annual
    inspections of the Bramall Lane and Hillsborough Sports Grounds had been undertaken by the
    City Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group at the end of the 1993/94 Football
    Season in compliance with Section 10 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (As Amended).
    Most of the works had been satisfactorily completed at the start of the new Football Season and
    those remaining would be either completed in the near future or to a timescale approved by the
    Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group. All outstanding works did not pose a serious safety
    risk to spectators entering the respective stadia.
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
      (b) the appreciation of this Sub-Committee be conveyed to the Officers now reported for
    ensuring that works at the football stadia were carried out before the start of the new Football
    Season.
★ (2) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS AND THEATRE LICENSING
  City Hall, Barkers Pool
     The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application to renew
  public entertainment and theatre licences in respect of the City Hall, Barkers Pool. The premises
  were inspected on the 24th August, 1994 and representatives of the Inspecting Authorities
  attended the meeting and addressed the Sub-Committee. An Officer from the South Yorkshire
  Fire and Rescue Service stated that although the condition of the seats was much improved since
  his last report to this Sub-Committee on the 17th February, 1994, he was still concerned that
  damaged seats could pose a fire hazard. An Officer from the Departm ent of Design and Building
  Services stated that the roof covering was in a poor condition; this had been patched to prevent
  water penetration and although damage to the fabric of the building had been caused by the
  leaks, this did not pose a hazard to members of the general public. An Officer from the
