           FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                   671

9   Grant Aid
  The Director of Social Services submitted a report giving recommendations for non-recurring
grant payments from specific funds.
resolved   :   That grants be made as follows—
MENCAP Homes Foundation                          —£16,148 from Joint Funding
Sheffield Funding Advisory Service               — £8,855 from the Urban Programme
Pitsmoor CAB Debt Unit and Sheffield Credit      — £1,000 from Revenue Budget.
Unit Forum

10 Conferences, Etc.
resolved  : That approval be given to the attendance of as delegates (a) the Deputy Chair
(Councillor Steinke) at the AM A Social Services Strategy Review Sub-Committee held on 4th
October, 1989;
  (b) Councillor Ms. Harvey at the Inter-Agency Adoption Panel Training Day in Leeds on 20th
September, 1989; and
   (c) Councillor Moscrop and four members of this Committee to be nominated by the Chair at a
seminar on UPVC windows and related matters in connection with the new Sharrow Industries
initiative on a date to be arranged.

11 Exclusion of the Public and Press
resolved  : That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on
the remaining item of business on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
information described in paragraph 1 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as
amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985 relating to particular
employees of the Authority.

12 Early Retirements
resolved  : That the six employees in the Family and Community Services Department referred to in
the report of the Director of Social Services now submitted be permitted to retire early on the
grounds that their posts are surplus to requirements and they be granted maximum added years in
accordance with the Local Government (Compensation for Premature Retirement) Regulations,
1982.
    672     MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

                                     Meeting held 16th October, 1989

    Present  Councillors Ms. Fiore (Chair), Baker, Crowder, George, Godber, Griffiths, Lamb,
    Moore, Mrs. Mulhearn, Mrs. Nelson, Pye and Mrs. E. Smith.

    1 Minutes of the Last Meeting
   It was reported that the City Council, at its meeting held on 4th October, 1989, approved the
minutes of the meeting of the Committee held on 18th September, 1989, with the exception of item
(2) of the minutes of the General Purposes Panel held on 7th August, 1989, relating to appointments
to the Sheffield Community Health Council.
r e s o l v e d : That (a) the appointment under the authority previously given by the General Purposes
Panel of Councillor Lamb to serve on the Sheffield Community Health Council for the period
ending 31st August, 1990, in place of Ms. J. Smailes be noted; and
  (b) Mrs. Anne Hewitt of 3 Drummond Crescent, Sheffield 5, be appointed to serve on the
Sheffield Community Health Council for the period ending 31st August, 1992, in place of Ms. J.
Duggleby.

2 General Purposes Panel
resolved  : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General Purposes Panel,
the following minutes be approved—

       Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 15th September, 1989. Present— Councillors
      Butler (Chair), Ms. Fiore, Lamb, Moscrop, Mrs. Mulhearn, Mrs. Nelson and Mrs. E. Smith.
★     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
        With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 8th September, 1989,
     the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on the outcome of a
     meeting of the Advisory Group on the Safety of Sports Grounds held on 14th September, 1989.
     Representatives of the South Yorkshire County Fire Service, the Health and Consumer Services
     Department and the Building Surveyor who were members of the Advisory Group and the
     Managing Director and Secretary of Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd., and the company’s solicitor
     attended the meeting.

       Resolved: That, in accordance with the recommendations made by the Advisory Group on the
     Safety of Sports Grounds now reported—
       (a) the Safety Certificate issued by the former South Yorkshire County Council (as amended
     by Sheffield City Council) to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in respect of the
     Hillsborough Sports Ground be amended as follows —
           (i) Schedule 3 shall be amended to provide for a reduction in the permitted capacity of the
           Spion Kop terrace from 18,200 to 16,800 spectators:
           (ii) Condition 5 shall be amended to read as follows —
             “Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act the Holder shall not cause or
          permit the Sports Ground or any of its installations to be altered (which term shall exclude
          minor remedial works which do not in any way affect the safety of the Sports Ground) in
          any manner whatsoever without the prior consent of the Council. In addition, no temporary
          structure shall be installed without the prior written consent of the Council. The Holder
          shall supply the Council with copies of such plans, specifications and calculations as the
          Council may reasonably require to enable any application for such consent to be considered
          and shall comply with any conditions attached to that consent” ;
       (b) further to the removal of radial fences and consequential works at Sheffield United
     Football Club, Bramall Lane, in accordance with the Notice of Consent issued on 25th August,
     1989 and in view of the fact that the newly installed barriers have not been tested no spectators
     shall be permitted in the area surrounding the new barriers until such time as the barriers have
     been tested and found to be satisfactory; and
        (c) a Prohibition Notice under Section 10 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 be issued
     in respect of Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd., prohibiting the entry of spectators to the Stadium.
