          MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                           1529

                                    Meeting held 18th April, 1990

Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore (Chair), Butler, Crowder, Godber, Griffiths, Moore, Moscrop,
Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Pye, Saunders, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.

1 General Purposes Panel
resolved   : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General Purposes Panel,
the following minutes be approved—
      Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 2nd April, 1990. Present— Councillors Butler
    (Chair), Lamb, Moscrop, Mrs. Mulhearn, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.
★    ( 1 ) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
    The Mill Public House, Westfield
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported on an application for the renewal
    of the public entertainment licence issued in respect of The Mill Public House, Westfield. The
    Panel received copies of (a) a letter which accompanied the petition submitted to them at their
    meeting held on 2nd January, 1990 (page 1089 of the printed minutes), signed by 47 residents of
    Westfield objecting to alleged noise and vandalism arising from the disco at The Mill Public
    House, (b) a letter from Bass Taverns enclosing the application and (c) a letter to the licensee
    from the Director of Health and Consumer Services following an inspection of the premises by an
    Environmental Health Officer. The meeting was attended by representatives of the applicants
    and of the Department of Health and Consumer Services.
      A t this stage in the proceedings, the Panel
       Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before a decision is made on
    the application under consideration and before discussion takes place on the subsequent item of
    business which relates to an application for the renewal of the public entertainment licence issued
    in respect of Charlie Parkers Nightclub, Charles Street, on the grounds that, in view of the nature
    of the business to be transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure
    to them of exempt information as described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of the Local Government Act,
    1972 as amended, relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons and legal matters
    and advice.
       The Panel then considered the application for the renewal of the public entertainment licence
    issued in respect of The Mill Public House, Westfield.




      At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were re-admitted to the meeting.
★    (2) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    Urgent Item—Removal o f Perimeter Fences
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on applications
    submitted by the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs to remove the pitch
    perimeter fences from the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds, respectively. The
1530    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  report enclosed copies of correspondence from the Home Office, the Head of Administration
  and Legal Department and the Football Clubs concerned and an extract from the Final Report of
  Lord Justice Taylor.
    Resolved: That (a) approval in principle be given to the proposals outlined in the report now
  submitted for the removal during the coming close season of pitch perimeter fences at the
  Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds;
    (b) the Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds) be authorised to call a meeting of
  representatives of the two football clubs concerned and the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory
  Group to discuss proposals for suitable structures to replace the perimeter fences; and
     (c) the two football clubs concerned be required to submit to the Council proposals for the
  removal of the pitch perimeter fences and their replacement by suitable alternative structures in
  time to enable the necessary works to be carried out in the close season.
          In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act,
  (n o t e :
  1972 as amended, the Chair of the Panel (Councillor Butler) decided that the above item should
  be considered as a matter of urgency as formal applications had not been received until after the
  despatch of the agenda and it was necessary to make an early decision in principle, to enable
  proposals to be developed with a view to the works being completed during the close season.)
  Advisory Group
    The Panel received and noted the minutes of meetings of the Safety of Sports Grounds
  Advisory Group held on 9th and 22nd February, 1990.
  Proposed Sports Grounds Forum
     With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989,
  in the light of the interim report of Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Disaster, to
  establish a Safety of Sports Grounds Forum to discuss general matters relating to the safety of
  sports grounds with representatives of the football clubs and supporters associations, the Head of
  Administration and Legal Department submitted a report reviewing the Panel’s decision in the
  light of Recommendation 31 of the Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor.
   Resolved: That (a) the resolution of this Panel of 27th November, 1989 (page 947 of the
 printed minutes) relating to the establishment and operation of a Safety of Sports Grounds
 Forum be rescinded;
   (b) the Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds) be authorised to arrange appropriate regular
 meetings with representatives of the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs
 and the supporters associations to discuss general issues relating to the safety of sports grounds;
 and
    (c) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to report back at the end
  of the 1990/91 Football Season on the suitability and effectiveness of this arrangement.
 Expiry o f Safety Certificates
   The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report referring to the
 recommendation in the Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor that safety certificates should be
 reviewed by the Local Authority at least once annually and should be required to be renewed
 annually, and containing proposals for the three General Safety Certificates currently in force to
 be amended accordingly. The report enclosed extracts from the Safety of Sports Grounds Act,
 1975 and the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations, 1976 and 1987.
    Resolved: That the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised
   (a) to take all necessary action to amend the General Safety Certificates currently in force in
 respect of the Hillsborough (Sheffield Wednesday) and Bramall Lane (Sheffield United) Sports
 Grounds and Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton), (i) to provide for the expiry of the Certificates
 on 31st July, 1990 and (ii) to include a condition that Certificate Holders should apply to renew
 their respective Certificates at least three months before the 31st July, 1990, or such shorter
 period as the City Council agrees to permit and, if an application is properly submitted, the
 condition should allow for the current certificate to remain in force until the application for its
 renewal is determined by the Council; and
   (b) to inform Certificate Holders in writing that (i) should they fail to apply to renew a
 Certificate, the Council will consider as soon as possible on the expiry of such Certificate whether
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                              1531

or not to issue a prohibition notice in respect of the respective sports ground and (ii) with regard
to any such application, the inspection procedure to be detailed will be an integral part of the
process adopted by the Council to determine the application.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground—Emergency Lighting
  With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 5th February, 1990
(page 1220 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
a report on a proposal submitted by the Consulting Engineers on behalf of Sheffield United
Football Club for the upgrading of the emergency lighting provision at Bramall Lane Sports
Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from the Consulting Engineers and the South
Yorkshire County Fire Service relating to the proposal.
  Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the letter of the Consulting
Engineers of 6th February, 1990, for the improvement of the emergency lighting at Bramall Lane
Sports Ground (Sheffield United), on the understanding that all associated works are completed
before the beginning of the 1990/91 Football Season.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground—First-Aid Facilities
  With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd January, 1990
(page 1088 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
a report on a proposal of the Sheffield United Football Club to use temporary mobile
accommodation for the provision of first-aid facilities at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground.
   Resolved: That (a) approval in principle be given to the proposal outlined in the report now
submitted for the use of temporary mobile accommodation for the provision of first-aid facilities
at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground for the 1990/91 Football Season;
   (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to give notice in writing to
the Sheffield United Football Club that a permanent first-aid facility will be required before the
start of the 1991/92 Football Season;
  (c) the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group be requested to undertake a site visit with
representatives of the Sheffield United Football Club to ascertain a suitable location for the
temporary accommodation; and
  (d) the Sheffield United Football Club be required to deposit with the City Council not later
than 15th May, 1990, an appropriate scheme for the provision of first-aid facilities in the proposed
temporary accommodation.
Hillsborough Sports Ground—Emergency Lighting
   With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 22nd December, 1989
(page 1086 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
a report on a proposal submitted by the Consulting Engineers on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club for the upgrading of the emergency lighting provision at the Hillsborough Sports
Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from the Consulting Engineers and the South
Yorkshire County Fire Service relating to the proposal.
  Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the letter of the Consulting
Engineers of 6th February, 1990, for the improvement of the emergency lighting provision at
Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday), on the understanding that all associated
works are completed before the beginning of the 1990/91 Football Season.
Hillsborough Sports Ground—First-Aid Facilities
  With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd January, 1990
(page 1088 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
a report on a proposal submitted by the Consulting Engineers on behalf of the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club for the extension of existing first-aid facilities at the Hillsborough
Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from the Consulting Engineers, the South
Yorkshire County Fire Service and the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and
memoranda from the Building Surveyor and the Director of Health and Consumer Services.
  Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the letter from the Consulting
Engineers dated 24th January, 1990 and plan No. 12267/8 referred to therein, subject to the
inclusion in the proposal of the recommendations of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory
Group as detailed in Section 3 of the report now submitted and on the understanding that all
associated works will be completed before the start of the 1990/91 Football Season.
1532    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton)—Provision o f Doctor
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on an application of
    Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited for their current General Safety Certificate to be amended so
    as to remove the requirement for at least one medical practitioner to be present at each specified
    sporting activity at the Sheffield Sports Stadium, as there was no reasonable expectation of more
    than 2,000 spectators attending such activities. The report enclosed a copy of a letter from
    Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited.
       Resolved: That (a) the application now submitted by Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited for the
    amendment of the General Safety Certificate issued in respect of Sheffield Sports Stadium so as
    to remove the requirement for the attendance of a medical practitioner at all specified sporting
    activities be granted; and
       (b)   the Head of Administration and Legal Department (i) be authorised to amend the relevant
    General Safety Certificate accordingly and as soon as is practicable with the inclusion in a suitable
    condition within the Certificate of the comments of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group
    in the matter and (ii) be requested to report back to the next meeting of this Panel giving details
    of the costs incurred by the Council in undertaking such amendment of the Certificate.
★    (3) REVIEW OF LICENCE FEES
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report reviewing the fees
    charged by the City Council for the issue of miscellaneous local licences. The report also
    contained information on the assessment of administrative costs of the operation of the licensing
    function.
      Resolved: That (a) the fees to be charged for the issue of licences as detailed below be
    increased with effect from 3rd April, 1990, as follows—
                                              Existing                           Proposed
    Licence Type                      1st Licence      Renewal           1st Licence      Renewal
                                           £              £                   £              £
    Track Betting
    Licence Annual
    (Statutory Maximum)                  350              350               350              350
    Initial                               10                                 10

    Public Entertainments
    Licences
      Class I (Annual
      Licences—
      Nightclubs, etc.)                  600              600              1025             1025
       Class II (Annual
       Licences—
       Other Premises)                   185              185               210              210

       Class III (Annual
       Licences—Incidental
       Music Only)                        36               36                38               38
       Class IV (Occasional
       Licences)                          26                                 29
       Transfer of Licences               46                                 58
       Variation of Licences                                                 58
    Certificate of
    Suitability                          600              600               620              620
    Cinemas (Statutory
    Maxima)
      Annual Licences                    173.50           173.50            173.50           173.50
      Monthly Rate                        58               58                58               58
      Transfer                            35                                 35
