         MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                             513

re s o lv e d :   That the proposal contained in the report now submitted be approved.

4 Publicity Department
Four-Monthly Report on Staffing
  The Committee received and noted the four-monthly report on staffing of the Chief Publicity
Officer.

Service Planning
  The Committee received and noted a report of the Chief Publicity Officer on service planning in
her Department giving details of target achievement and objectives and the outlook for future years.
Christmas Illuminations
   The Chief Publicity Officer submitted a report on proposals for the provision of Christmas
Illuminations for 1989/90 in The Moor, Fargate, Barker’s Pool, Pinstone Street, the Peace Gardens
and Castle Square with extensions to other areas should further funds become available.
re s o lv e d :   That approval be given to the proposals contained in the report now submitted.
Revenue Budget
 The Committee received a report of the Chief Publicity Officer on the monitoring of the Revenue
Budget.
Lord Mayor’s Secretariat
  The Committee received a report of the Chief Publicity Officer on a review of the staffing
arrangements for the Lord Mayor’s Secretariat carried out by the Personnel Department and noted
that, because of the varying nature of the workload of the Lord Mayor’s Attendants, it was
proposed to bring the relevant posts into line with the NJC Conditions of Service for APT&C staff
without delay and as recommended by the review.

5 Capital Programme Out-Turn 1988/89
  The Committee received and noted a joint report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
Department, the City Treasurer and the Director of Land and Planning on the out-turn of the
Committee’s Capital Programme for 1988/89.

6 Safety of Sports Grounds
  The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report informing
members of action taken in respect of sports grounds in lie City as a result of the Inquiry into the
Hillsborough Disaster, giving details of staffing changes which would be necessary to deal with the
additional demands on the Licensing Section of his Department arising from the recommendations
contained in Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report and outlining other future necessary action in the
matter.
re s o lv e d :   That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
  (b) approval be given to the proposal contained in the report for the creation of two additional
posts of Chief Licensing Officer and Licensing Officer to deal with safety of sports grounds and
other issues, subject to such proposals being discussed with the appropriate trade unions under the
Council’s Responding to Change agreement; and
  (c) the attention of the Policy Committee be drawn to the fact that this Committee has insufficient
resources in its Revenue Budget to cover the cost of providing the two additional posts.

7 Municipal Enterprises
Action taken under Delegated Powers
  The Committee received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, on action taken
by him under delegated powers to let stalls at Exchange Street and The Market Place, Crystal Peaks
Shopping Centre, Waterthorpe.
Four-Monthly Report on Staffing
  The Committee received and noted the four-monthly report on staffing of the Municipal
Enterprises Management Board.
