          ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                    229

      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
    aspects of the application relating to The Palais, London Road.
      A t this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
       Resolved: That, subject to the receipt of a satisfactory report from the inspecting authorities
    following the refurbishment works now reported and to the withdrawal of the appeal to the
    Magistrates Court, authority be given for the City Solicitor and Head of Administration to grant
    a public entertainments licence in respect of The Palais, London Road for a period of six months
    in view of the previous history of the premises.
    N im m o’s, Sidney Street
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report requesting that
    consideration be given in principle for a public entertainments licence in respect of premises at
    Nimmo’s, Sidney Street. The hours applied for were from 11.00 p.m. until 8.00 a.m. the
    following morning on each day of the week. The premises were inspected by the relevant
    authorities on 14th April, 1994 and significant alterations and improvements were considered
    necessary to bring them to the required standard. The applicant addressed the meeting, stating
    that he had had previous experience of organising events at clubs and confirmed that he would
    not be applying for a liquor licence in respect of the premises. An Officer from the South
    Yorkshire Police addressed the Sub-Committee and stated that discussions had taken place with
    the applicant regarding the proposed opening hours and although the Police would have no
    objection to late opening on Fridays and Saturdays, they would oppose any application to operate
    late hours on other days of the week.
      Resolved: That the application now submitted for consideration to be given in principle to an
    application for a public entertainments licence in respect of Nimmo’s, Sidney Street and the
    observations now made by the relevant Authorities, be noted.
★    (2) HYPNOTISM ACT 1952
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application to hold a
    performance of hypnotism on the 17th May, 1994 at The Stadium, Broughton Lane. The
    hypnotist, Mr. John Care, addressed the Sub-Committee on various aspects relating to his act.
       Resolved: That the public and press, the applicant and officers of the City Council involved in
    the application relating to a performance of hypnosis be excluded from the meeting before
    further discussion takes place on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
    transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
    information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Local Government Act 1972 as amended by
    the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985 relating to (a) legal matters and advice
    and (b) proposed action under any enactment by the Authority.
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
    aspects of the application relating to the performance of hypnosis.
      A t this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
       Resolved: That, subject to the observance of the standard conditions now reported in respect
    of public performances of hypnotism and to the deletion from the programme now discussed of
    items 18, 31 and 46, the application now submitted for a performance of hypnosis to be held at
    the Stadium, Broughton Lane on the 17th May, 1994, be granted.
    (3) FILM CERTIFICATION
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on a request which had been
    received from the General Manager, W arner Brothers Theatres (UK) Limited, Sheffield for this
    Sub-Committee to consider changing the classification of the film “Mrs. Doubtfire” from the
    British Board of Film Classification “ 12” category to “PG ” . In pursuance of the decision of this
    Sub-Committee of 17th March, 1994, a representative of the Director, Arts Department, had
    viewed the film and his comments, stating that in his opinion the “ 12” classification awarded by
    the British Board of Film Classification should be upheld, were appended to the report.
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally that a letter from a member of
    the general public had been received in support of the film’s reclassification.
230       ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      Resolved: That, in the circumstances now reported, the decision of the British Board of Film
    Classification to determine a rating of “ 12” for the film “Mrs. Doubtfire” be applied to
    performances held in Sheffield.
★   (4) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS AND THEATRE LICENSING
    Sheffield Arena, Broughton Lane
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application for the
    renewal of public entertainments and theatre licenses in respect of the Sheffield Arena,
    Broughton Lane. The premises had been inspected by the relevant authorities on 13th April,
    1994 and were found to be in a satisfactory condition. The hours originally applied for were 8.00
    a.m. until 2.00 a.m. the following morning on each day of the week but the City Solicitor and
    Head of Administration stated that following discussions this had been amended to 8.00 a.m.
    until midnight each day of the week with provision to vary the hours for pre-booked special
    events.
      Resolved: That the application for public entertainments and theatre licences in respect of the
    Sheffield Arena, Broughton Lane be granted for a period of 12 months subject to the hours being
    restricted to 8.00 a.m. until midnight the following morning on each day of the week in view of
    parking and other problems now discussed and associated with this area.
    Eckington Hall, Sheffield Road
       Resolved: That, in the circumstances outlined in the report now submitted by the City Solicitor
    and Head of Administration, approval be given for the renewal of a public entertainments licence
    in respect of Eckington Hall, Sheffield Road for a period of 12 months.

    The Leadmill, Leadmill Road
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application which had
    been received in respect of the Leadmill, Leadmill Road for an extension of hours to the public
    entertainments licence until 4.00 a.m. for one event only to be held on the 7th May, 1994. The
    applicant stated that Leadmill was planning to host a prestigious event on the evening of 6th May.
    1994 and this was the first stage in its long term strategy to tour throughout Britain and then
    Europe to promote Britain's club scene.
      Resolved: That approval be given for an extension of hours until 4.00 a.m. to the public
    entertainments licence in respect of the Leadmill, Leadmill Road on Saturday 7th May, 1994.
★   (5) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS—SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
    Spion Kop Fencing
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
    submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club tc
    provide along part of the route leading to Exit W of the Spion Kop, a fence which, amongst oth;:
    things, would prevent access to pieces of shale etc., under the Stand’s structure.
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head c:
    Administration in approving the proposals now reported to provide a fence along part of th;
    access/egress route leading to Exit W within the Spion Kop Stand, such work to be com plet:;
    before the end of the 1994 closed season.
    West Stand and Exit Stairways
      Resolved: That, in the circumstances outlined in the report now submitted by the City Solicircr
    and Head of Administration, confirmation be given to his action in approving a propose
    submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football C lub::
    provide additional guard rails at the bottom of the West Stand and exit stairways at t i :
    Hillsborough Stadium.

★   ( 6 ) STREET TRADING
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report (a) which referred to iz:
    City Council’s scheme to permit night time hot food street trading at sites on Bank Stre;:
    Burgess Street, Dixon Lane, East Parade, George Street, Hartshead, Holly Street and Norfcii
    Street and (b) on applications received for street trading consents in Holly Street and Norfc'.*
    Street.
