       D         A V I E S
      A         r      n       o      l       d

      C        o       o      p       e      r
       OAYIESARNOLO COOPER SOLICITORS 12 BRIDEWELL PLACE L0 N 00N EC4V 8A0
       TELEPHONE 0 1 -3 5 3 6 5 5 5 TELEX 2 6 2 8 9 4 LDE 172 FAX 0 1 -9 3 6 2020


     R C Paramor
     Chief Fire Officer
     E ss ex Co unty Council
     Fire and Rescue Service
     R a y l e i g h Close
     Hutton
     B r e n t w o o d CM13 1AL


      o u rref              6/clm                                                                                                     10th January 1990
      YOUR REF




     Dear

      I ver y m u c h enjoyed the opportunity of addressing you and such
      an     intimate      group    of   your colleagues last week and will
      ce r t a i n l y prize my s h iel d and my tie.

     I     have        smartened    up  the notes  which  assisted me ' in  my
     p r e s e n t a t i o n and I enclose a copy which feel perfectly free to
     reproduce and supply to all of those who attended and indeed to
     any others who mi g h t find my thoughts of assistance.

     B e a r i n g in mind the importance wh ich I placed upon liaison w i t h
     L i a b i l i t y Insurers it occurs to me that your legal colleagues
     may think it appropri ate to send a copy of my notes to the
     Coun cil 's insurers who I understand are the Municipal Mutual,
     of course well known to me and to my colleagues.

      If there is anything arising from what I said last week or out
      of these notes (which cover additional areas which I glossed
      over in the time a l l o t t e d to me) please do       not hesitate to
      c o n t act me.        In the meantime I would very    much value your
      s u p p l y i n g me with a list of all of those who attended.

      Finally, bearing in m i n d that I was commended to you by your
      c o n t act at, I believe, Leic est er University may I invite you to
      let her - have a copy of the        attac hed notes  which are more
      compreh ens ive than the ones I prepared for the Law Society
      Local Gov ernment Gro up Conference on 9th October last which I
      k n o w sfee a t t e n d e d -

      Your


      D A V I D /SC -MCINTOSH




0   0 A V I 0 A. M d N T O S H JO H N PARKER V INCENT 0 ‘CALLAGHAN 0 A V I 0 R O G E R S MICHAEL 0 0 B I A S SIMON PEARL J 0 H N C 0 A T 0 N A N 0 R E W BRITTON JOHN SMITH
    N I C H O L A S R O C H E Z MARX BEATTIE KENNETH M c K E N Z IE ALAN FISHER ANNE WARE DANIEL G0WAN AN0REW HIGGS G E H A L 0 0 MA H 0N ET MICHAEL FLETCHER
M   0 A V I 0 M c L . R O B E R T S 0 A V I 0 HERTZELL R O B E R T LEE M IC HAEL COVER JANET MACMILLAN NICHOLAS S I N F I E 1 0 LAURENCE M E S S E R KIGEL MONTGOMERY
Q   CO N SU L T A N T : ANTHONY HA RR IS
    l O R O O N B R U S S E L S MAORIO
   NOTES ON DAVID MCINTOSH’S ADDRESS TO THOSE VITH SAFETY
 AND EMERGENCY RESPONSIBILITIES WITHIN E8SEZ COUNTY COUNCIL
  AT IT8 FIRE AND RESCUE 8ERVICE8 HEADQUARTERS, BRENTWOOD
                 ON THURSDAY 4 JANUARY 1990

INTRODUCTION

It is with great trepidation that I presume to address you
given that I sun a lawyer in private practice who just happens
to have gained more than his fair share of experience in
defending high profile and media driven mass injury cases on
behalf of occupiers of premises, operators of transport and
manufacturers of products.

I am conscious that your daily responsibilities involve Safety
and   Emergency   Planning   on   a   much   wider   scale    than      my
involvements.

Indeed when listening to various of the Local Government
speakers with whom my partner Alan Fisher and I shared the
platform at the Law Society's Local Government Group's Major
Incidents and Disasters Conference on 9 October 1989 I
realised that the Fire, Police and Ambulance Services outrank
everybody else in the field on which I address you today.

Those services, with full Local Government involvements did,
after all, respond heroically to the greatest UK disaster of
them all, namely the catastrophic consequences of the Second
World War which devastated London and other major cities.

There is therefore     little which I can usefully say to you
regarding practical    Safety and Emergency Planning within your
own areas of expertise.

There are, however, distinctions with major differences
between   the way in which society reacted to wartime
catastrophe and to post-war tragedies such as the Abervan
slag-heap collapse and the Flixborough Fire of a good few
years   ago.    Then personal injury litigation was          properly    a
well after-the-event development.   How compensation claims
come to the fore as major media topics sometimes even before
rescue workers and the ambulances have left the disaster
scene.

It is very difficult to publicly challenge their motives but I
do wonder about the behaviour of some of the now far too
regular plaintiffs' lawyers who always seem willing to express
views on blameworthiness before any investigation of the
underlying facts has taken place. Which of. these "ambulance
chasers- will be the first to arrive at a disaster scene even
before the tragedy strikes.

For obvious reasons I am not prepared to indicate which
plaintiffs' lawyers I have in mind. I do, however, absolve
Rodger Pannone and Michael Napier from this particular
criticism. I do so because of their prominence as plaintiffs'
lawyers and the consequent risk that it might be thought I
have them in mind. To the contrary they do not normally turn
up at disasters scenes prematurely and they only usually make
carefully considered statements.

They, with their less reputable brethren and, it is fair to
say, others of good professional standing and competence have
ensured that post-disaster litigation virtually begins as soon
 as the first media reports are filed.

 This is something which Kate Adie deplored as a guest speaker
 at the Law Society's National Conference in Harrogate in
 October 1989.    She was critical of society's demand for
 -instant   answers’* and   for   the  immediate   search  for
 -scapegoats" while emotions run high amongst the injured and
 bereaved.

 Deplored or not this does, however, appears to sell copy and
 irresponsible journalism appears to pay off.

 What    it means   is   that those who appear,   sometimes   on the



                                  -   2-
scantiest grounds, to be blameworthy are seen as "fair game"
by those sore than willing to conject on civil liability. Zt
is a great shame that a number of plaintiffs' lawyers, who by
their training ought to be cautious and objective, once
invited by the media to comment are too often willing to do
so (in most cases only with the assumed consent of their
clients) and always with a view to bringing settlement
pressures to bear at the earliest possible stage. No apologies
are forthcoming in respect of these utterances when, on proper
investigation, they are found to be wholly groundless.-

This is very much the changed scene which confronts those
thought to be liable for major disasters and those, like me,
who are regularly called upon to defend them.

THE LESSONS OF PAST DISASTER INVOLVEMENTS

In   addressing you I am able to draw upon my own and my
firms' involvements    in   far too many Disaster cases.   They
include    the Abbeystead Waterworks explosion,      Manchester
Airport   catastrophe, the Teneriffe PanAm/KLM collision, the
Bradford and    Hillsborough football ground tragedies and the
Piper Alpha rig collapse. All of these were single incidents.
In addition I have had personal involvement        in multiple
incident cases such as the Whooping Cough vaccine, Opren
cases and sun presently       involved  in   the Tranquilliser
litigation on behalf of a leading manufacturer and the HIV/AIDS
Haemophiliac cases for all of the Regional Health Authorities
of England and Wales.

As you will all know these are not ordinary cases,  It is
not enough   to defend them on whatever legal basis may be
available. They impose extra - legal pressures and require
crisis management and media skills.

They    are  commercially undefendable on the part   of   a
"target-” defendant   whose safety, emergency and security
procedures are themselves susceptible to serious criticism.
Even where good legal defences exist their value can be


                              -   3-
undermined if    the extra-legal   pressures   and      the    media
orchestrated crisis is not adequately parried.

Thus   the   importance of pre event Safety    and   Emergency
Procedures Planning - not only do reduce the risk of Disaster
»nri   to   minimise   the  consequences   of   those    which
nevertheless occur - but to make sure that those confronted
with multiple claims are able to respond effectively within
the ensuing crisis and later by way of the best -possible
legal defences.

Some   of the disaster cases I have already mentioned have
been satisfactorily    defended   without defendants    having
accepted liability which was not theirs and without payment of
exorbitant damages.    My firms' own cases of Abbey stead and
Whooping Cough where our clients entirely avoided liability
are   examples    of resolute defences prevailing in   the    face of
media campaigning and legal proceedings.

Other   instances which my colleagues and I have had       no
influence upon also spring to mind where, for example, Rodger
Pannone   has extracted    generous (by English and Scottish
levels of damages) payment not just because his clients had
good legal claims but because the paying defendants could not
withstand close     scrutiny of    their safety records and
emergency   planning.  Because of     this they   could   not
effectively parry the post disaster crisis pressures. They
and other defendants like them will always have to pay "over
the odds" to save their corporate reputation and businesses.
Furthermore it is from within the ranks of these types of
defendants that individuals face personal criticism and even
criminal prosecution.

 Others can   learn from the experiences    of these initially
 unwise   and later unfortunate defendants. By way of careful
 planning   measured against   the appreciation  of  the risks
 facing them other enterprises can      and should be able to
 minimise the risk of them becoming disaster litigation


                                 -   4-
defendants.  I do, however, esphasi.se that whatever skill is v ..
displayed after a catastrophic event it will not overcome
shortfalls    in prior     safety    and emergency procedures
planning.


The most important message I can communicate is of the need to
reduce the incidence of disasters.

I doubt whether I can be contradicted in stating that with
proper pre-event planning and greater investment ' in safety
procedures the     Bradford City Football Club    fire,   the
Zeebrugge   Ferry Sinking, Piper Alpha rig explosion,   Kings
Cross fire,    Clapham Railway crash, the Lockerbie aviation
catastrophe the Marchioness Disaster and possibly other well
reported single incident disasters could have been prevented.

Furthermore,some  recent disasters,     notably Piper Alpha
and Kings Cross, even if not prevented would undoubtedly have
been less catastrophic if safety and evacuation procedures
to minimise    the consequences of the foreseeable had been
adequately focused upon and provided. Similar considerations
apply to the Manchester Airport incident in respect of which
only   belated emphasis has been given to easing access- to
emergency exits and to     the potential of smoke protecting
hoods.

Despite the seemingly every-day evidence of multiple loss
of life    and limb which confronts us whenever we open    a
newspaper, listen to the radio or watch the television, I
regret to say there are far too many who continue to
believe that the "lightning" of a disaster will never strike
at them. "Ostrich" like they are continuing to operate their
enterprises with only a side-long glance at reviewing wholly
inadequate and out of date safety procedures.

In this    respect not only are they failing in their duty
(both moral   and  legal) to consider the welfare of their
employees, visitors,   customers  and the public at  large,


                             -   5-
they are also failing to manage 'their affairs ..in a prudent
and business-like way.     Even  if they axe well insured
against   any resulting personal injury      property damage
claims they are still likely to be badly daaaged as an
ongoing business unless they can show that disaster struck
them despite careful planning to minimise      the risk of
such an occurrence and that the consequences     were, so far
as possible, minimised by their foresight.


On   this   Pan American Airlines' business experience,      post
the Lockerbie Disaster, is illustrative. It has been reported
that in September 1989, nearly a year after the terrorist bomb
ripped through flight 103, claiming 270 lives, Pan Am flew
11%    fewer first     class   and    9% fewer business     class
passengers    than    in September     1988.    This significant
downturn in business     has   nodoubt been influenced     by the
perception,     rightly or      wrongly, that      the   security
arrangements in respect of that fatal flight were inadequate
- something which, whether justified or not,        has adversely
affected    Pan Am.     Other airlines    affected   by terrorist
attacks do not appear to have suffered such an            adverse
business consequence.


This is a message which I and no doubt a         number of you
have attempted to impart when addressing business associations
and seminars but even as I have spoken on those occasions I
have recognised expressions of disbelief on some of the faces
looking towards me. They seemed unaware of the fact that every
disaster I have referred to came as & surprise to victims and
defendants alike.

It   is only a matter of time before a disaster      occurs
resulting from circumstances for which no obvious defendant
can be blamed but where those responsible for emergency
planning and the rescue operation itself will be seen as
the only available targets against whom the victims can
seek compensation and possibly even retribution.   In such
circumstances clever plaintiffs' lawyers  can   be  relied


                              -   6-
upon to pick over      the shortcomings of lesser men. They
do, after all, take     pride  in pushing the boundaries of
liability further and further.

Your roles as Emergency Planners and Rescuers and the statutory
and other obligations involved place you in the "front line" as
possible "target" defendants if perchance there is no-one else
against whom blame can be easily and conveniently established.

This    means   that   the   performance   of   your   every-day
xesponsibilities such as the inspection and licensing of
premises might become the focus of critical scrutiny post a
disaster striking. This is certainly the case with regard to
the West Yorkshire County Council in respect of its Fire
 Service responsibilities towards the Bradford City Football
 Club.   This resulted in the Council contributing to the
 compensation payment made to the victims of that horrific fire.

Even worse there is also the risk of your at the scene and
after-the-event  roles being microscopically analysed  for
fault.   Rightly praised for unstintingand sometimes personally
dangerous rescue roles on day one but then, probably wrongly,
seen as possible defendants on day two when response time and
adequacy of resources and equipment start to be considered by
clever plaintiffs'    practitioners.     In this    context the
Hillsborough Football Ground tragedy provides an unhappy
example.   There the South Yorkshire Police Force is seen very
much as the main paying party although I note it is the
intention of the Police Authority and its insurers to pursue my
 firm's clients in that matter, the Football League and the
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for contributions.

 In making these observations the Kings Cross Underground
 Station disaster  also springs to mind.    Had there been no
 build up of combustible debris beneath the stairway and no
 other   dangerous  materials present and had the fire been
 started by a carefully planted IRA bomb then no liability for
 the fire itself could have been laid at the door of London


                                 -   7-
Underground Ltd or any other entity capable of answering
in compensation. Yet proceeding* would most certainly have
been   commenced  against London  Underground, and possibly
against others, on the basis that the consequences of such
IRA terrorism would have been much reduced     if  potential
emergency exits had been clear and indicated and if staff
had been at their posts and properly instructed and drilled
in safety and emergency evacuation procedures.

Only belatedly and considerably post the Fennell Inquiry
Report   and Recommendations are these      matters   being, I
hope properly addressed. Even now I suspect too little is
being done too slowly for as a regular tube train commuter
I have the impression that London Transport's Management
still have a lot to learn in many respects.        If I could
conveniently   avoid    the   inefficiency,    inconvenience,
overcrowding and sometimes shabbxness   of   the London tube
system and the   feeling which I share with the British
Safety Council that it is still not entirely safe I would
do so.

British    Rail    and   its   management failures   which   led   to
the Clapham       Junction Disaster also springs to mind. Sir
Robert Reid,      BR's outgoing Chairman has said in response
to Sir Anthony Hidden's report

"I am very concerned about the very      strong criticism of
the management   of the Signalling and     Telecommunications
Department of Southern Region. Clearly there has been a major
 failure   in that Department.

 BR's   failures,  as highlighted by the Clapham Inquiry,  are
 not something    which senior management can delegate.    The
 criticisms strike    at the entire management approach within
 BR. Yet,   once again, in the wake of a major disaster no
 member of senior management has resigned because of it, been
 dismissed, or otherwise       singled out.



                                    -   8-
The   Evening Standard in its editorial on 8 Hoveaber
1989 expressed the view that Sir Robert Reid ought to 'Save
resigned as a result of Sir Anthony Hidden'* findings. On the
basis that those who enjoy ultimate seniority ought to accept
commensurate responsibility I am inclined to agree. Its about
time those    at the top grasped the nettle of inadequate
management throughout their organisations and did something
about it before further avoidable disasters occur.

Persuasive urgings aimed at corporate management are plainly
not enough.    The roles of Local Government, the Health &
Safety Executive and others, such as the Port of London
Authority, charged with the responsibility of policing safety
within our community should be made far more effective than
has been the case to date. The Government must approve the
necessary budgets to allow this to happen and in doing so
can rest assured that not even their political opposition
will criticise them unless they make too meagre a provision.

I do    however recognise that today's managers      face ever
increasing   pressures to maximise profit when so         many
companies are subject to unwelcome take-over bids and public
enterprises have to work within restricted cash limits.

In such circumstances safety budgeting does           not      receive the
priority it deserves.

What is called for is a change of climate which forces those
in charge of companies and public enterprises to recognise
that safety planning and budgeting is an imperative and to
remove any feeling that shortcuts can be taken regarding it.

PERSONAL EXPOSURE    OF   DIRECTORS      AND   OFFICERS   TO   CIVIL   AND
CRIMINAL LIABILITY

As some of you will know in parrying the constant cry by
consumer campaigners like Des Wilson of Citizens Action
Campaign (CITCOM)  and Jack Ashley MP and plaintiffs lawyers


                                -   9-
like  Rodger Pannone  and  Michael   Napier for   increased
levels and even punitive damages I am on record in stating
that punishment and retribution should be divorced from the
payment of compensation.

It is not, however, reasonable to suggest that those who
commit serious wrongs should personally escape censure. I
therefore believe that where directors and officers of
companies or senior individuals within public enterprises and,
dare I say it, within Local and Central Governaent who
callously   disregard  safety   particularly  in   favour   of
productivity and profit they should face criminal prosecution.

In being pressed by the media over this I have, however, made
it perfectly clear that I am not encouraging or expecting a
mass   of criminal prosecutions decimating the boardrooms or
council chambers of this country but instead expect the risk
of prosecutions to heighten safety consciousness.      I have
likened this to my own attitude towards driving. After having
had my driving licence endorsed twice for driving between 80
and 90 miles per hour on the Mil I am now a reformed and
very safe and prudent driver. I regret to admit that this is
mainly because I do not wish to invite disqualification!

 It should,    however, be noted that personal accountability
 is very much "flavour of the month" and that there are a
 number of developments militating towards the involvement of
 individuals as defendants in personal injury litigation in the
 same   way   as they    now   have to -"face the music"   when
 financial misbehaviour occurs. If directors and management of
 major   corporations    are to be regularly arraigned in our
 criminal courts following upon financial scandals such as the
 Guinness and Blue Arrow affairs nobody ought to be surprised
 if more directors and officers       find themselves personal
 defendants within civil litigation.

 Only two months ago the Evening Standard reported that          a
 musician injured in anattack at a deserted underground


                              -   10-
station had, on legal advice, commencing proceedings against
London Underground Managing Director Dennis Tunnicliffe in
respect of his and London Underground's failure to prevent
the attack following upon two previous murderous attempts by
an unknown attacker. The claim will apparently rely upon the
fact that on the scene of the attack the railway station
was   "utterly devoid of supervision,  thereby creating    a
liability   justly upon the Underground for redress".    The
original writ apparently named Mr Tunnicliffe as *the sole
defendant but on the insistence     of   the court    London
Underground has also been joined       as   a   defending party.

Another event occurred two months ago which also heightens the
likelihood    of  individuals being  pursued   for   corporate
mismanagement and abrogation of duties. The Companies Bill
completed it's final stages through Parliament and includes
an amendment which will allow companies to indemnify and
insure directors against any liability for "negligence,
default,   breach of duty and breach of trust", including the
cost of any criminal proceedings.


This   amendment replaces the provisions of section 310      of
the 1985     Companies Act which prohibited a company from
indemnifying a Director or Officer against the costs of
defending criminal prosecution save after acquittal.       This
undoubtedly had the effect of denying access to the very best
of legal representation in a number of instances.        Ernest
Saunders, of Guinness fame, springs to mind as someone who only
now has resolved his difficulties with the benefit of Legal Aid
support.


Now Directors and Officers of companies will begin to demand
and receive as part of their remuneration package the benefit
of Directors and Officers Professional Indemnity insurance.
Once that becomes commonplace, there will, however be a side-
effect. They and their- insurers- will be seen   as potential
"deep pockets" against whom to litigate. This will result in
more Directors and Officers finding themselves co-defendants


                             -   11-
 with their companies than has been the case in .the past.
 Individuals within Public enterprises and Local Government are
 also likely to be singled out as personal targets.         Any
  acceleration in the existing trend of wherever possible blaming
  individuals could result m all of us becoming almost as uneasy
  as are doctors regarding the personal risk of litigation. (See
  David McIntosh's paper "Open Season on Directors" as delivered
  at the Insurance and Reinsurance Research Group Seminar in
. London on 28 November 1989).

 THE NEW PLAINTIFF'S TACTICS


 Most   of the prominent plaintiff's disaster lawyers are now
 well known and their regular tactics have become familiar.

 These include


       1. The appointment of "Lead firms" of solicitors       and
       the  constitution   of Action Group Committees in      the
       blaze of immediate post-disaster media attention.

       2. Immediate calls by spokespersons for the Action Group
       or Lead firms for a voluntary settlement scheme, with
       the threat of litigation, if at all possible in the
       United   States, held over the heads of the target
       defendant.

       3.   The use by Lead firms of any Inquiry set up to
       determine the cause of the disaster as an opportunity
       to vent the merits of their legal claim, with the
       plea   that   its findings ought to be sufficient to
       establish blame.

       4. Portraying the behaviour of other defendants who
       have set up voluntary compensation schemes in previous
       cases   as examples which should be followed by    the
       defendants in the instant case.



                               -   12-
      5. Encouraging the natural interest of consumer and
      political activists and the media as a means of bringing
      public pressure to bear.

      6. Identifying prime target defendants and exploiting
      every weakness amongst a group of defendants on the
      "divide and conquer" principle.

      7. Singling out individuals within target     defendants
      upon whom to     shower personal blame in     order   to
      create prejudice and personalise the claim.

      8.  Obtaining  legal aid support quickly    for those
      who qualify for it with such cases run as "test cases"
      at public expense.

      9. Refusing to identify every plaintiff within the group
      of   claimants  or to provide medical or other vital
      evidence and instead, insisting on seeking concessions
      on liability and even on the measure of damages as a
      means of obtaining an early "win" with the ability
      to thereafter choose the most severe cases with which’
      to set the level of damages with a "hoped for" domino
      effect.

These   tactics  require prompt,   skilled and co-ordinated
responses which are possible only if crisis management has
been pre-planned   with all possible before the event steps
taken    and essential after the event initiatives quickly
organised.

THE DEFENDA NT' S RESPONSE


After   the event initiatives will certainly involve briefing
and arranging regular meeting with the defendants'      "Crisis
Management    Team”    and   rationalising   thecommercial/
personael relations    and   legal   response with    both the
defendants' and their insurers' interests in mind.
In   particular, informed guidance is often necessary to
persuade defendants who have never previously been involved
in a crisis of this type that it is not always in their
long   term  best interests to respond to media and other
enquiries in ways which the immediate pressures suggest to
them might be appropriate.

If the media and consumerist campaigning pressures are to
be effectively    resisted   andtime bought so     that   the
substantive issues canbe properly     deliberated upon it  is
important for defendants to recognise that an across the
board negative response to media enquiries is likely to be
extremely   damaging. It    will play into the hands of the
plaintiff activists who will continue to be proactive with
the media in promoting     their one sided claimant serving
views.

If target defendants are not able to respond effectively
and sometimes by way of seizing the initiative in their
public statements,   they run the risk of losing the media
campaign and trial by crisis irrespective of the outcome of
the .legal  action which is bound to take far longer.   (See
David McIntosh's    paper "Trial  by  the Media in Multi-
Plaintiff cases presented    at  the Law   Society's  Local
Government Groups "Directors and Major Incidents" Seminar
in London on 9th October 1989).

As   well as responding to the immediate crisis, it         is
essential for potential defendants to retain, as quickly as
possible, competent   legal  advisers, both 'solicitors   and,
through them, barristers and such other experts e.g. engineers
and doctors, as are bound to be needed later on. Those who
are slow out of their blocks in taking these steps, will
find that first choice advisers and experts have been pre­
empted by others.

There   must be liaison with any co-defendants and procedures
for communicating with the media must be set up.
          contact      points «{ + k
    L*ad fira   rePresentatives                            ‘ *Cti°" Gr0UP “ d
    their deaired -divide and                                   ~    “   «oid


    The defendants- and oth*r -key.                 .
    •nd signed statements quiclcly                obtJ>   “ “ rt b* id*ntified
    not remain regularly available.                    ln* fr°” *“y “ho lni9ht

   * ‘tore of "key- document, must be built.

   In   the   event    of   Cour+
   factors become   importantT^ ^                  9* ^ 1"9 • C°mmenC*d* other
   procedural delav anrf       •.                       av°iding    unnecessary
   determination      of    all istP*n V *e*U n 9    falr and   objective
                             U 1MUeS Vhich        considered deferable.


  and, where    appropriat” 1"* vol "*'** °" UndefendaW« issues
  appropriate levels of damlgel° U”tarV Settleme« s offered at



  Plaintiff^ advisers in^the se"31^ “                   e9“al    ***        the
  they are not stacked in the p l l ^ I "



 -% ir tid
         f f .; lsoi a ^ u r                  any inabiuty -     -     -*   «
        in particular, what is
 failure to produce    full                    eCODang the ®lno«t i*writable




                                               r   “ -“ -  —       -■    ••
Despite   the privacy of such h               P°rtant lnterl°cutory «tages.

byActionG
        roups••-p-nitirrr^;-:^used
thresholds a b o v T ^ h J l T thei^                         ^       »   the
Plaintiff's ’ lawyers and c        1 ° lents              will    not permit
judice, confidentiality        “ f*19”* " and the **••• to * s e sub
                               and contempt of court rnlfi3 „


                                    -   15-
protective Orders    and   even Injunction* can be quickly sought
when   and   if the need arise*. •

freSPOKPTNG TO THE £&LL FOR "MID-ATLAPTIC PftMftggS".

Where one of the defendants, such as the manufacturer of
the aircraft    in the Manchester aviation disaster and the
leader of the oil rig consortium in the Piper Alpha case,
is arguably susceptible to OS jurisdiction and not certain of
being able to have the litigation remitted to the UK as a
result of forum non conveniens      arguments, the scene   is
 -right-  for plaintiffs' solicitors to seek "mid-Atlantic"
damages. At their highest they can constitute the perceived
 US levels of awards less the one third or more contingency
 fee deduction which the claimants would have suffered     if
 the   litigation  had  been  effectively pursued within the
United States.

 Unfortunately co-defendants     of the OS   based jurisdictional
 target   canalso  be drawn           into   exorbitant  payments
 (perhaps   because     of  contractual  indemnity   or   other
 considerations)    which they   could have avoided if their
 domicile and non US asset base were the .ole US jurisdictional
 consideration.

 Where there     isa real threat of US jurisdiction being
 exercised, those the potential victims of it, are quick to
 bring pressure to bear upon their own insurers and upon
 other, defendants regarding the-good sense- of acceding to
 damages requests which fall somewhere between UK and US levels
 and which do not involve the same degree of exposure to
 defence costs as would be the ease if contested litigation
 took place in the United States.

 Defendants       withUS presences  and   asset exposure  have
  considerable    leverage over their insurers when confronted
  by this   "forum shopping" threat. They can point   to  the
  capriciousness of the US court system and can threaten that
 if, as a result of it, they are found liable beyond the
 level of their insured limits, they will pursue their own
 underwriters for unlimited   liability on the basis of their
  bad    faith  in not agreeing to settle earlier at lower
 levels.


Rodger Pannone and other prominent plaintiffs' lawyers are
astute   in   their   appreciation  of   these   and   similar
considerations and able to bring to bear "divide and ’conquer"
tactics.


Thus,  the importance of my having urged upon you the value
of defendants quickly organising themselves in a way where
they organise  and control, in their joint best interests,
single and effective contact points in their mutual dealings
with skilful plaintiffs' practitioners.

Sometimes     the   plea for "mid-Atlantic" damages is    less
soundly based and relies upon the suggestion that because
other defendants,     in   earlier  cases,   have   seen   the
"wisdom" (as defined by the claimants' lawyers) of paying up
at that level, others should do likewise.    To this chorus is
added the    argument that   if one group of victims receive
"European damages plus” it is unjust for others to contemplate
accepting less.


It is only a matter      of time before a    regular European
defendantor insurer finds    itself involved in acase where
the right predicates exist for calling this type of bluff
by either seeking     a mandatory injunction from a European
Court requiring the litigation in question to be tried in the
European   country where    the   catastrophe occurred,    and
nowhere else, or by way of successfully challenging US in
personam    jurisdiction or succeeding    on   a forum     non
conveniens argument in the United States courts.


The pharmaceutical industry has, in a number of cases,
including the Opren one, succeeded in these respects and in
that case forced     "English   litigation"   to 'take    place
involving English levels of damages. ~

I believe the opportunity for this European forum approach
will arise in respect of a single incident disaster even with
some OS enterprise involvement and that the "mid-Atlantic"
damages path will not be as readily available as has been the
case recently.


When this occurs it will, no doubt, lead to a plaintiff's
lawyer and others adding to their "hue and cry " over the
inadequate levels of European damages.

INVITING OTHERS TO THE PARTY


It is    rare in mass    tortcases, whether single or    multi­
incident, for there only to be one defendant in the frame.

The   possible   defendants   are   usually identified,    with
considerable help from the media, very early on but later it
is not unusual for those advising the plaintiffs to settle upon
one or   possibly two as the real target    defendants and for
those to be pursued by way of Writs with the other possible
parties left to one side.

It is, however, dangerous for plaintiffs' lawyers not to name
as a defendant    anyone who might be held culpable just in
case their   main   "targets" avoid liability,   leaving  the
plaintiffs "high and dry" and perhaps statute barred against
others’ they might then      regret     not having   pursued   as
defendants from the beginning.

There are, however, good reasons for plaintiffs'       advisers
to counsel     against  a   "sue everybody"     approach.   For
example,in drug related litigation such as Opren, the general
approach    amongst   sophisticated Action Groups     and  lead
solicitors   has   been    against  suing  individual   medical
practitioners.   This is perhaps   because the pharmaceutical
companies have been seen as potentially deeper pockets or
because most patients are loathe to sue their own doctor with
whom   they    have  ongoing   and  valued  patient/physician
relationships.

In   some of the single incident disaster cases,   liability
has been pursued against an airline operator or against an
occupier of    premises     with confidence that such lone
defendant will be held jointly and severally liable, leaving
it to do the best        it can to obtain indemnity and/or
contributions from other parties.

It is essential whether in routine or mass tort cases for
the defendants' lawyers to quickly decide whether or not it
is   in their clients'    interest to face the music alone or
whether   to invite or coerce others to join the defendants'
party.  These types of deliberations can lead to decisions to
implicate Services such     as yours in respect of believed
shortcomings in before and after the event roles.

Sometimes the     interests    of defendants are better served
by trying  to      achieve     an amicable   sharingarrangement
without allowing a dispute over that to become public and
sometimes, where apportionment of blame cannot be rapidly
agreed,   the potential    defendants  agree to arbitrate or
resolve that disagreement by way of Court proceedings, after
the main    event. These   courses are wise where plaintiffs'
advisers have not      sued everyone    in   sight and where
internecine warfare    between defendants would play into the
hands of the claimants.

Where,    however, it is impossible to reach agreement       as
between potential defendants or third parties as to the sharing
of blame or as to an after the main action method            of
resolving    difficulties   over   apportionment,  it becomes
essential   for  the target   defendant already involved in
proceedings at the suit of the claimants, to take steps to
force others to   join    in   its agony.


                                -   19-
This   can be achieved directly, by way of   issuing Third
Party   proceedings,  joining  those who   owe' contractual-
indemnities or, from whom contributions as joint tortfeasors
alight be obtained, without the leave of the court if done
before   a Defence   is served and thereafter only on inter-
parte application.

It can also be achieved, in an indirect way, by approaching
the plaintiffs'   solicitors and inviting them to join other
defendants   with    the urgingthat if they do so,         the
possibility of a       settlement will be enhanced. This is a
tactic which is      well triedand tested, albeit not a happy
one by means of which to be victimised.

Alternatively,  a target defendant able to maintain a   denial
of liability canmerely blame others on the         basis that
their negligence or breach of duty towards the claimant
may   have caused the injuries •and losses, in which event,
those   advising the   plaintiffs will have to think again
regarding joining that other defendant as opposed to running
the risk of not doing so and failing against the original
target.

Where   a defendant blames another and the plaintiffs    then
joins that other and subsequently fail to establish liability
against it, the plaintiffs will normally obtain an indemnity
against costs   liability from the defendant who, in effect,
invited the joiner of the successful defendant.

A decision to organise the joining of another party whether
as defendant or third party is something which should not
be   lightly taken,   lest it upsets important commercial
relationships or    weakens overall defensive positions by
highlighting the target defendant's concern that it will be
unable    to   escape liability without worsting another.

In   pharmaceutical     cases   another   consideration     is   the
unseemliness,   unless there    is very good .reason,   of     a
pharmaceutical    company  named as     a   single   defendant,
implicating its own regulatory body and members of the medical
profession on whom it relies for a great deal of his business
custom.

THE IMPORTANCE OF AVOIDING DELAY


Although     the   primary   responsibility   for   efficiently
prosecuting personal    injury litigation lies heavily     upon
plaintiffs' Solicitors,    it    is not only plaintiffs,    the
courts   and, eventually,   the media who should be concerned
over unnecessary delay.    In   my experience the vast majority
of   defendants   and insurers dislike personal injury cases
dragging their heels.

Awards   of damages have, over recent years, risen markedly,
and the    longer  a case runs the more it costs in      legal
expense    on both   sides.     It is   in the interests    of
defendants   and defendants' practitioners not to allow undue
delay,  particularly as in most cases it is only too easy to
blame defendants for it, even where the fault lies elsewhere.

The   possibility  of out-of-court settlements which    reflect
the merits    and likely values of claims should always be
explored but, if settlements cannot be achieved amicably, there
are steps open to defendants' lawyers to ensure that cases
are as quickly as possible pursued towards hearings. In some
cases, defendants who feel confident as to the merits of their
defence ought to be anxious to have their name cleared by
way of early judicial decisions.

A philosophy involving defending to the hilt may have a
deterrent   effect and I do not know to what extent this may
have saved some defendants a great deal of money by way
of discouraging client claims, either from the onset or by
wearing down opponents.    I do, however, wonder whether the
sort   of publicity which   over defended cases can generate


                              -   21-
makes those savings worthwhile.
DISCOVERY


The adversarial nature of U.K. personal injury litigation
imposes    on    the   parties'     solicitors    a     personal
responsibility   to make    sure that there      is   full   and
frank disclosure of all relevant documents and no self-
serving decisions over what is and what is not disclosed.

It is just as important in catastrophe cases,     even where
the cause of the disaster is apparent, to make sure that
defendants, particularly   non-regular   clients who may not
appreciate this, are quickly acquainted with the importance
of     them preserving all  relevant   documents pending  the
determination of the litigation which is either threatened or
extant. Failure in this respect can lead to embarrassment
within the defendant company and even to adverse findings
if potentially helpful documents have gone astray.      Less
than frank discovery can also lead to professional criticism
and even the disciplining of the lawyers involved.

As     wellas cautioning regarding   the   preservation of
documents and any equipment or subject matter which might
need to be inspected it is important to "capture" all the
relevant documents early   on and to master them and their
bearing   upon liability   or   quantum.   Immediately post a
disaster it can be more important to review documents at Bead
Office   (before  they   are  seized   by   the   investigating
authorities) than to attend the disaster scene. Sometimes ones
own clients' documents contain "smoking guns" and the sooner
one knows   about   them the better.

When   the inspection of documents stage is reached it can
be dealt with by way of supplying copies to one's opponents
where only a few documents are involved, with the offer of
making the originals available. If,        however, voluminous
documents are disclosed as for example in scientific ("state
of the art" knowledge and foreseeability) cases then it is very
important to    make   sure that   the plaintiffs' advisers'
examination of the documentation is carefully monitored. In
particular it is important to focus on which of the documents
appear to interest the plaintiffs' advisers the most.

Sometimes,  particularly where litigation is commenced late
in the day, or where historical allegations are made, some
documents which ideally ought to be available may* not have
been preserved and occasionally even recent documents'are lost.

Proper and full explanation should be volunteered when there
are gaps of this type within one's clients'         documents
for if explanations are not     given there is the danger of
it being suggested the documents were selectively destroyed,
misplaced or lost and this can be extremely prejudicial.

AH    litigation   practitioners should remember   that   the
proper performance of discovery obligations is a personal one
so far as the solicitors are concerned and their duty to the
court in   this respect even exceeds their duty to their own
clients.

LEVELS OF DAMAGES


The   unpredictability of damages awards in cases where
liability is acknowledged or where a compromise settlement is
the proper course constitutes a major impediment to the
resolution of litigation without recourse to court hearings.

As a critic of the access to justice lottery which depends
more   upon financial means than upon merits, I am    also
critical of the damages lottery.


This   is why I favour the idea of a Compensation Advisory
Board as a sensible means of reviewing levels of damages and
making them   more uniform than   is the case now. CITCOM
(Citizens Action Committee) and its regular spokesman Des
Wilson are to be applauded for their original championing


                            -   23-
of such a board   notwithstanding      promotion   of this idea seems
to   have been temporarily abandoned.

Such    a   Board should include, contrary      to   CITCOM's
proposals, representatives from industry and its insurers and
should not be lawyer dominated.       As most personal injury
damages   awards are financed by insurers      from premiums
funded by commerce and consumers it would be helpful if
increases in levels of damages were to be phased so that
insurance premiums could be raised in anticipation and by
such means, the price spread fairly throughout society.

I do however deplore the urgings of CITCOM and others for
higher and higher damages with OS levels relied upon,  at
least in part, as an examples.

I   am very much on record in expressing the view that we
should guard against the dangers which have been experienced
within OS personal injury litigation which, as a result of its
bizarre   and exorbitant awards of damages, has closed down
public   facilities, bankrupted important companies, including
insurers,   and discouraged the proper practice of "high risk"
medicine.

The   awarding   of damages  for   personal  injury    should
remain compensatory in the UK and should not be mixed up
with retribution and accountability which,    in appropriate
cases should, as I have already stressed, be matters for our
criminal courts.

 Compensatory damages can, after all, be substantial. Within
 the last year or so two Elm plus awards have been handed down
 by the English courts and many other awards have been made
 which   in dollar terms have exceeded Elm.

 Rodger   Pannone recently   received  widespread           publicity
 championing    the idea that punitive damages             should be
 introduced into our    compensation system as a           force for


                                 -   24-
safety. I reject such an idea for, whether or not the punitive
element of damages goes to the claimant as a ”vind-fall ”
award or into a general fund to be used for industrial
safety, exorbitance in damages (as in the United States)
will punish the wrong people, namely innocent shareholders
and consumers who, one wayor another, always        "pick up"
commerce s expenses* Rodger Pannone argues that the threat
of large damages awards is      a real incentive in favour of
safety and quality control.      So is the personal threat of
criminal   conviction   and possible imprisonment   with   the
advantage that those punishments cannot backfire, in money
terms, upon the innocent.


Bereavement    damages, as awarded by the English      courts,
are however perceived by practically everyone as too low at
£3,500 and the Government's willingness to increase this
statutory amount     to £10,000 should   be welcomed. It   is,
however,    quite impossible   to   justify   any figure    as
representing adequate compensation for loss of life.

THE SINGLE INQUIRY/PRESIDING JUDGE m R i


Rodger Pannone and Michael Napier argue that the string
of Inquiries and Reports which follow upon personal injury
catastrophes   could be  replaced by a    single,  properly
constituted tribunal, headed by a High Court Judge able
to sit with assessors with the powers of a coroner and also
the power to penalise the culpable.


Such an idea is seductively attractive and is certainly
a responsible one in that it does not expect such atribunal
to decide on the apportionment of civil liability.

That is, however, something which Rodger Pannone aired as
a possibility a year or two ago, since when I believe a second
and better judgment on his part has prevailed.


If   after the event Inquiries are extended beyond the purpose


                              -   25-
of . ascertaining the cause of the disaster and making
recommendations to minimise recurrence in the future then
everyone    and  his   aunt:  not just   those who   receive
"Salmon letters" will insist that considerations of natural
justice entitle them to be fully represented before such a
tribunal.   The outcome would, as a result, be delayed to a
far greater extent than has been the case with leebrugge,
Kings Cross and Hillsborough.

I do not believe the Pannone Napier idea is necessarily a
bad one.   It does however, need to be thought through
very thoroughly    indeed   before Public Inquiries   into
disasters are extended beyond their present purposes.            ^

What is, however, very much needed is a better system
of deciding when Public     Inquiries take place   and more
certain ground rules as to how they operate than is the case
now. At the    moment   these Inquiries seem to be set up
depending  on how loud the public clamour       for them and
those of us who have the have experience of them can testify
no one Inquiry seems to be like any other.      In some  the
witnesses are allowed to give evidence in the same way as in
the civil courts with sufficient time for their preparation
and proper allowance for cross-examination on the part of
all interested parties whereas on other occasions they   are
rushed through with speed taking precedent over everything
else.

What   is needed is a properly constituted Committee to
carefully but quickly deliberate upon how'best the Public
Inquiry procedures for mass personal injury disasters can and
should   be improved.

Arguments as to civil liability and as to susceptibility to
criminal prosecution can often be won or lost at the Public
Inquiry stage.   As these Inquiries follow quickly upon the
disasters I cannot over-emphasise the importance of speedy and
thorough investigation and the preparation of the defence case


                             -   26 -
before the Inquiry begins.

PROTECTING THE DEFENDANTS' INTERESTS

In   all that one does as a defendants' practitioner,  one
should    hold the commercial interests of one's clients'
foremost.


The fact that we are instructed as legal specialists should
not obscure the fact that practically all of our clients,
and certainly all insurers and most corporations and public
enterprises  are more interested    in   the  economics  of
litigation and its effect upon their corporate welfare and
reputation than   the niceties of        the law.

We  should keep this in mind at all times so that we do not
get carried away as if on an academic exercise.

We   should   not allow our distaste for        individual   opponents
to colour our judgment and we should not see our litigation
as a means of promoting our own interests by, for example,
getting our names in the Law Reports when creating new law, as
opposed to extricating our client from litigation with the
best possible and often, low key, result.

We   should be willing to speak up for our clients        and,
where appropriate, assist them in responding to the media,
particularly where plaintiffs' solicitors can really only
be adequately parried by their defendant opponents and we
should certainly    not  sit back and allow the tort reform
debate   to  be dominated    by plaintiffs' practitioners and
their sympathisers. If we do, we are likely to be faced
by changes in civil litigation practice and even perhaps
in   the way the legal profession is organised, which may not
beserving of   our clients as regular defendants.

Our   interest    in the    concerns of our regular    defendant
clients should     extend    to wanting to influence the   Rules


                               -   27-
within which they and we          have to operate.    Influencing
the   compensation "climate"      is not the exclusive right of
plaintiffs' campaigners.

RECONCILING THE COMMERCIAL INTERESTS OF DEFENDANTS AND THEIR
INSURERS

I have already touched upon the possibility of differences
of approach as between defendants and insurers in th'e context
of claims for "mid-Atlantic" damages with their US "forum
shopping" aspect.

Where UK and European litigation arises involving defendants
who are insured against third party claims their      insurers
normally take over the defence responsibilities and with their
insureds'  participation appoints a law firm capable of
representing their joint interests.      Their interests are
usually common, ie to defend and only accept liability in line
with   the merits of the claim.

Disaster   litigation, with its crisis and trial by        media
phase, does however impose extra stress and strain on the
indemnifying relationship. Defendants in order to escape from
the crisis damaging their reputation and ongoing activities may
want to settle the     threatened   claims at any cost almost
irrespective of the legal merits.        Insurers, on the other
hand   are usually    only prepared   to    accept liability to
indemnify in respect of perceived legal liability at normal
levels of damages. On other, and much rarer, occasions where
economic settlements are available but defendants are still
concerned to "clear their names" at trial it can be the insurer
who is pro—settlement and the defendant against.

The   potential   for conflicts of interest of this type   is
well known to regular plaintiffs' practitioners who can make
insurers appear to be the villains of the piece       without
focusing on     the fact   that   they only take premiums to
indemnify   against   legal liability.


                                  -   28-
  I   «    certainly     aware         of   litigation   where   these
  iffering approaches     have   been reconciled by means of
 settlements being shared as between the insured and insurers
 in a way intended to reflect their differing perspectives.

 What   is  needed,   above   all,   is the earliest possible
 appreciation of    the   fact that multi-plaintiff b ass tort
 litigation   differs markedly     from individual  claims and
 requires a far greater degree of pre-planning’"

 Liability insurers as well -as insureds should be involved at
 the pre-planning    stage. They should      be familiar     and
 comfortable with their insured's Safety and Emergwwy and
 Emergency Planning Procedures and they should be built into
 the Crisis Management Team organised to respond when needed.
 Depending upon the nature of the Disaster risk in question.
 Legal and other potentially necessary representation, should be
 lined-up in advance and placed on permanent "standby* *o that
no-one   necessary to the crisis management activities are
wholly unprepared when, unfortunately, catastrophe strikes.


Whether or not this degree of pre-planning has taken place it
is of course essential for the insured, the insurers and the
commonly appointed advisers to -get together" as qaickly as
possible after    a  disaster  has struck in order to     co­
ordinate a joint response along the lines I hav* already
discussed. It is at this stage that an appreciation aeeds to
be gained as to the likely cost of defending and of the size
of possible costs and damages payments so that this can be
measured against the available coverage in order to find
out precisely who is financially exposed to pay what-

This is very important. Potential "payers" naturally *rpect to
have considerable "say" in how claims are defeated         and
regarding possible claims over for indemnity or contribution
against others.


It is absolutely essential that the views of all entities with


                             -   29-
a financial or commercial interest, actual or potential, are-
'taken into account on the defendants' side if possible
devisive problems are to be avoided.


THE SPECIAL POSITION OF THE SAFETY AMD RSSCVE .SSRVICgS

Most of what I have said today applies with even greater force
to     those    who   do    not    fulfil     official   Safety   and    Emergency
Services roles.

You    do,     however,    occupy your own premises,           operate your own
transport and sometimes provide services which, when things go
wrong, can cause multiple loss of life and limb.                   You therefore
have similar houses to put and keep in order from a Safety and
Emergency   Procedures   viewpoint.   Furthermore   in   these
capacities you will be judged by the highest of standards in
view of the expertise rightly attributed to you.                        Your "state
of the art" knowledge is higher than that of your "customers".
Many     of    you    in your own lecturing roles              contribute   to    the
advance         of     knowledge         in     the   Safety      and     Emergency
Procedures fields and most of you regularly attend lectures and
courses in these topics.

Over     and     above     this    you   have    potential    exposure    to     other
peoples' Disasters both in pre and post—event roles.


As Local Government you are subject to tight budgets and are
 rarely over-staffed.

 The    special claims handling demands of                   Disastter Litigation,
 involving multiple claimants; usually a number of co-defendants
 and a media case of crisis proportion to fight immediately post
 the disaster         (and sometimes even through and beyond hastily
 convened Public Inquiries) cannot normally be adequately met by
 relying only on in-house resources.

 I urge you to recognise that you could become                      implicated as
 Disaster Litigation              defendants and encourage you          to make sure
   that you ar. „ell organised again,t thit pc„ ibiUty;



   Insurers will^ioo* *“!“9h t0 ***“ ”            th*t your OMn Third Party
   involved as a party to c l v i i l Illga t L       P*rChanC# *°U b*c°"«



   indemnity^ w i u 0^    1^ * ^ 400* that your       in«“ranc« Units           of
  Yorkshire Police Authorlt e”OU9h?   ^                * * S°Ut*
  to face financial liaMl-t-10      COntext o£ HUl»boro«gh, have
  insurance with uncertainty'as^rth'th''4 **°*ed y°“r       °f
  recover the difference fro-             y°“ W i U ** *ble
  ratepayers.                 anyone else - other than local




  representation,     as to the      C°”f°rt leV*1S            be *9" * d as to
 crisis steering co^ittees Z ^ o t T ^     °* ^
 needs rather than leave those d e U b "
 the moment".                      derations until the *»gony of




 "outgunned- n T t ^ y V p l l i n t i * 7 *   1 °“        ^       ,~ Selves
 pre-retained ,and thJs ? not a v a U ^ T              ^      ^
 prepared, .ore obvious and more                           *°“i    ^       *“

      rtV1,1' oniya                                                    ^

cases.                       procedural    demands    of multi-pl*intif f


I can inform you from the experience of f
months that tv>                         firm over the recent
        that there is growing demand for this t v ™ ef nr.
commitment from firms like mine.                       P
The preparation of my own firm's Emergency Procedures Manual is
what led to our creating the first Major Incidents Unit within
a private UK law first. He announced this at a press conference
in January 1989 but in doing so took care to lay considerable
emphasis on the importance of accident prevention and planning
to minimise the consequences of the unavoidable.

I am pleased to tell you that my colleagues and I have, as a
result, been sought after as speakers at Safety and Disaster
Litigation Seminars and sometimes to advise industrialists on
the particular risks facing them.

We have nevertheless become involved in more and more cases as
defendants' lawyers post-disasters occurring and it is to that
end that our Manual has been organised.

The Manual was completed and published for my firms' internal
use in January 1989 and is now due for revision. As you can
see from the copy I have brought with me it is a substantial
document and I do not intend to deal with its contents in great
detail. It is however available for your inspection.

The Manual has its origins in the internal discussions which my
colleagues had following my firm's involvement in a number of
the disaster cases which I have already mentioned.       It was
clear from these discussions that a sophisticated approach was
necessary if we expected to continue to successfully parry
increasingly   well co-ordinated    groupings  of   plaintiffs'
solicitors constituting the Lead Firms or "Claimants Action
Groups" as formed after each and every multiple-disaster.

We recognise that in these types of cases defendants cannot
rely upon the expertise of an individual solicitor with only a
small back-up team to carry out all of the tasks and provide
all of the services necessary during the.post-disaster crisis
period and later in mastering the detail of all of the
individual claims constituting the group claim.



                              -   32-
We concluded that what was required in these natters was two
separate but closely co-ordinated "teams*. One to carry out/
aa quickly and as efficiently as possible, an investigation
into the circumstances of the disaster, and the other, with the
benefit of constant briefings from the first, to provide
guidance to the defendants in order to ensure the best possible
management of the crisis with a view to corporate damage
limitation.


Pour of our partners, namely Vincent O'Callaghan (some of whose
major roles have involved, Piper Alpha, Bradford City Football
Club and Hillsborough), Alan Fisher (the Abbeystead and
Peterborough explosions), David Rogers (various marine-type and
land based disasters), and myself (aviation, land based and
major pharmaceutical cases such as the Whooping Cough Vaccine,
the arthritic drug Opren, the current tranquilliser litigation
and the HIV/AIDS haemophiliac cases) are on "standby" to
undertake   appropriate responsibilities when unfortunately
another disaster occurs and our firm is instructed.      Two of
us have   had intensive - media training to enable us        to
effectively head up our "home office" team in either London or,
as from February, Manchester where we are opening in a
substantial way (or even, if appropriate within our Client's
Head Office), with another partner with his team involved "in
the field" in the detailed investigations.

Each of us has a copy of our firm's Manual in the office and at
home so that it can be taken with us in an emergency in order
that we have, insofar as we have foreseen it, all available
information at our fingertips both at and away from the office.

It is, in the wider context, a matter of regret that these
procedures have already been tried and tested within our
responses to some    of the disasters on which we have been
instructed since January last. For example my partner Vincent
0'Callaghan   whilst watching "Grandstand" at home on the
fateful Saturday afternoon received telephone instructions from


                             -   33-
the Liability Insurers of the Football League and Sheffield
Wednesday and was in touch with the Sheffield Club's Secretary
almost instantly. This ensured that no injudicious statements
were made on behalf of the Football League or the Club despite
very substantial pressure for their instant comments.      This
caution has undoubtedly served the League and the Club well and
was built upon by way of ensuring that their defensive case was
very carefully prepared in advance of the hastily .convened
Taylor Public Inquiry when the Counsel we retained .was very
effective indeed in cross-examining the many South Yorkshire
Police witnesses.

On the Monday immediately following Hillsborough,        whilst
Vincent O'Callaghan was attending upon the Club in Sheffield, I
was able to provide the media with a cautious, but better than
"no comment", statement. It was confined to expressing sympathy
towards the injured and bereaved and to deploring the over-
hasty comments of some plaintiff or pro-plaintiff lawyers who
had been too quick off the mark. These initial contacts with
the press have been built upon by partner Vincent and I do not
consider it a coincidence that, in the main, the Football
League and the Sheffield Wednesday Club have not been given a
"hard time" by the media.

As you will be able to see for yourselves our Manual is based
on a careful analysis of our requirements in order to ensure we
can properly represent the interests of our clients whatever
type of disaster case quickly comes upon them and us.        In
practice it amounts to a giant check—list of possible contact
points and a summary of the sort of regulations/legislation
which may need to be considered in a hurry without library
resources being at hand. This approach to potentially urgent
needs is capable of being adapted within manuals tailor made
for any enterprise.

The importance of .a carefully considered and well, co-ordinated
post-disaster response cannot be over-stated.



                              -   34-
One only    has to look at the shambolic way in which London
Transport Limited reacted to the Kings Cross Underground
Station fire (striking out in every possible direction
sometimes on the flimsiest of evidence with reluctance to
quickly admit liability) and contrast it with the way in which
British Rail (as it happens untypically) responded post'the
Clapham Rail crash. British Rail quickly realised that there
was no escaping liability so they rapidly admitted it and as a
consequence have been praised for their post-disaster attitude.
Again it is not a coincidence that British Rail behaved so well
  ter % the Clapham event.  They had the foresight to quickly
retain Roger Henderson, QC, who, as the Kings Cross Inquiry's
Counsel, had given London Transport such a hard time. This is
the perfect example of learning from the mistakes of others.

Perhaps, however, the very best post-disaster Public Relations
response was by British Midlands Airways whose Chief Executive,
Mr Bishop, said and did everything perfectly following his
company's Boeing 737 having crashed into the Ml embankment on
attempting to land at East Midlands Airport. Again this was no
  incidence for as I understand it Mr Bishop has a background
in Public Relations and was experienced in responding to the
media. Not many companies are as well served by way of media-
friendly Chief Executives.


Whilst dismissing coincidence as a feature of these cases in
which defendants have been efficient in their post event
responses it is perhaps pertinent to remember that it is not a
matter of coincidence that disaster so often strikes where
Safety and Emergency planning has not been foremost.     To a
degree potential defendants can make their own luck.

T H E IMPORTANCE OF A S C E P T I C A L INVESTIGATION


It is rare, if ever, that there will be one simple cause of a
major disaster.   Almost always one will find that there are
several factors which led to the catastrophe and each of those
has to be carefully investigated. The client company may have


                                    -   35-
of the incident. Internal findings oust be the subject of
careful analysis because of the risk of wishful thinking having
influenced.

Two examples will illustrate this.

The first concerned a case where there was an explosion at an
oil refinery in South Korea. The investigation undertaken by
refinery staff identified an alleged defective component as the
cause of that explosion. Subsequent inyestigations accepted at
face value the result of the initial inquiries and, in due
course, litigation was launched in England to recover very
substantial losses._. In reality, it was clear that the
component had not and could not fail and could not have caused
the explosion. Why did the investigators' reports reach their
original conclusion? The answer was that if, as indeed was the
case, the explosion had been caused by operator error, then the
operator and the line management above him, were likely to be
subjected   to   criminal prosecution leading to terns     of
imprisonment.    Thus the original investigators had a vested
interest in protecting their own position.

The second example concerns an explosion upon a petroleum barge
in Hull. This like the first of my examples was handled by my
colleague David Rogers.    It was originally thought that the
explosion occurred because petrol was stored in a forty gallon
drum in acompartment forward of the engine room. However, for
this to have been the cause petrol would have had to have
leaked, from the drum itself, then through a water-tight
bulkhead into the engine room. David felt this was unlikely.
He interviewed previous crews and was able to establish that it
was their practice to use a fire main which could both pump and
extract water to and from a particular location, to extract
slops in the tank which they then stored in the forty gallon
drum for the purpose of fuelling their cars. The use of the
fire main for this purpose was strictly forbidden.           By
examining the pipeline diagrams David was able to establish
that the fire main led to a junction box in the engine room and


                              -   36-
that the fire main led to a junction box in the engine room and
despite the fact that this junction box had been dismantled and
disposed of for scrap, we were able to         recover this and
establish that the gaskets within the junction box were not oil
proof.  In fact the gaskets had rotted away and it was clear
that because of this petroleum spirit which had gathered in the
junction had leaked into the bilges       ofthe engine room,
vaporised and created an explosive mixture.

As   a result we were not only able to substantially reduce one
of   the claims made upon our clients by the estate of the master
                 %
of   the barge who had obviously condoned an unsafe practice but
we   were also able to avoid any question of prosecution of the
barge owners by the statutory authorities.

This is an example of the sort of scepticism which I expect to
be brought to bear whenever a firm is called upon to
investigate the circumstances underlying disasters.

Imagine the use to which our home office team could have put
that sort of information, perhaps in a Press Release, if in
those two cases field investigation had taken place at the same
time as the need to respond to misinformed media comment.
Happily in those cases the investigations carried out by David
Rogers took place quietly public interest scrutiny.

M U L T I P L E CLAIMS HANDLING DATA


I turn now to consider another aspect of the investigation
which.should be undertaken in the initial stages which, in some
cases, could merit the use of yet a              third -team.

It is necessary to establish at the earliest possible stagethe
names, addresses, social backgrounds, family circumstances and
earnings  levels of the victims of any accident.           This
information is often held back by "knowing" plaintiffs'
solicitors and was not, for example, available as soon as it
ought to have been in the Piper Alpha case. As a result the


                                       -   37-
Solicitor* representing the victims. This information, as soon
as it is gathered, can easily be computerised and then used by
the defence to make individual offers if necessary over the
heads of the claimants Steering Committee (who dislike divide
and conquer tactics exerted against them which might undermine
their Group approach).

It is also important, particularly post a major disaster, for
pertinent documentation to be quickly mastered*        'Often,
following a major incident, the statutory authorities Descend
upon the defendant company and insist upon removing vast
quantities of "relevant" documents.

In my firm's experience the Health & Safety Executive and the
Department of Transport are the most likely to              "confiscate"
documents    ostensibly   as   part    of   their   essential   role   but
sometimes,   my   colleagues    I believe, in order to seek
                               and
evidence to support a prosecution or particular theories as to
the cause of the accident.

It is important for us, on behalf of our clients, to identify
at the earliest possible stage the relevant documentation and
to master it as quickly as possible so as to be able to provide
an early preliminary advice on the merits of the case intimated
against our clients.

My firm constantly employs between 10-15 graduates who are
inducted into the task of identifying relevant documents and
collating them.   If an incident occurs they become the third
team who are despatched to the clients' premises to acquire the
relevant documentation, to collate and photocopy just in case
any originals are bespoken by the powers that be. This is a
costly exercise and involves a great deal of manpower but in
the end nearly always pays off and rarely involves expense
which would not have to been incurred in -any event. To leave
these sort of tasks for later on just in case they might prove
 unnecessary is not the wisest of counsel.



                                  -   38-
All of the activities I have mentioned are intended to provide
our clients, and us as 'their advisers, with as such data as
possible upon which to advise regarding liability and quantum.

It is surprising how often careful analysis of the individual
claims which confront establish aggregate coopensation values
markedly lower than the sort of figures bandied about by self-
serving plaintiffs' lawyers and, understandably, as a result’*by>
the media.

In the over publicised Opren case my office was able to
demonstrate Opren case that values had been wildly over­
estimated by our opponents. Unfortunately, as happened in that
case, when   those advancing exorbitant damages claims are
confronted by the modest levels of "realistic" valuations they
then turn their guns towards Parliament and lobby for higher
bereavement and other damages pointing to the bad example of
United States levels of damages as a yardstick for us.

THE U L T I M A T E LESSON


The ultimate lesson for defendants in mass tort cases is that
whatever they say or do and whatever the merits or not of the
cases arraigned against them they can only limit the deunage
they suffer if not tangibly then to their reputations. They
seldom have the opportunity of entirely clearing their names.
Most cases settle out of court and some are even withdrawn when
the plaintiffs realise they cannot succeed. Nothing is however
done to redress the extra-legal harm which may have been done
to defendants wrongly vilified during a post-disaster crisis.

Plaintiffs' lawyers never lose. If they do not "win" it is not
their fault.   It is, of course, the fault of an unfair tort
system which delivers inadequate levels of damages which they
then blame.

What you and others unfortunate enough to be caught up in this
as defendants can however do is expose the falseness of


                              -   39-
    positions too easily and often wrongly adopted by. plaintiffs'
    practitioners and by the consumer campaigners and the media
    which come quickly to the aid of any injured claimant.

    By careful preparation and by way of well organised, co­
    ordinated defending the balance can be substantially redressed
    and at the very least disastrous post-disaster claims handling
    can be avoided.




)




                                  40 -
