SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY
6 APRIL 1990
PRESENT:
Councillor H S Salt (Chairman)
Councillors: S G Bennett, M P Bownes, Mrs J Johnston,     G Moore,
P J Moscrop, T L Seaton
277.       Membership
           The Chairman reported that Councillor T L Seaton would
           not be standing for re-election to Sheffield City Council
           at the forthcoming local elections, and as a result his
           membership of the Authority would end. Councillor Seaton
           had been a member of the Authority since its inception in
           1985 and the Chairman paid tribute to the spirit in which
           he had made his contributions.
           In addition Councillor Bownes, a Member of the Authority
           from Doncaster Metropolitan Borough Council since May
           1989, would not stand for re-election. The Chairman
           thanked Councillor Bownes for his services to the
           Authority.
278.       Minutes
           RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meetings of the
           Authority held on 23 February (2 meetings) and 16 March
           1990 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
279.       Emergency Planning Comnittee
           RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the
           Emergency Planning Committee held on 9 March 1990, as set
           out in appendix 1, be received and the recommendations
           made confirmed.
280.       Appointments Panel
           RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meetings of the
           Appointments Panel held on the 20, 27 and 28 March 1990
           be received.
281.       Circular - A Guide to Fire Precautions in Existing Places
           of Entertainment and like Premises
           A report by the Clerk and Financial   Officer summarised a
           circular from the Home Office which   enclosed a new
           National Advisory Standard to cover   places of
           entertainment. The Guide followed a   fire, which caused
       -   2   -




       the death of 48 young people on 14 February 1981, at a
       St Valentines night disco-dance in the Stardust Club in
       Dublin.
       The aim was to set acceptable standards of safety and
       encourage consistency of enforcement whilst at the same
       time leaving scope for flexibility and the exercise of
       professional judgement and common sense. The Home Office
       had advised that the Guide was essentially a
       consolidation of existing guidance and that there should
       be no significant additional cost or manpower
       implications arising from its use.
282.   Special Service Charges
       A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and
       Chief Fire Officer referred to the annual revision of the
       scale of Special Service Charges as recommended by the
       Yorkshire and Humberside Fire Authorities Advisory
       Committee and Examinations Board. The revised scale of
       charges represented increases of around 14% for labour
       costs and 8% for materials and transport.
       RESOLVED - That the revised scale of Special Service
       Charges be implemented with effect from 1 April 1990.
283.   Review of Fire and Building Regulations
       A report by the Chief Fire Officer referred to minute 156
       of the meeting of the Fire Service Committee on 4
       November 1988 dealing with an announcement by the
       Department of Trade and Industry of a review of the
       interaction between the Building Regulations and the Fire
       Precautions Legislation. The review had been
       commissioned by the Department of Trade and Industry's
       Enterprise and Deregulation Unit and undertaken by
       Consulting Architects, Bickerdike Allen Partners overseen
       by an Interdepartmental Steering Group including the Home
       Office and the Department of the Environment.
       The Consultants had concluded that no radical change to
       the present system was justified. Noting recent changes
       to the Fire Precautions Act and proposals for changes to
       the building regulations the Consultants felt a clearer
       process would result. The conclusions also identified an
       urgent need for the production of two documents, one a
       national guide to legislation and procedures, the other a
       design guide to Fire Safety and Buildings. In addition
       the conclusions recommended a number of practical steps.
                                                           /




       -   3   -




       The Chief Fire Officer considered the recommendations
       logical and sensible, safeguarding the important role of
       the Fire Prevention Officer and following the philosophy
       set out in the Holroyd report twenty years before.
       RESOLVED:
       1. That the report be noted;
       2. That a careful watch be kept on the way the
       recommendations are carried forward so that any area of
       concern which arises can be raised.

284.   The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster - Final Report.
       A report by the Chief Fire Officer referred to the Final
       Report of the Enquiry set up by the Home Secretary
       following the disaster at the Hillsborough Football
       Ground. The report contained 76 recommendations; part 2
       was of most professional interest to the Fire Service
       since it considered measures to improve safety.
       The responsibility for certificating sports-grounds
       rested with District Councils. The Fire Service were
       part of Working Parties created by the District Councils
       who could make rules to ensure compliance with the
       National Safety Standards. Regular meetings of the
       Working Parties were taking place in connection with
       implementation of the recommendations and the District
       Councils had either reviewed or were reviewing their
       procedures. A meeting had been held with the South
       Yorkshire Police to discuss and review co-ordination of
       emergency services.
       The Authority discussed the operations of the brigade on
       the day of the disaster including communications problems
       reported to have been encountered. The Chief Fire
       Officer reported that Lord Justice Taylor had been
       complementary to the Fire Service. Such communications
       problems as had been encountered were due to background
       noise of the crowd and had been overcome by other means.
       However, he reported other occasions when existing
       fireground communications had not been satisfactory. The
       Chief Fire Officer was looking into the problems
       encountered and would report to the Authority when his
       conclusions were complete, in say some three months or
       so.
       RESOLVED - That the report be noted.
-   4   -




285.        Telephone allowances
            A joint report of the Chief Fire Officer and the Clerk
            and Financial Officer referred to telephone allowances
            payable to uniformed officers agreed by the Fire Service
            Committee on 18 December 1987, including a biennial
            review. Based on the actual variation in telephone
            charges an increase of 8.33% per quarter was appropriate.
            The Authority also discussed very successful telephone
            monitoring arrangements made by Sheffield City Council,
            and discussed the potential for such savings within the
            County Fire Service.
            RESOLVED
            1. That with effect from 1 January 1990, the calls
            allowance for uniformed officers in the County Fire
            Service be increased from £8.00 to £8.67 per quarter.
            2. That the Chief Fire Officer report to the Authority
            on the possibility of introducing telephone monitoring
            arrangements within the County Fire Service.

286.        Outstanding Reports
            The Authority considered a schedule of reports requested
            by the Authority which remained outstanding.
287.        Exclusion of Public and Press
            RESOLVED - That, under Section 100(A)(4) of the Local
            Government Act 1972 the public be excluded from the
            meeting for the following items of business on the
            grounds that they involve the likely disclosure of exempt
            information as defined in paragraphs 1, 7, 8, and 11 of
            part 1 of schedule 12A of the Act.
288.        Appeals Panel
            RESOLVED - That, subject to the addition of
            Councillor S G Bennett to the list of members present the
            minutes of the meeting of the Appeals Panel held on 21
            February 1990 be received and the recommendations made
            confirmed.
289.        Appointments Panel
            RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the
            Appointments Panel held on the 1 March 1990 be received.
-   5   -




290.        Land at Monksbridge Road, Dinnington - Proposed Lease
            RESOLVED - That approval be given to the lease of the
            site at Monksbridge Road, Dinnington to B Worthington Esq
            Kiveton Park, Sheffield on the terms now reported.
291.        Use of Computers within South Yorkshire   County Fire
             Service
            A joint report of the Chief Fire Officer and the Clerk
            and Financial Officer analysed the recently completed
            twelve months trial of an office based computer system.
            RESOLVED - That a further comprehensive report be
            submitted on the Revenue savings, including staffing
            savings, which will result from the use of computers
            within the County Fire Service and that consultation be
            undertaken with the Trades Unions.
292.        Proposed New Fire Station, Eastwood, Rotherham
            A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and
            Chief Fire Officer referred to minute 167 of the meeting
            of the Authority on 8 December 1989 when a feasibility
            study had been requested, as a matter of urgency, for a
            limited cost Fire Station at Rotherham with a maximum
            cost limit of £2 million; and to minute 248 of the
            meeting of the Authority on 23 February 1990.
            The Authority now considered the various options for
            developing a new Fire Station at Eastwood, Rotherham and
            the financial implications involved.
            RESOLVED - That, bearing in mind the original cost limit,
            the officers consider further various design options and
            advise the Authority of the facilities it is possible to
            achieve within that limit.
293.        Fire Station, Erskine Road, Rotherham - Kitchen and Food
            Storage Facilities
            A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the
            Chief Fire Officer referred to minute 162 of the meeting
            of the Authority on 24 November 1989 when a capital
            estimate of £25,000 had been approved for the
            refurbishment of the kitchen and food storage facilities
            at the Fire Station, Erskine Road, Rotherham.
            Although the only tender received was in excess of the
            estimate, the Authority had in mind that the required
            works were being undertaken on Health and Safety Grounds.
         -   6   -




         RESOLVED :-
         1. That approval be given to an additional capital
         estimate of £5,910.00.
         2. That the tender from Sheffield City Council, Works
         Department be accepted at the agreed reduced price of
         £26,810.00.
294.     Trades Unions Liaison Conmittee'
         RESOLVED:- That the minutes of the meeting of the Trades
         Unions Liaison Committee held on 5 April 1990.


18 April 1990
NO: WP000135
