        fT§tv-      I ^ na^       nJ/T t>jx. w bpovjr            e'u.    d sc^aw ^v

      ( ^ i T   -   2   ia a a a J a * ^ .   (Xak JU^        [ s 'XJ c fa \MSLSlJf kSLj   i x o ^ _ j L v t * J L u - v |“   •



                                  Ioam. L f c t d   a k q a jl    oImac*. .



SOPTH Ifflmamn FIRE AMD CIVIL DEFEBCE AUTHORITY

SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE

29TH JUNE, 1990


REPORT OF CHIEF FIRE OFFICER

AMA SEMIWAR - TAYLOR REPORT IMPLEMENTATION - CONSULTATION
BETWEEN LOCAL AUTHORITIES AND FOOTBALL AUTHORITIES

1.    Matter for Consideration

      Further to the Approval provided in Minute No. 313 of the meeting of
      the Fire Service Committee on 4th Hay, 1990, a Member of the
      authority and two officers attended the above Seminar to discuss
      aspects of the implementation of the Taylor Report into the
      Hillsborough Stadium disaster.

2.     Information

2.1   The Seminar was held at the Wembley Conference Centre and was well
      attended by an audience comprising local authority elected members,
      officials of football league clubs,       members   of   supporters'
      organisations and officers responsible for enforcement of the Safety
      of Sports Ground Act.

2.2    The Seminar was divided into morning and afternoon sessions which
       were   concluded by discussion of pre-submitted questions from
       delegates, contributions also being invited from the floor.

2.3    The morning session was chaired by Mr. Denis Howell, MP, who
       explained that the major objective was to foster a more harmonious
       and co-operative relationship in      the   future   between   local
       authorities, who were responsible for enforcing safety legislation,
       and the clubs. The clubs were very much a part of the community and
       may be able to benefit from the financial and management expertise
       available within Local Government which many clubs do not possess.
       The two speakers were Mr. Arthur Sandford, the Chief Executive of
       the   Football   League,   and   Councillor G. Davies,   Leader   of
       Wolverhampton Metropolitan Borough Council.

2.4    Mr. Sandford presented an interesting insight into the position of
       the Football League regarding ground safety. As the former Chief
       Executive of Kottinghamshire County Council he felt that he had an
       understanding of both enforcement and compliance problems. He said
       his greatest concerns were the failure of the Government to
       establish the Football Licensing Authority and the fact that the
       cost of providing seating would be considerably more than had been
       widely reported because the costing had been for seating only and
       ignored the cost of providing cover.
2.5   Councillor Davies explained how his authority had been directly
      involved in the rescue of Wolverhampton Wanderers Football Club on
      the grounds that the club was an important and integral part of the
      community. Be explained that he would be willing to give advice to
      any local authority facing a similar situation.

2.6   The afternoon session was chaired by Mr. John Greenway, MP, and the
      speakers   were   Councillor  Helliwell,   Leader   of   Calderdale
      Metropolitan Borough Council, and Councillor Brown, Chairman of
      Football's Family Forum.

2.7   Councillor Helliwell spoke of his Council's direct involvement in
      the running and financing of Halifax Town Football Club. He said
      that without that involvement the club would have gone out of
      existence, but was now reorganised on a sound financial basis and
      had no outstanding liabilities which was something which very few
      other clubs could say. He directed stinging criticism at Football
      Club directors and chairmen for the unsatisfactory state of the
      game.   This, unfortunately, led to an acrimonious dialogue between
      Councillor Helliwell and various football club representatives.

2.8   Councillor Brown explained the philosophy and working of Football's
      Family Forum.    The idea is to involve young people with football
      clubs from an early age, so inculcating a love of the game.     This
      involves visits to football clubs in groups to watch matches and
      visits by players and club officials to schools during which all the
      good    aspects  of the game are reinforced.       Councillor Brown
      emphasised that it is the young people of today, who will be
      tomorrow's adults, who will solve the hooligan problem. He said
      that hooliganism is a symptom of society and there was no short term
      answer.

2.9   It is understood that further joint work will now be undertaken
      between the Local Authority  Associations  and   the   Football
      Authorities and that the proceedings of the Seminar are to be
      published.

3.    Recommendation

3.1   That the report be noted.




                                                 H.B. WRIGHT,
                                                 Chief Fire Officer.




AS/JMT

19th June, 1990.
