                                                                              19
SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY

TROPES UNIONS LIAISON COMMITTEE

gfl JUNE 1990

PRESENT;   Councillor F B White (in the Chair)
           Councillors: S G Bennett, G Moore

           Representatives of Trades Unions:
           T R Allison Esq (FBU)
           M Dodge Esq (FBU)
           R Carnal 1   (FBU)
           R Blackburn (FBU - Officers)
           ft V Rolfe   (NAFO)
           P Hustler    (6MBATU)
           S Marsden    (T&GWU)
           B Foster      (APEX Partnership)
           Mrs B I Cole (NUPE)

i    MINUTES
     The Committee accepted the minutes of their Meeting held on
     5 April 1990.
£    ITEMS Tn,RP_r:nNgrDERED BY THE FIRE FIND C I U IL DEFENCE AUTHORITY

     The Committee considered the items which were for consideration at the
     meeting of the Fire and Civil Defence Authority on £9 June 1990 and
     particular reference was made to the following:

     a)    Minutes of Authority - 18 May 1990

           The FBU referred to Minute 3£0 (Nuclear Convoys), and asked when
           further information was likely on the arrangements of dealing wit
           h incidents involving Nuclear convoys. The Chief Fire Officer
           reported that the information referred to in the NIREP (Nuclear
           Industry Road Emergency Response Plan) referred to arrangements
           for dealing with civil nuclear convoys, not those under military
           escort carrying nuclear weapons. Under the NIREP arrangements a
           lot of information had been received and needed to be looked into

           The FBU also referred to Minute 3£3 (Proposed new Rotherham Fire
           Station - Situation Report) and asked what further progress was
           being made. The Chief Fire Officer reported that the design work
           was under consideration by the Project Architects. Officers had
           met the Home Office about the grant for the Civil Defence
           Emergency Centre, but the Hone Office were looking for more
           details.

      b)   Outstanding Reports
           The Fire Brigades Union referred to the report requested on the
           Occupational health scheme.


                                                            Cont/d...
 The Clerk and Financial Officer reported that only 50‘X of the
 Sheffield City Council account for the remainder of the contract
 period had been paid pending further discussions on the delivery
 of the service until the end of March 1991.

The Chief Fire Officer reported that the aia of the current
ongoing work was to set a standard which could then be provided to
potential tenders with further discussions following on. That
standard was available in an aliiost complete document and could be
Bade available to the trades unions.

The FBU said that they were seeking to ensure that the trades
unions were fully involved; in their view a weakness of the
previous schene had been the lack of any trades union involvement.
They were also looking for the inclusion of APT & C staff in the
occupational health facility.

ftMft Seminar -   Taylor Report - Inpleaentation - Consultation
between Local     Authorities and Football Authorities

The FBU asked   when the report on the conclusions to be    drawn fro«
the Fire Service operation at the Hillsborough Stadium      Disaster
would be available. The Chief Fire Officer recalled that he had
originally forecast three months to prepare the report. One
particular problem did appear to have arisen on the co««unications
side which he would like to try to resolve.

Propress Report

NUPE referred to the Kitchen refurbishaent at Erskine Road
Rotherham Fire Station. The Deputy Chief Fire Officer reported
that due to the operational consequences the work was being done
in two phases. The electrical work had been completed in phase 1.

HM Inspector of Fire Services - Annual Inspection - 1990

The ConBittee discussed the letter received fro« HM Inspector of
Fire Services on the result of his annual inspection for 1990.

Fire Service Control - Replaceaent Head Sets for Operators

The FBU, supported by the FBU Officers and NftFO, thought that the
head sets for Fire Service Control Operators were desperately
needed and hoped the Authority would go ahead with replaceaent.
The FBU Officers and NftFO wanted to retain the personal issue of
headsets on hygiene grounds.

Transport - Purchase of Heavy Duty Uans

The FBU had seen the vehicle concerned and supported the proposal.


                                    Cont/d..
     h)    P er so nn el - F i r e m e n s P en si on s Sch eme

           The FBU Officers drew attention to the short time lapse between
           the member of the brigade commencing non operational duties and a
           recommendation to retire him being made. They did not wish to see
           this become an established practice.

           The Chief Fire Officer reported that the member concerned had been
           interviewed in depth and given advice, but it was his own wish
           that he be retired.

     i)    Use of Computers in South Yorkshire County Fire Service.

           Following consultations with the Chief Fire Officer the trades
           unions expressed their agreement with the proposal.


 3   ’ONE FUND FOR ALL’-PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS

     The FBU recalled that when they had met Officers two days prior to this
     meeting, they had asked that an arrangement be made whereby employees
     of the Authority could donate direct from their pay to ’One Fund For
     fill’, an Organisation which ran centres to assist the unemployed. The
     Clerk and Financial Officer undertook that a report would be presented
     during the next cycle of meetings.


SJL
WP002167




                                         NOT FOR PUBLICATION as it
                                         contains   exempt information
                                         within para. ..      ••••••• • of
                                         Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                                         Act 1972 as amended.
