BOPTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AMD CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY

EMERGENCY PLANNING COMMITTEE

S OCTOBER 1990

REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY PLANNING

HILLSBOROUGH AND AFTER;    RESPONDING TO DISASTER

1.     Matter for Consideration

       This report summarises the proceedings of a    Conference to
       discuss the initial . findings of the Hillsborough Project
       which is based at the Centre for Studies in Crime and Social
       Justice, Edge Hill College of Higher Education, Ormskirk,
       Lancashire.

2.     Background Information

2.1    A four-person research team was commissioned by Liverpool
       City Council to examine the immediate     aftermath of the
       Hillsborough Disaster, including the responses of relevant
       authorities,  the   impact of the media   coverage; and to
       monitor and evaluate the Home Office Inquiry, the Police
       investigation and the Coroner's Inquest.

2.2    In  May   1990  the  team   published   its  First  Report,
       Hillsborough and After:   the Liverpool Experience.   It is
       over 300 pages and presents the findings of the first phase
       of the project.

2.3    The main issues include:

       the relationship between crowd safety and crowd control; an
       evaluation of the Taylor Inquiry; the role of the media
       including the creation of myths, the introduction of the
       'Heysel  Factor',    intrusive journalism  and  the use of
       explicit photographs and descriptions.

2. 4   a further section, entitled 'Tragedy Out of       Disaster ,
       uses extensive interviews with bereaved families, social
       workers, ambulance officers, clergy, the police and other
       agency workers to establish what happened in the immediate
       aftermath of the disaster.      It concludes that ^ lack of
       preparation and forward planning by the authorities added
       considerable and avoidable distress to the bereaved and that
       the process of identification was both inappropriate and
       insensitive.

2.5 The First Report contains six chapters:-

       1.   considers the impact of the Disaster, the context of
            the Home Office Inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor and
            the need for in-depth research.
      2.    considers the relationship between crowd safety and
            crowd control within the broader context, prevalent in
            the 1970s and 1980s, of 'hooligan hysteria'.

      3.    provides a critical appraisal of the Taylor     Inquiry,
            its two reports and its main recommendations.

      4.    the media coverage of the Disaster.

      5.    the events in Sheffield on the night of the disaster.

      6.    an   initial   discussion   of   the    Disaster   Fund
            concentrating on the criteria used for distribution and
            the impact of payments on welfare benefits.

      Overall the report makes 50 recommendations and it will be
      followed by a Second Report in November 1990.

2.6   The full Report is available in the Unit Library

3.    Comments

3.1   This one-day conference provided the first opportunity to
      present the initial findings of the Hillsborough Project to
       an  informed  audience   committed to the development   of
      effective and sensitive responses to the victims, families
       and communities affected by future disasters.

3.2   The Report and its recommendations provide an important and
       far-reaching insight into the Hillsborough Disaster.  It is
      expected that the Second Report will be equally significant.

4.    Financial Implications

      None.

5.    Recommendations

      That a further report be prepared on the           Hillsborough
      Project's Second Report and related issues.


S .J Turney,
Director of Emergency planning.

(Officer responsible: P Hall)

T,ocal Government (Access to Information! Act 1985

Documents                                                     EPU

Hillsborough and After: The Liverpool Experience              Library




                                -   2   -
