It c j '                        * -$ - a r e ^ ' * ' -   •                                             0

 SOUTH YORKSHIRE TIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY

 SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE                     j / nf i nV k t        0W

 6TH APKIL, 1**0

 REPORT OF CHIEF FIRE OFFICER                                t,0U)         J)         ^          *

 THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - FINAL REPORT                          \         \       A   L*> ilxftttOl M


 1.

 1.1
        Introduction                      ^ W u tVWi £2q     CL-Gu La

        The Final Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary following
                                                                                *Lx_ C/Ma JL ^

                                                                                       y
                                                                                       '
        the disaster at the Hillsborough^Football Ground was published on 29th u' ~ \ ~ ~
        January, 1990.    Relevant extracts from the Interim Report were f@ L(y to''t
        considered at the Authority's meeting on 18th August, 1989.     (Mimj^B^ ^
        61 refers).                                                     40*--.---
                                                                       ^ y & jL p t: o J c caa Sl
        The Government has in large         measure,   accepted   the    Report is i v
        recommendations and copies of the Home Secretary's oral statement to
        the House of Commons responding to the Final Report and the schedule
        setting out its initial response are attached at Annex 'A' and 'B'
        respectively.

  1.3   The report is set out in five parts and contains 76 recommendations,
        43 of which are repeated in substance from the Interim Report. The
        recommendations are set out at Appendix 'C'. Part two of the Report
         is of most professional interest to the Fire Service since it
        considers measures to improve safely.

  1.4 Amongst other things, the recommendations include, a move to all
       seater accommodation, the creation of a National Review Body to
       monitor the discharge by local authorities of their certificating
       duties, mandatory safety certificate conditions, the creation and
       constitution of the Advisory Group, an urgent review of the Green
       Guide and the non implementation of the football membership scheme.

  2.    Mandatory Conditions in Safety Certificates (Recommendation 24)

  2.1   Lord Justice Taylor     observes that as a result of the abolition of
        Section (2)(2) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, by the Fire
        Safety and Safety at Places of Sport Act, local authorities are not
        bound to include terms or conditions on any particular aspect of
        safety in certificates.

  2.2   He considers that there are some   requirements of                            such   crucial
         importance to safety that it should be mandatory                              for    safety
        certificates to specify them.

  2.3 He considers those      specified in the original Section (2) (2) of the
       1975 Act fall into that category.        Accordingly, he     recommends
       (Recommendation 24) that they are re-introduced.

  2.4      The conditions in question cover, the number, size and situation of
           entrances to and exits from a stadium and their maintenance, the
           number, strength and situation of any crush barriers and the maximum
           number of spectators to be admitted to the stadium or any part of it.
2.5   The Fire Service has often in the past, recommended that a set of
      national standard certificate condition is produced which would ensure
      more even standards.    The Home Office has always resisted this
      recommendation.   Therefore, the above recommendation is very much
      welcomed, particularly since it      enhances   the   probability   of
      comprehensive national conditions being produced on other related
      safety aspects.

3.    The Advisory Group (Recommendation 31)

3.1   The report recommends that District Councils should set up Advisory
      Groups   consisting   of appropriate members of their own staff,
      representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services and
      of the building authority.      It recommends that the Advisory Group
      should consult representatives of clubs and recognised supporters'
      organisations on a regular basis; that its terms of reference should
      encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require
      regular visits to grounds and" attendance at matches. The Advisory
      Group should have a Chairman from the District Council and an
      effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should
      be required to produce regular written reports for consideration by
      the Local Authority.


3.2   There is no legal requirement relating to the setting up of Advisory
      Groups.   However, with the exception of the ambulance service,
      Advisory Groups along the lines now recommended were established in
      each of the four districts by the former South Yorkshire County
      Council and were continued when responsibility for licensing passed to
      districts in 1986. Each of the districts has reviewed or is currently
      reviewing its procedure.

3.3   The strict legal position is that District Councils are required to
      send a copy of any application for a safety certificate or the
      transfer of a safety certificate, to the Fire Authority. They are
      also required to consult the Fire Authority about the terms and
      conditions to be included in a certificate and about any proposal to
      amend, replace or transfer a certificate.

3.4   Moreover, the Fire Authority has the status of "interested party"
      enabling it to appeal to the Secretary of State against the inclusion
      or exclusion of anything from a safety certificate.

      A similar position applies in relation to the Chief Officer of   Police
      but not the Ambulance Service.

4.    A National Review Body (Recommendation 6)

4.1   The setting up of a National Review Body to oversee and keep under
      review the discharge by District Councils of their certification
      functions is to be welcomed. It will enable the Review Body to give
      advice to authorities about solutions to similar problems they have
      seen elsewhere but about which authorities might not otherwise be made
      aware. The National Review Body will have power to require terms and
      conditions to be included in any safety certificate. When linked to
      the mandatory conditions mentioned in Paragraph 2.4. This should lead
      to better safety certificate conditions in the future.
5.    Revision of the Green Guide (Recommendation 74)

5.1   Lord Justice Taylor formed the opinion that the guidance given in the
      Green Guide is insufficient to cope with present day requirements and
      is in urgent need of revision.

5.2   Accordingly he set up a Technical Working Party with the following
      terns of reference "to review technical aspects of the Guide to Safety
      at   Sports   Grounds;   identify areas requiring clarification or
      amendment; and make recommendations". The report of the Technical
      Working Party will form the basis for a detailed review by the Home
      Office.

6.    Status of the Green Guide

6.1   Lord Justice Taylor considered whether to make the terms of the Green
      Guide mandatory throughout and concluded that some safety factors
      (those mentioned in Paragraph 2.4) should be mandatory requirements of
      safety certificates.

6.2   Those apart, and recognising that sports grounds vary greatly in their
      layout and fixtures, he considers that the Green Guide should remain
      non-mandatory since it must be open to the Local Authority to judge
      the   propriety   of deviating in some respect from the Guide's
      recommendations at a particular ground.

6.3 However, where there is a departure from a specific recommendation of
    the Guide, the Local Authority should be aware of it and should be
     satisfied that such departure is justified for good reason.

7.    Implementation of Recommendations

7.1   Regular   meetings   of the Advisory Groups are      taking place in
      connection with implementation of the recommendations and the District
      Councils have either reviewed or are currently reviewing their
      procedures in the light of the Final Report.

7.2   A meeting has been held with South Yorkshire Police to discuss     and
      review the existing procedure relating to the         co-ordination of
      emergency services. Proposals have been put to the    police aimed at
       improving the passage of information about sports events and their
      response is awaited prior to arranging a joint meeting of all three
      emergency services.

7.3   In the light of the recommendations, particularly those relating to
      the provision of seats and the reduction of standing capacity on
      terraces it will be necessary for much consultation to take place with
      the clubs and their representatives. It may also be     necessary for
      Local Authorities to review safety certificates again when the revised
      Green Guide is published.



                                                                H E WRIGHT
                                                        Chief Fire Officer

AS/DG
20.03.90
                                                                                                                                            ANNEX A
         19                   •innwii Snuiiun', DiHiMrr      29 J A N U A R Y 1990          lliu s h n r iiu ’>n S h h ilW tl D tu tin -r       2<J

              H ills borough S t a d i u m D i s a s te r (Taylor              Lord Justice Taylor doe» not spare those who run the
                                                                           industry. He says, indeed, that the provision they make for
                                    R e por t)                             their customers i> often not merely basic hut >qualiti: and
                                                                           that squalid condition* car. have an >mpac( i">n safety and
         .22 pm
                                                                           that, in his view. :hc\ ji.so lead :o lower vanuards of
              Mr. Speaker: Statement. Mr. Secretary W addiniton.          behaviour.
                                                                               Lord Justice Taylor       ;hat :h< Koottwil Association
                                                                          and Football League have not seen it as any part of their
                                                                          duty to offer guidance to clubs on safety matters, and he
                                                                          questions whether the directors of many clubs are
                                                                          genuinely interested in the welfare of their supporters or
                                                                          their good behaviour. Players, too. are criticised, with
                                                                          Lord Justice Taylor pointing out that incitement from the
                                                                          pitch or bad behaviour by players, which is not confined to
                                                                         soccer, has a major influence on the crowd.
                                                                              I acknowledge that some clubs have made an effort to
                                                                         improve standards, but ' Lord Justice Taylor's clear
                                                                         conclusion was that the majority had not and that the
                                                                         game has a future only if the directors and the players can
                                                                         change their priorities and give a leadership which is
                                                                         plainiv lacking at present.
                                                                             He agrees with the Government that there must be a
                                                                         move towards all-seater stadia and points out that section
                                                                          I I o f the Football Spectators Act 1989 specifically
(    ;                                                                   provides the machinery for that. The change will improve
                                                                         safety and behaviour, and we intend to bring it about.
                                                                             Lord Justice Taylor makes clear that the bulk o f the
                                                                         finances for ground improvements wiil have to be raised by
                                                                         the ciuos themselves. He says there are ways of raising the
                                                                         money if the clubs' management is enterprising and
                                                                        resourceful, and he points to the opportunities presented
                                                                        by sponsorship. He also points to the revenue that flows to
                                                                        the football authorities from television rights and says that
                                                                        the football authorities should ensure that this valuable
                                                                        source of revenue is directed towards improving stadia. He
                                                                        canv asses the possibility of a levy on transfer fees which he
                                                                        says have reached a level which many regard as grotesque.
                                                                             There is a whole series o f detailed recommendations set
                                                                        out in chapters 5. 4 and 5 on matters relating to spectator
                                                                        safety such as gates and gangways. Indeed, of the 76
                                                                        recommendations. 4? in substance appear in the interim
                                                                        report. The G overnment accept these proposals, some of
                                                                        which can be implemented immediately: some will need
                                                                        further work. F or convenience. 1 have placed in the Vote
                                                                        Office a schedule setting out the Government's response to
                                                                        each.
                                                                             Hon. Members will recall that section 13 o f the
                                                                        Football Spectators Act provides for the Football
                                                                        Licensing A uthority to supervise the safety responsibilities
                                                                        o f local authorities in respcct o f designated football
                                                                        grounds. We intend to1 implement that provision. Lord
                                                                        Justice Taylor welcomes the establishment o f the Football
        M r. Waddington:                                                Licensing A uthority but would like us to go further and
        I am most grateful to L ord Justice T ay lo r lor the           extend its remit to cover other than football grounds. This
    report, which s e a out clearly why we have had so many             would require primary legislation, and we will have to
    m ajor tragedies at football g ro u n d s over the years and why    consider whether ii is justified.
    we have had disorder and hooliganism.                                    Part 111 of the report contains a number o f proposals
       As the House familiarises itseif with the report, it will        relating to crowd control and hooliganism.                   It
    become clear that it is addressed as m uch to the football          acknowledges the crucial role o f the poiice in crow d
    industry as it is to the G o vernm ent. L ord Justice Taylor        control. Lord Justice Taylor rightly reminds us that,
    explains how, in his interim report, he concentrated on             without the work o f the police, many sporting events
    overcrowding because that was the cause o f the                     would be chaotic and could not be permitted to take place.
    K:llsoorougn disaster, but now he goes on to talk o f a             Something like 5.000 police officers are engaged on
    game, the image o f which has been m uch ta rnished, and o f        football duties each S aturday during the season, largely at
    a blight over the gam e due to old grounds, p o o r facilities,     the expense o f the taxpayer and the ratepayer. He pays
    hooliganism, excessive drinking an d p o o r leadership.            tribute to them for their service, and 1 want to ad d mv

          i'o': i j..*> i.i
                Hiilsboruu%h Stadium D m s w r         29 JANUARY 19%                    H iihb orou^n S tad iu m Disaster


 thanks to the police lor the wav that they carry out the             better atmosphere by improving the now oiten squaiid
difficult, thankless and often unthanked tasks that are               conditions to which they subject their supporters —s q u a l i d
 thrust upon them.                                                    conditions that can encourage squalid b e h a v i o u r .
    The report recognises the advances made in the last                   Those clubs that have not faced up to their
couple of years in the effectiveness o f the policing of              responsibility now have a final opportunity to do so: and
 football, particularly inside grounds, an d to the major             if thev do not now act. the public wiil not forgive them.
impact o f closed circuit teievision on the hooligan
problem. It also mentions other measures taken by the
Governm ent, such as the restriction on the sale o f alcohol
an d the power given to the courts to make orders
excluding convicted hooligans from grounds.
     Lord Justice T aylor also recognises the great potential
value o f the police national football intelligence unit in
dealing with football-related crime and with hooligans
travelling to matches abroad.
    As 1 have said. L ord Justice Taylor takes the view that
better facilities and better treatm ent o f fans will bring
better behaviour. Beyond that, the report recommends the
creation o f three new specific offences to apply at
designated sports grounds— throwing a missile: chanting
obscene or racialist abuse: and going on to the pitch
w ithout reasonable excuse. It also asks for consideration
to be given to extending the courts' powers to impose
attendance centre orders and for the use o f electronic
tagging in the case o f offenders' convicted o f football-
related offences. The specific new offences suggested seem,
to some extent, to duplicate offences which are already
available in the Public O rd e r Act 1986. but I shall look
carefully and quickly at all these suggestions.
    I      now come to the p roposed football membership
scheme. Lord Justice T aylor examined the invitation to
tender for a scheme which was issued by the consultants
employed by the football authorities. He came to the
conclusion that he could not supp ort a scheme o f that kind
because he could not believe that the technology wouid
work well enough to avoid the danger o f congestion and
disorder. He was also concerned abo u : the call on police
resources. Instead, he proposes the measures to which 1
have referred.
    In the light o f this advice, the G overn m e nt have decided
no t to proceed with the establishment o f a football
membership authority, but p art 1 o f the A ct will remain on
the statute book. W ork will continue to see how the
shortcomings identified by Lord Justice T a y lo r could be
overcome in case we have to return to the m atter again,
should the problem o f hooliganism not be defeated by the
alternative strategy proposed in the report.
    Let no one imagine that this means that there will be
any let-up in the fight against hooliganism. Those who.
unlike the G overnm ent, have for so long shrugged off the:r
responsibilities will now have to face up to them.
    T he G overnm ent intend to proceed as quickly as
possible to the establishm ent o f a football licensing
authority and. subject to consultation, section 11 o f the
 Football Spectators Act will be used to direct the Football
Licensing A uth ority to require all-seater stadium s— with
standing being reduced by stages and entirely eliminated in
first and second division g ro u n d s by A ug u st 1994 and in all
Football League grounds by 1999.
    T he necessary steps will be taken to ensure improved
arrangem ents for crow d control and better training for
police and stewards. T here will be urgent consideration of
the case for new offences a n d for new powers to deal with
those excluded from g ro u n d s by the courts. T h e clubs will
be compelled to get rid o f the terraces. But L ord Justice
T ay lo r indicates how m uch m o re they can do to create a

   :i c o ’: : joh m
                                                              Annex   ' B'




Initial response by the Government to recommendations contained
in the Taylor report.


ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION    (Recommendation 1-4)

1.   General recommendation in respect of all sports grounds
     designated und e r the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 197 5.

2.   To apply to all UE F A "high risk" matches from Autumn 1993.

3.   To apply by 20% stages between now and Autumn 1994 to
          Football league, Divisions 1 and 2
          Scottish f o o t b a l l .league, Premier Division
          National stadia.

4.   To apply by 10% stages between now and Autumn 1999 to all
     other matches p l ayed at designated grounds.

The Government accepts this recommendation in principle and
expects to apply it in the case of UEFA high risk matches, the
4 Divisions of the football league, and the national stadia as
recommended.


The a c d i c a t i o n of the recommendation to Scotland and to other
sports*cannot be achieved u n d e r the Football Spectators Act 19SS
but the Government, will in any case visn to discuss it with the
S D O r t i n a authorities concerned.  Designated sporrs grounds under
the" 19 7 5 Act include cricket, rugby union and rugby league
grounds which are not all enclosed grounds and which it may not
be practicable to deal with in this way.



ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL     (Recommendation 5)

The Government supports Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation
that the   football  league  and Football Association should
establish an Advisory Design Council on stadium design.




NATIONAL INSPECTORATE AND REVIEW BODY (Recommendation 6)

      (a)   The Football Lice ns in g Authority should be created to
            review the discharge of functions by local authorities.

      (b)   The powers of the Authority should be extended to other
            sports and other sports venues.

The   Government   supports   the  recommendation   that   safety
certification of designated grounds should be centrally reviewea
and prccoses to br in g into force relevant provisions of p jrt I
of the Football Spectators Act to create and empower the Football
Licensing Authority to carry out these responsibilities in
England and Wales in relation to grounds used by football league
clubs and the international football grounds. Consideration will
be given to introduction of legislation extending the role of the
new authority to Scotland and in relation to other sports grounds
and sporting venues after consultation with the representative
sporting organisations, the local authority associations and
other interested bodies.    Consideration will also be given to
extending the Authority's responsibilities in the meantime on a
v oluntary basis.

M A X I M U M CAPACITIES F O R TERRACES   (Recommendations 7-10)

7.     Safety certificates to specify maximum number of spectators
       in pens or areas (interim recommendation 1).

8.     Calculations of crowd density:           revised   figures   (interim
       recommendation 2, revised).

9.     Arrangements to prevent        further   access    to pens   (interim
       recommendation 3).

10.    Turnstile flow rates.

The Government suaDorts these recommendations. Local authorities
with responsibilities under the Safety cf Sports Grounds Act 1975
(the 1975 Act) have already been urged to review and amend safety
certificates   to  reflect   reductions  in  terrace   capacities
r ecommended in the Interim Report.     The adjusted figures in
recommendations 8 and 10 will be drawn to local authorities'
attention.   The next edition of the 'Green Guide' will refleer
the new figures.

FILLING AND MONITORING OF TERRACES           (Recommendations 11-12)

H.     statements of intent      (interim recommendation A t revised.

12.    Stewarding or policing of pens         (interim recommendation 5).

The Government have already urged police and clubs to enter into
non-contractual statements of intent with the aim of ensuring
that no doubt exists as to the respective responsibilities of
each; and to provide monitoring of terraces accordingly.        The
relaxation in recommendation 1 2 (b) will be drawn to the attention
of local authorities and clubs.

GANGWAYS    (Recommendation 13)

Local authorities will be urged to include in safety certificates
terms and conditions to give effect to this recommendation.

FENCES AND GATES      (Recommendations 14-21)

 14.   Removal of spikes.

 15.   Reduction in height.

 16.   Training of stewards       (interim recommendation 6).
17.       Emergency gates in perimeter fences.

18.       M a r ki ng of emergency gates        (interim recommendation 7) .

19.       Gates normally to be kept               open       during   matches   (interim
          recommendation 8, revised).

20.       M a n ni n g of  emergency               gates         (replaces      interim
          recommendation 9).

21.       Cutting equipment       (interim recommendation 10).

The Government supports the recommendations on perimeter fencing.
Local authorities will be u rged to amend safety certificates to
include requirements so as to implement recommendations 14, 15,
17   and    to  note  recommendation   19  which  varies   interim
r ecommendation 8.    The revised recommendations on closure and
man ni ng of gates in perimeter fences at football grounds will be
drawn to the attention of local authorities, clubs and police.

CRUSH BARRIERS         ( Recom m e n d a t i o n s 22, 23)

22.       Inspection    (interim recommendation 11).

23.       Review of layout       (interim recommendation 12).

These are xeDeated from the Interim Report.                           They have already
been commended to local authorities.

SAFETY CERTIFICATES           (Recommendations 24-31)

24.       M andatory conditions in safety certificates.

25    .   vari at i on from terms of safety certificates.

26.       Terms of safety certificates.

27.       Review of safety certificates              (interim recommendation 13).

28.Issue of certificates                 to    grounds        without    them   (interim
recommendation 14).

29        Annual   review  of   certificates*  annual                      renewal    of
          certificates (interim recommendation 15).

30        Review of arrangements            for   issuing       certificates    (interim
          recommendation 16) .

31.       Local authority advisory groups (interim recommendation 17,
          revised).

The Government agrees with the aims of these recommendations.
An order under s.ISA of the 1975 Act will be made to implement
recommendation 24. Consideration will also be given to including
w i th i n the scope of such an Order provisions which will require
terms and conditions addressing other aspects of safety to be
included in safety certificates.
Local authorities will be urged to ensure the terms/conditions
in safety certificates are clear and unequivocal: they will be
reminded of the need to have •an effective review system, the
desirability   of a   properly  constituted  team approach  to
c ertification and the desirability of consulting club and
supporters association representatives.

Annual r e vi e w of safety certificates already exists in effect
because annual inspections of designated grounds in connection
with safety certificates is already required by law.          The
Government will consider whether any change in the law should
be made to ma k e annual renewal of certificates compulsory.

DUTIES OF FOOTBALL CLUBS       (Recommendations 32-43)

32.   M ea s ur em e nt of turnstile flow (interim recommendation 18).

33.   C orrelation of  turnstile        flow    and    capacity   (interim
      recommendation 19).

34.   Closure of turnstiles      (interim recommendation 20).

35.   Closed  circuit     television     (interim      recommendation   21,
      extended).

36.   Signposting (interim recommendation 22, extended).

37.   Information on tickets      (interim recommendation 23).

38.   Co-ordination with the police       (interim recommendation 24).

39.   Computer records of ticket sales.

40.   Restri c ti o n of all ticket matches to capacity attendances.

41.   Pre ma t ch entertainment    (interim recommendation 25).

42.   Recruitment of stewards.

43.   Police control rooms.

These recommendations are aimed primarily at football clubs and
are supported by the Government.       Where appropriate, local
authorities will be asked to amend safety certificates to enforce
these recommendations.

POLICE PLANNING    (Recommendations 44-53)

44.   No m in at i on of a Chief      Officer    for    liaison   (interim
      recommendation 26).

45.   Pre m a t c h briefing   (interim recommendation 27).

46.   operational orders       (interim recommendation 28).

47.   Police action on ticketless fans.
48.   Review of arrest procedures.

49.   Postponement of kick-offs    (interim   recommendation 29).

50.   Early kick-offs and Sunday fixtures.

51.   Control room facilities.

52.   Training of senior officers.

53.   Charges for police services.

These recommendations, some of which are repeated from the
Interim R eport are directed primarily to Chief Police Officers
and police authorities. The Government supports the proposal for
senior   officer   training  ahd   the   objective    to  improve
effectiveness of policing at football matches.     The Government
agrees that the cost of policing inside grounds should be met in
full by clubs and will consider providing guidance to police
authorities after consultation with relevant representative
associations, to ensure consistency of practice.

COMMUNICATIONS     (Recommendations 54-58)

54.   Radio communications    (interim recommendation 31, amended).

55.   Provision of a command channel.

56.   Land lines   (interim recommendation 32).

57.   Public address    (interim recommendation 33).   '

58.   Illuminated advertising (interim recommendation 34:     advice
       on hand signals w i t h d r a w n ) .

These are largely repeated from the Interim Report which the
Government has already urged clubs, local authorities and police
to implement.  Chief Officers will also be encouraged to use an
additional, discrete channel of communications for police match
commanders.

CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES      (Recommendations 59-63)

59.   Co-ordination    (interim recommendation 35).

60.   Pre match briefing    (interim recommendation 36).

61.   Communication w ith emergency services.

62.   Arrival of emergency vehicles     (interim recommendation 37).

63.   Briefing of police officers     (interim recommendation 38).

These recommendations are intended to ensure full co-ordination
and co-operation of the emergency services and are substantially
those covered in the Interim Report which the Government has
already endorsed.  The Government will urge all those concerned
to comply wit h the further recommendation             devised to ensure
immediate summons of emergency services.

FIRST AID, MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES
(Recommendations   64-69)

64.   First aiders (interim recommendation 39).

65.   First aid rooms     (interim recommendation 40).

66.   Medical practitioners (interim recommendation 41, revised) .

67.   Ambulances   (interim recommendation 42, revised).

68.   Ambulances, larger matches      (interim recommendation 43).

69.   M a j o r incident vehicles.

The   Government will draw attention to variations from  the
relevant Interim Report recommendations and will discuss the
provision of major incident vehicles with the authorities
concerned.

OFFENCES AND PENALTIES      (Recommendations 70-73)

70.   Selling tickets.

71.   Other specific offences.

72.   Attendance centres.

73.   Electronic tagging.

The Government     will   look   carefully   and   quickly   at   all   these
suggestions.

GREEN GUIDE   (Recommendations 74-76)

74.   Revision of the Green Guide.

75.   Crush barrier tests.

76.   Inspections for corrosion.

The Government accepts these recommendations and will act on them
with urgency.
                                                                                                        ANNEX "C "




                              PART V - F I N A L R E C O M M E N D A T I O N S

A ll-Seated Accommodation
   1. T h ?             "f S tate should ensure th a t spectators are adm itted only to seated accommodation at
m atches played at sports grounds designated u nder the Safety of Sports G rounds Act 1975 in accordance w ith
th e timing set out in Recom mendations 2 to 4 below.

  2. R ecom m endation 1 should apply w ith effect from the sta rt of the 1993/4 season at high-risk m atches as
defined u nder th e U E F A Regulations set out in p ara g ra p h 82 above.

   3. Subject to Recom mendation 2 above, Recom m endation 1 above should apply with effect from the s ta rt of
the 1994/5 season to all m atches at grounds in th e first an d second divisions of the Football League, the
P re m ie r Division of the Scottish Football League, and at national stadia, subject to a reasonable extension of
time in the case of a club promoted to th e second division of th e Football League or the P re m ie r Division of the
Scottish Football League. S tanding accom modation at these grounds should be reduced annually by 20% of the
present sta n d in g capacity (such presen t stan ding capacity to be calculated according to Recom mendation 8
below ), the first 20% deduction being effective from A ugust 1990 so as to eliminate standing by A ugust 1994.

. 4. Subject to Recom mendation 2 above. R ecom m endation 1 should apply with effect from the sta rt of the
 1999/2000 season to all m atches at all oth e r grounds designated under the Safety of Sports G rounds Act 1975.
S tanding accom modation at these grounds should be reduced annually by 10% of the present standing capacity
(such present stand ing capacity to be calculated according to Recom m endation 8 below), the first 10%
deduction being effective from August 1990 so as to elim inate sta n d in g by A ugust 1999.

Advisory D esig n Council
  5. T h e Football Association and the Football League should establish an Advisory Design Council whose
functions should be:

    (a) to conduct and m arshal research into the im provement and design of football stadia:

    (b) to dissem inate regularly such information and expertise as they acquire in this field to members of the
        Football League and. on request, to oth e r football and sports clubs in England. Wales and Scotland.

National Inspectorate and Review Body
  6. (a) If P a r t I of the Football S pectators Act 1989 is im plem ented, section 13 should be brought into force
giving the Football Licensing Authority the functions and powers therein specified (power to review the
discharge of functions by local authorities). If P a r t I of the Act is not im plem ented or is substantially delayed,
other arran g e m en ts should be made for the discharge of the functions and pow ers in section 13 of the Act by the
appointm ent of a body to exercise them.

      (b)         In either event, the body exercising those functions and powers in relation to association football
should also be entrusted with sim ilar functions and powers regarding the discharge by local authorities of th e ir
certifying and licensing functions in relation to o th e r sports grounds and sports entertainm ents pursuant to the
Safetv of S p o rts G rounds Act 1975 and P arts III an d IV of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of S port Act
1987.'

M a xim u m Capacities for Terraces
  7. W h e r e a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
should specify th e m axim um number of spectators to be adm itted to each such pen or area.

A pen or a re a is to be deemed “self-contained” notw ithstanding th a t it has a gate or gates affording access to
a n o th e r pen or area and w hether such gate or gates be open or shut.

   8. E ach figure for m axim um capacity should be assessed in accordance w ith C h a p te r 16 of the Green Guide
(“ the G reen G uide figure") subject to the follow ing qualifications:-

    (a)   the m ax im um density permitted under p a ra g ra p h s 221 and 222 of the G reen Guide (when the terrace
          or view ing slope is in good condition) should be 47 not 54;


                                                          76
    (b) th e m inim um figure specified in p a ra g ra p h s 221 and 222 (when the terrace or viewing slope m aterially
        deviates from th e recom m ended guidelines, so as to constitute a possible hazard to individuals closely
        packed) should be 0 not 27;

       (c) in arriving at “ the G reen G uide figure” , proper and realistic allowance m ust be m ade for all factors
           w hich should reduce the perm issible density including those specified in p ara g ra phs 220 to 224
           inclusive of the Green Guide.

  9.     A rran g e m e n ts should be m a d e :-

       (a) to lim it the num ber of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the m axim um capacity
           figure assessed in accordance w ith Recom m endation 8 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
           ticketing arran g e m en t, by counting or otherw ise, and

       (b) to close off fu rth e r access to such pen or a re a w hen its m axim um capacity is about to be reached.

   10 T h e m axim um notional rate at w hich spectators can pass throug h a turnstile should be 660 persons per
h o u r ' not 750 per h ou r as stated in p a r a g ra p h 47 o f the G reen Guide. T h e m axim um rate for any p articular
tu rnstile m ust ta k e full account of all circum stances including th ose given as examples in parag raph 47.


Fillin g and M on itorin g Terraces
   11 T h e r e should be a written sta te m e n t of intent, agreed between the club and the police setting out th eir
respective functions as to crowd safety and control an d in p articular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or
oth e r sta n d in g area and the m onitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. An>
variation of th e docum ent in respect of an individual m atch should be agreed in writing in advance.

  12. (a) At each m atch, th ere should be on the perim eter track, for each self-contained pen or o ther standing
are a (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the club is monitoring th a t area) or a police officer (if the police are
m onitorin'5 it) whose sole d u n is to check crowd conditions in th a t area for possible overcrowding or d istress
Z u g h o u t {lie period the area is occupied by spectators. W hoever is so appointed should be in addition to any
oth e r steward or police presence. H e should have ready access to a police officer who can authorise access
throug h gates to the pitch under R ecom m endation 20 below.

      (b)        T h is Recom mendation need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
spectators present. „r r e a s o n a b l y to be expected, d uring a p articular match do not exceed one t h i r d of the area s
m axim um perm itted c a p a c ity or 2.000. whichever is th e lower.


G angw ays                                                                                            „
   13 G angw ays should be kept clear, in accordance with p ara g ra p h s 97 to 99 of the Green Guide. Gangways
 should be painted in a conspicuous colour w heth e r they are sunk or not. T h e Safety Certificate should require
 th a t no sta n d in g is allowed in gangways an d th a t they be painted.


 Fences and G ates                                                                                        .
      14. All spikes or sim ilar constructions on perim eter or radial fences, and any sections overhanging or
 r e t u r n i n g in w a r d s to w a r d s s p e c t a t o r s , should be removed.

   15 P e rim e te r fencing should be no h ig h e r th a n 2.2 metres, measured from the tojiof the fence to the lowest
 point' at w 5 spectators may stand , and including any wall or other foundations forming part of the perim eter
 boundary.
      16 All police officers and stew ards with duties in relation to the standing areas and especially those with
 H.,    its under Recom m endation 12 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
         a a *ti • tn th<> recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
  d e m o n s t r a t i o n s at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different

  crowd densities.
    17 T h e r e must be provided in anv p erim eter fence of a pen or other self-contained area sufficient gates of a
  m i i m l m » 1 d T o f U m etres .0 en a ble t h a t pen or a re a to be evacuated onto the pitch the n m e presenbed for
  an emergency evacuation of that pen o r area.


                                                                77
   18. All gates in radial or perim eter fences of pens or oth e r self-contained areas should be painted in a
different colour from the rest of the fence and m a rk e d "E m ergency E x it” .

   19. W h e r e th ere is a perim eter fence in front of a pen or enclosure, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully
open d uring the period when spectators are in th e pen or enclosure, wherever those in command feel th a t this
can safely be done. W h e th e r they be fully open, partially open or closed, they should be kept unlocked
th roug hout the period w hen the pen or enclosure is occupied.

   20. E ac h gate in a perim eter fence affording access to th e pitch from a pen or enclosure should be m anned by
a steward or by a police officer w hen th e pen or enclosure is occupied. W h e th e r such m anning should be by a
police officer or by a steward should be decided by th e Police Com m ander. In either event, th e Police
C o m m an d e r should appoint one or more police officers with power to authorise access through gates to the
pitch im mediately in th e event of an emergency.

  21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where t h e re are
perim eter fences to permit th e im m ediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
necessary. A greem ent should be reached as to w h e th e r the equipm ent should be used by police, the fire brigade
or stew ards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. W h e th e r to use it should be a decision of a
nom inated senior police officer at th e ground.


Crush Barriers
   22. All crush barriers should be visually inspected each year for signs of corrosion. Any b arrier found to be
affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

    23. T h e layout of barriers in each pen or terraced a re a should be reviewed immediately (if this h a s not
already been done following the Interim Report) to ensure th a t it complies with th e criteria contained in
C h a p te r 9 of the Green Guide. I f it does not, th e a s sessm en t of th e m axim um capacity figure for th a t pen or
te rraced area, in accordance with Recom m endation 8 above, should reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
   24. T h e Secretary of State should exercise his powers under eith er section 6(2) or section 15(A) of the Safety
of S p orts G rounds Act 197? so as to m ake m andatory in Safety Certificates those conditions specified in the
original section 2(2) of the 1975 Act. So far as th e original section 2(2)(b) is concerned “ shall” should be
substituted for “ m ay” .

  25. In assessing these m andatory requirem ents in the C ertificate for a particular ground, the local autho rity
should follow the Green Guide criteria. O nce th a t is done, the resultant figures and terms for th a t ground
should be specified in the Safety Certificate and no variation from them should be permitted other th a n by
formal revision.

   26. W h e re a local authority incorporates any provision of th e G reen G uide into the Safety Certificate, oth e r
th a n one within the scope of Recom mendation 25 above, it should m a k e clear w hether that provision is to be
complied w ith absolutely or w ith discretionary flexibility.

  27. T h e r e should be an im m ediate review of each Safety Certificate (if this has not already been done
following th e Interim Report) by the responsible local authority, which should consult the club in respect of
which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the am bulance service and the building authority.
Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium . Its object should be to ensure that th e operative
conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or substitu te any condition show n to be necessary as a
m a tte r of urgency following the findings and Recom m endations in this Report.

   28. Any local authority within whose are a th e re exists a sp o rts ground designated under the 1975 Act for
w hich no Safety Certificate h as yet been issued should proceed forthw ith to remedy the situation.

  29. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually an d each
Certificate should require to be renewed annually.

  30. E ach local authority should review its arran g e m en ts for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
am ending and renewing Safety Certificates (if th is h a s not already been done following th e Interim


                                                           78
Report). S uch review should require th at there e x ists or is provided an accountable administrative structure
w hereby th e functions of the local authority are regularly and effectively supervised by senior officers and
elected m em bers and decisions are properly taken in accordance w ith the local authority's rules.

   3 1 .’ To as sist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory G roup (if this h a s not
already be^n             ponsisting of ap p rop riate m em bers of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire
and am bulance serv ices and of the building authority . T h e Advisory G roup should consult representatives of the
club and of a recognised supporters' organisation on a regular basis. T h e Advisory G roup’s term s of reference
should en c o m p a ss all m a tte rs concerned with crowd s a fety and should require regular visits to the ground and
attendance a t m a tch e s. T h F 3 3 v i s o r y G r o u p should have a cha irm a n from t h T l o & l l i u f h o n f ^ h d T r i W e c t i v e '
procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular written reports for
consideration by th e local authority.


D uties of E a ch Football Club
  32. E ac h tu rn stile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured (if this h as not already been
done follow ing th e Interim Report). T hereafter, regular inspections should be made to ensure th a t each turnstile
rem a in s capable of ad m itting spectators at the rate anticipated.

   33. T h e correlation between each view ing area in th e stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such as
to ensure th a t all th e spectators intended to be adm itted to th a t viewing area can pass through th e turnstiles
w ithin one hour. I f th a t cannot be done, th e capacity of th a t viewing area should be reduced accordingly. Since
th is Recom m endation includes te rm s and conditions within the scope of the original section 2(2)(c)(i) of the
Safety of S p o rts G ro u n d s Act 1975 it should be given effect in the Safety Certificate (see Recom mendation 24
above).

  34. T urnstiles should be closed when th e perm itted capacity of the area served by them is about to be reached
and a rra n g e m e n ts should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile operators for this
purpose.

  35. C losed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
concourse a re a s and in pens and oth e r standing areas, to be m onitored before, throughout and at the end of a
match.

  36. All signpostinn for spectators both outside and inside the ground should he comprehensive!) rc - lowed (if
this has not alreadv been done following the Interim Report). It should, in relation to the a r r a n g e m e n t for each
m atch, be unam higuous. eye-catching, sim ple and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of
spectators to th e ir app ro p riate viewing areas. Any re du nda nt signs should be removed.

   37. Inform ation on tickets should be unam biguous, sim ple and clear and should correlate absolutely with the
 inform ation provided in respect of each m atch both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs should
 contain inform ation necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

    38 Inform ation on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed (if
 this has not alreadv been done following the Interim Report) by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure
 th a t it correspond s with the planned a rra n g e m e n ts for adm itting spectators to the ground.

   39. Clubs should consider m a inta in ing a record on com puter of ticket sales before the day of the m atch, for
 season tickets and tickets for all-ticket m atches for seated areas, containing the names and addresses of those
 purchasing tickets.

   40 All-ticket m a tch e s should be confined to those at which a capacitv or near capacity crowd is expected
 W h e n a m atch h as been designated all-ticket, clubs should not sell tickets at the match and should ta k e steps to
 advise th e spectators of both clubs accordingly.

    41. E ach club should consult with a recognised supporters' club as to the provision of pre-match
 en te rta in m e n t aim ed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.

   4 7 C lub s should recruit and retain sufficient com petent stew ards. T hey should be fit, active an d robust, and
 preferably betw een th e ages of 18 and 55. Clubs should ensu re th a t stewards are fully trained, aware of their
 duties u nder A nnex B of th e G reen G uide and u nder th e sta te m en t of intent (see Recommendation 11) and able
 to perform them .


                                                                          79
 43. T h e club should provide a police control room which is:-

    (a) well placed, so as to com m and a good view of the whole pitch and of the spectator area surrounding it;

    (b) of sufficient size for th e com mander, h is deputy and enough officers to operate the radios, telephones
        and C C T V screens. T h e r e should be space for others who may need from time to time to visit the room
        eg other senior officers, club m a nage m ent or a m em ber of the em ergency services:

    (c) well equipped with CCTV, radio and telephone facilities and. where necessary, sound-proofed ag ainst
        excessive crowd noise.

  It should be the duty of the club to provide a room and equipm ent to the satisfaction of the chief officer
nom inated under Recom m endation 44 below.



Police Planning                                         -
  4 4. T h e C h ie f C onstable o f each police force in whose are a there is one designated sports ground or more
should nom inate a chief officer to liaise w ith the m a nage m ent of each football club and local authority
concerned in respect of th e safety an d control o f crowds.

  45. T h e O perational O rd e r for each match at a designated sports ground, and the pre-m atch briefing of all
officers on duty there, should alert such officers to th e im portance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is
detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

   46. T h e O perational O rd e r for each m atch at a designated sports ground should enable the police to cope
w ith any foreseeable pattern in th e arrival of spectators at a m atch and in th e ir departure. It should provide for
sufficient reserves to enable rapid deploym ent of officers to be m ade at any point inside or outside the ground.

  47. Police planning should provide th a t ticketless fans should not be allowed to enter a designated sports
ground except in an emergency.

  48. A rrest procedures inside and outside designated sports grounds should be reviewed so as to keep to the
m inim um the period during which an a rre stin g officer is away from his post.

  49. T h e option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
Crowd safety should be t h e p aram ount consideration in deciding w hether to exercise it.

  50. Consideration in consultation with the club should be given, especially for high-risk matches, to the
possibility of an early kick-off or a S u n d ay fixture.

  51. T h e r e should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television monitoring
outside and inside the ground and th e record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers at turnstiles
or of num bers adm itted to any are a of th e g round. Officers in the control room should be skilled in th e
interpretation and use of these d ata.

   52. Consideration should be given to th e provision of a specific train ing course for senior officers presently
acting a s Police Com m anders and th o se in line to do so. S u ch a course should include training in the basic
strategy of policing football m atch es.

   53. Police authorities should review the charges they m ake to clubs for the costs of policing inside grounds so
a s to ensure th a t realistic charges a re made. T h e H o m e Office should ta k e steps to ensure consistency of
practice, subject to local discretion an d the need to have regard to local circum stances.



Communications
  54.     T h e re should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transm issions to be
received, evaluated and answered. T h e radio system should be such a s to give operators in th e control room
priority over, and th e capacity to override, others using th e sam e channel. Additional channels should be used,
w here necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves.


                                                            80
  55. T h e r e should always be a com m and channel reserved solely for the Police C om m ander to communicate
with his senior officers round the ground.

   56. To com plem ent radio com m unications, th e re should be a completely separate system of land lines with
telephone links between th e control room an d key points a t the ground.

  57. W ithin the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual areas
outside and inside the ground, with groups o f areas or with'lhe whole' ground. Important announcements should
be preceded by Jflou'd               ^IKe s i i B ^ t 1 o i S T ^ i i » ^ c p o W ® ^ ^ | a t r i t J i i g h * l e * e I - Thi s
arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.

   58. U se should be made where possible o f illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.


 Co-ordination of Emergency Services
    59. T he police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
 liaison concerning crowd safety at each designated sports ground. /

   60. Before each match at a designated sports ground the police should ensure'that the fire service and
 ambulance service a re g i VeiTfu lR e ta ils about the event,lncluding itsvenue^ ttsffirang) the number of spectators
■expected, their likely routes o f entry and exit,: and                                           diffiadtf
 control W m o r e h ie n to C th e f f o w j . Such details shouldlielfeadiTy available" in the control rooms o f each o f the
 emergency services.;

   61. Lines o f communication, whether by telephone or by radio, from the police control room to the local
 headquarters o f all emergency services should be maintained at all times so that emergency calls can be made
 instantly.

     62. Contingency plans for the arrival at each desig nated sports ground of emergency vehicles from all three
 s e n ices should be reviewed. T h ey should incrude routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility w ithin
 the ground i t s e l f . .

    63. Police officers posted at the en tra n c e s to th e ground should be briefed as to the contingency plajns for the
 arrival of emergency s e n ices and should be informed When such s e n ic e s are called as to where'and why they are
 required.


 First Aid. M edical Facilities and Ambulances
    64. T h e r e should be at each sports ground at each m atch at least one trained first aider per 1.000 spectators.
 T h e club should have th e responsibility for securing such attendance.

    65. T h e r e should be at each designated sports ground one or more first aid rooms. T he number of such rooms
 an d th e equipm ent to be m a inta in ed within them should be specified by the local authority after taking
 professional medical advice and should be made a requirem ent of every Safety Certificate.

    66. (a) At every m atch where the num ber of spectators is expected to exceed 2,000. the club should employ a
 medical practitioner to be present and available to deal with any medical exigency at the ground. H e should be
 trained and com petent in advanced first aid. H e should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off
 an d should rem ain until h a lf an h ou r a fter the end of the match. H is w hereabouts should be know n to those in
 th e police control room and he should be immediately contactable.

           (b)            At any m atch w here th e n um be r of spectators is not expected to exceed 2,000, the club should m ake
 a rra n g e m e n ts to enable a medical practitioner to be summ oned immediately to deal with any medical exigency
 a t the ground. H e should be trained and com petent in advanced first aid. T he arrangem ents made should be
 known to those in th e police control room.

   67. At least one fully equipped am bulan ce from or approved by the appropriate ambulance authority should
 be in a tten d a n ce at all m atches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

     68. T h e num ber of am bulances to be in attendance for m atches where larger crowds are expected should be
  specified by the local authority after consultation with the am bulance service and should be made a requirement
  of the Safety Certificate.


                                                                81
  69. A “ m ajor incident equipment vehicle", d esigned and equipped to deal with up to 50 casualties, should be
deployed in addition to other am bulance attendance at a m atch where a crowd in excess of 25.000 is expected.



O ffences and P enalties
 70. C o n sid eration should be given to creating an offence of selling tickets for and on the day of a football
match w ithout authority from the home club to do so.

  71. E ac h of the following activities at a designated sports ground should be made a specific offence:-

      i.    throw ing a missile;

      ii.   ch a n tin g obscene or racialist abuse;

      iii. going on the pitch without reasonable excuse.

  72. C o n sideratio n should be given to e x tending -the courts* powers to m ake attendance centre ord ers for
football related offences on occasions of designated football m atches. T h e provision should be capable of
imposition on an offender aged 21 or over and subject to a m ax im u m of 72 hours in th e case of a n offender aged
17     or over.

  73. C onsid eratio n should be given to the use of electronic m onitoring (tagging) in the sentencing of offenders
convicted of football related offences.


Green Guide
  74.     As a m a tte r of urgency, th e H o m e Office should set up a body, to.revise the G reen G uide in accordance
with this Report, th e s e R e c o m m e n d a tio n s and th e R eport of the Technical W orking Party (Appendix 3).

  7^ In a n \ revision of the G reen Guide, the values to be ac lm ne d by way of percentage recovery after the
required loading tests on crush barriers should be specified. Acceptable values for various m aterials should be
specified.

     76. W h e n the Green Guide is revised, the need to inspect crush barriers for possible corrosion should be
 specifically mentioned ? r d em phasised.
