SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY

TRADES UNIONS LIAISON COMMITTEE

5 APRIL 1990: TOWN HALL, BARNSLEY


PRESENT:   Councillor F B     White (in the Chair)
           Councillors: M     P Bownes, G Moore
           Representatives of Trade Unions:-
           P   Hall Esq (NALGO), A V Rolfe Esq (NAFO),
           S   D Marsden Esq (T&GWU), B B Foster Esq(APEX),
           M   Dodge Esq, T A Allison Esq, J Gil liver Esq,
           B   Fletcher Esq (FBU), P B Hustler Esq (GMB),
           R   Blackburn Esq (FBU - Officers), Mrs BI .Co1e ■(NUPE)
1    Minutes
      The Committee accepted the minutes of their meeting held on 22 February
      1990.
2    Items to be considered by     the Fire and Civil Defence Authority
      The Committee considered the items which were for consideration at the
      meeting of the Fire and Civil Defence Authority on 6 April 1990 and
      particular reference was made to the following:-
      a)   Minutes of Authority - 23 February 1990
           In relation to minute 244 (1989 Salaries Agreement for APT&C Staff),
           in response to a question from NALGO the Chief Fire Officer stated
           that as at 1 April 1990 no members of Fire Service Staff were on
           spinal column points A1 or A2.
           In relation to minute 245 (Consultation at Member      level for all
           Employees of the Authority) it was agreed that as      from the next cycle
           of meetings the Clerk and Financial Officer would      arrange the
           meetings between Joint Secretariatj Fire Service,      Emergency Planning,
           and the Joint Shop Stewards Committee.
           In relation to minute 246 (Seminar - Management Information Systems
           on Equal Opportunities), it was noted that a meeting of the Equal
           Opportunities Working Party would be arranged in the near future.

      b)   Minutes of Authority - 16 March 1990
           In relation to minute 270 it was agreed that the Chief Fire Officer
           should present a report to the Authority the following day on the
           present position of the purchase of a Land Rover 110 Station Wagon
           for use as a heavy duty van. In connection with this item, and other
           similar
instances, it was the FBU view that further steps should be taken to
ensure consultation between the Chief Fire Officer and the Trades
Unions.
In connection with Minute 271 (Standard Spending Assesment - Meeting
with The Lord Ferrers, Minister of State, Home Office), the Fire
Brigades Union wondered why MP's and Members of the Authority had not
been briefed, prior to their meeting with the Minister, on the
results of the fire cover review. The Chief Fire Officer stated that
the results had not been available at that time. The Fire Brigades
Union also asked when the Chief Fire Officer was going to consult
with the representative bodies on the fire cover review.
 Appointments Panel - 27 March 1990
Whilst not questioning the Authority's decision, the Fire Brigades
Union asked for a breakdown for the cost of appointing external
candidates. It was agreed that this would be supplied to them.
 Circulars - A Guide to Fire Precautions in Existing Places of
 Entertainment and Like Premises
The Fire Brigades Union asked whether the Home Office guide had been
costed within the Brigade. The Chief Fire Officer offered to look
into the point.
The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster - Final Report
It was agreed that a report would be presented to the Authority
looking at the Brigade's operations during the Hillsborough Stadium
Disaster, with particular reference to any communications problems
faced on that day, and any such problems which existed within the
Brigade generally.
Outstanding Reports
In response to a question, the Clerk and Financial Officer reported
that he expected the report on the financial appraisal of the
Eastwood Paint Shop to be presented to one of the next two full
Authority meetings.
In relation to Secondary Employment, consultation had taken place
between the Chief Fire Officer and the Trade Unions and the report
was now awaited.
In relation to 'Building Cleaning Arrangements - Supervision -
Grading Issues' Apex asked when a meeting with Members and the Trade
Unions was going to be arranged on this matter. The Chairman
recalled that due to earlier arrangements having not gone ahead,
arrangements for discussions of this item still needed to be made.
-   3   -




g)          Use of Computers within the South Yorkshire County Fire Service
            NALGO did not wish to see the proposal go ahead to purchase the office
            based computer system until there was an agreement for staff. The FBU
            also expressed their concern that there should be consultation with them.
            The Chief Fire Officer pointed out that a new technology agreement
            existed. The reason for bringing the report foward now was that the
            equipment was on loan from ICL and the initial loan period had already
            expired.
            The Committee discussed the issue at some length. It was agreed that the
            issue would be debated fully at the Fire and Civil Defence Authority
            meeting.
h)          Proposed New Fire Station, Eastwood, Rotherham
            The Committee considered the proposals in the report with particular
            reference to the various options which were to be presented to members.
            In particular the Committee noted that solid fuel provision for the new
            premises was an option, although it would prove more expensive.
            The Fire Brigades Union also pointed out that the inclusion of a
            divisional headquarters at Rotherham would enable the existing divisional
            headquarters to be removed from Barnsley, thus allowing the use of
            accommodation there for urgently needed alternative uses.
i)          Headquarters Station Officer Posts
            The Fire Brigades Union - Officers Section raised the question of the
            currently vacant headquarters station officer posts.




                               N O T FOR P U B L I C A T I O N as it
                               contains   exempt information
                               within para.                       of
                               Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                               Act 1972 as amended.




D0C1462
