                                                                                                                               |I /5/tl.
                                                                                                                          BOWMAKER HOUSE
EASTW OOD & PARTNERS
                                                                                                                          23 KINGFI ELD ROAD
                C o n su ltin g        E n g in e e rs
                                                                                                                          SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W. Eastw ood             B .E n g , P h .D „ C .E n o ., F .I.C .E .                                                      Tel.: (0742) 583871
                         F .I.S tru ct.E .' F .G .S .. M .C ons.E .

A. A. Wood               B .E n g , P h D , C .E n g , F .I.C .E .
                         F .I.S tru c t.E , M .I.W .E .S , M .C ons.E .

A. G. Burdett             G .M .. B .S c !(E n g ). C .E n g .. M .l.C.E.

Associates :
Geoffrey Spir            C .E n i „ M .I.C .E., M .I.M «ch.E.

C. S. G reaves           B .E n g .. C E m . , M .l.C .E ., M .I.Struct.E .

R. C. A. E a stw o od    B .S c„ C .E n f.t M .l.C .E ., M .I.Struct.E.

CflMUltffft ?                                                                                            Our Ref:    WE/ACM/CW/1610
A. L. Percy              B .S c .. C E n f . , F J.C .E ..
                         F .I .S t n ie t E ., (U .M u n .E ., M .R .T .P.I.                             Your Ref:



                                                                                                                     13 April, 1979

                                          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
                                                 Application for Safety Certificate


                         Notes of Meeting, 11 April, 1979 at Hillsborough

                 Present:                                           Mr.                               Sheffield Building Surveyors Dep
                                                                                                               ««          M                    H   I
                                                                    Mr.

                                                                    Mr. K. Jones                      South Yorks. Fire Service
                                                                    Mr. H. E. Wright                     n           »»         n          »»

                                                                    Dr. W. Eastwood   Eastwood and Partners
                                                                    Mr. J. A. Strange     ”     ”     "
                                                                    Mr.                         it


                South Stand

                          The fire-services officer proposed a new exit from the
                 front terracing under the stand and through a new 1.2m wide
                 door adjacent to the existing snack bar.                                                            Wall surrounding
                 this area to have 1 hour fire resistance.                                                            Existing doors
                 to be self closing with 1 hour fire resistance.

                           The          fire officers requested that all walls enclosing
                 offices, lounges, bars and the press box have 1 hours fire
                 resistance.                              It was agreed by Building Surveyors representatives
                 that the existing construction could be upgraded by forming
                 a sandwich using ’Supertex’ or a similar product.

                           Mr. Jones is to send to Eastwood and Partners a copy
                 of South Stand seating plan showing his proposals for removing
                 seats to increase the capacity of gangways after dividing
                 barriers are removed.




  ■




                                                                       Registered In England -   No, 1134531
EASTW OOD Cr PARTNERS




 4                Mr.            requested that the brick staircase walls be
             buttressed where crowd surge pressure could be generated.
             (At a later inspection the location of these buttresses
             was agreed)^.'    Handrails to be added as was agreed at the
             meeting on 2 April.

 5                Prior to the meeting the bases of two stanchions had
             been exposed by removing floor timber.       Rusting is not
             excessive.       All bases will be exposed for inspection.     If
             necessary steel plating will be welded to any corroded parts
             before encasing in concrete for permanent protection.
         .        In inspecting the two bases,waste paper, and shavings
             of wood together with cigarette ends were found in considerable
             quantities beneath the floor boards.       The club to be advised
             that the space beneath the timber floor should be cleaned out.


             North Stand
 6.               It was agreed to recommend to the club that 10 seats
             would be removed from each of the 9 gangways and 4 seats
             from in front of each of the 9 upper exits.       I'he total
             number of seats lost is therefore 126 compared with 225
             in the original proposals.


             Spion Kop
 7.               Eastwood and Partners to send revised copies of drawing
             number 1610/1X showing the new crush barrier layout including
             two lines of radial barriers to Mr.            and Mr. Jones
             for their comments.

 8   .            Eastwood’s proposals for improving the existing upper
             Exit from Spion Kop agreed in principle as shown on drawing
             1610/12.     The dividing handrail on the ramp will be taken
             past the whole of the first staircase.

 9.               The Building Surveyors representative asked that the
             scoreboard structure be surveyed with particular reference
             to stability under wind loading.
EASTWOOD £r PARTNERS




       West Stand
 10.        Additional exits to t?e provided from upper stand on
       the lines discussed at the meeting on 2 April*


       Further Action
 11.         An evening meeting to inspect the emergency lighting
       will be held shortly after Easter.         Mr. Jones will contact
       Eastwood and Partners on returning from leave to arrange
       a date.



       Circulation

       Mr.                 ^    Building Surveyors Dept.       2 copies
       Mr.


       to!   h   ! E?“wright)    South Yorks Fire ServlCe      2 °°Ples

       Mr. E. England            Sheffield Wednesday F.C.      2 copies

       Eastwood Sc Partners                                    1 copy
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

                   Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

                    Matters reqiiring attention at the
      Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, Hillsborough, Sheffield

Spion Kop

1.       To secure a crowd capacity of 11, 040 people the following work to be
         undertaken:-

(a)      Improve the width of the exit from the Southern end of the Kop to a
         minimum of 4 .7 m etres throughout. This can be done by providing
         a gate through the perim eter wall in front of the Hillsborough Suite as
         indicated on plan no. 1610/11.

(b)      Increase the headroom of the north east exit to a minimum height of 2.1
         m etres.

2.       To secure a crowd capacity of 16, 850 people the following work to be
         undertaken, in addition to item 1:-

(a)      Provide four gates of at least 1.1 metre wide from the radial gangways to
         the perim eter track of the ground area.

(b)       Provide an additional exit from either the top or side of the Kop of at
          least 3 m etres width. It should be so designed that it does not impede
          the egress from any other gangway, (enclosed for guidance is a form
          FS 902).

 3.       The arrangement for crush barriers as produced by the consultant, whilst
          not complying fully with the guide recommendations, is considered
          adequate if the other requirements are fulfilled. These other requirements
          include the 2 No. racial barriers indicated on Plan 1XA and the provision
          of an additional 3m wide egress route to South-East area, and of gated
          openings to givfe access from the radial gangways to the ground perimeter
          area.

 4.       Make good all broken and spalled concrete terracing.

 5.       Check and carry out any necessary work to ensure safety of score-board
          building.

 6.       Replace corroded perim eter rails by construction complying with code
          recommendations.

 7.       Improve egress conditions at rear by provision of balustrades, rails,
           etc. as indicated on the plan.
B.    North Stand

      (i)          The seating arrangements as proposed on plan numbered 1610/7A is
                   satisfactory with the additional proviso

                   Provide barriers as indicated in green on the plan, in front of the upper
                   e x its.

               '   It is noted that there are no handrails to the stairs from the stand, but
                   in view of restricted width and length it is not proposed to require these.

      North Stand (Lower Level A ccess) (Upper Level A ccess)

      (ii)         The construction marked red on the plan numbered 1610/8A to be brought
                   up to a nominal one hour fire resistance. The doors to be self closing
                   with one hour nominal fire resistance.

C.    North-West Terrace

      1.           Replacement of the corrugated sheeting at the rear is required.

       2.          The removal of under-strength barriers and their replacement by new
                    ones constructed to guide recommendations.

 D.   West Stand

       To secure full use of the seating arrangements as indicated on plan numbered
       1610/9A, provide two additional escape routes both of at least 1.1m wide.
       These escape routes to lead from either the front or side of the stand and
       discharge to a place of safety.

 E.    West Terrace

       1.           The downward slope of the exit steps to be corrected.

        2.          Limitation of numbers to 7, 200 as agreed between Police representatives
                    and club.

 F.    South Stand (Rear)

        (i)         The seating arrangements indicated on the plan numbered 1610/6A is
                     satisfactory with the additional proviso

                    Provide two 600mm exits from the directors box as indicated on the plan.

        South Stand (Front)

            (ii)    To relieve congestion on the rear passage, provide an escape route from
                     the west end via the snack bar as indicated on plan no. 1610/4A.

                                                2.
(iii)     Provide an additional exit route from the east end side of at least
          1.1m wide as indicated on the plan numbered 1610/6A.

South Stand (Internal Layout)

(iv)      The construction marked red on the plan numbered 1610/4A to be
          brought up to a nominal one hourfiie resistance. The doors to be self
          closing with one hour nominal fire resistance, (enclosed for your
          guidance is form FS 901).

(v)       The sliding doors leading into the directors box to be replaced by
          nominal one hour fire resisting self closing doors as indicated on
          plan numbered 1610/4A.

(vi)      Remove paint store and timber construction and provide a one hour
          fire resisting door as indicated on plan numbered 1610/4A.

South Stand (General)

 (vii)    Areas of badly spalled concrete to be repaired.

 (viii)   Corrosion to steel columns to be investigated and its effects assessed
          and repaired as necessary.

 (vix)    All balustrades and walling to be subject to test and strengthening as
          may be revealed.

 (x)      Additional handrails to be provided to main entrance stairs and to stairs
          from first floor to stand.

 (xi)      Consider raising height of front wall opposite foot of each gangway.

 General Structural Matters

 1.       All crush barriers, balustrade w alls, fences and railings to be tested
          and replaced, or strengthened, where necessary.

 2.        Provision of handrails and suitable headroom to egress routes to be
           r e-a ssessed after re-routing of gangways etc. has been carried out.

  Emergency Lighting

  1.       The areas shaded yellow on the plan to be covered by a 3 hour minimum
           duration emergency lighting system conforming to BS 5266 Part 1 1975
            'The Emergency Lighting of P rem ises1.

  2.       The use of a double pole switch connecting the emergency lighting
            system to some essential lighting circuit e .g . bar lights is strongly
            recommended thereby ensuring that the emergency lighting is always
            switched on.
Fire Warning System

The suitability and type of system to be decided when further discussions have
taken place.

Fire Extinguishers

Fire fighting hand appliances are to be installed where indicated by a triangle
on the attached plan. The colour of the triangle determines the type of
appliance required. (Please see attached legend). It may be that equipment
is already provided in the building, and the plan shows the final complement
of appliances.

Two gallon water extinguishers to be wall mounted so that the handle is
approximately one metre from floor level. The 51b. dry powder extinguishers
and glass fibre blanket to be wall mounted, the extinguishers being mounted at
approximately light switch lev el.

General Fire Precautions

1.     All walls and ceilings inside the stands and along escape routes to be
       class 'O' surface spread of flame.

2.     Provide isolating valves on the pipeline leading to the gas cookers at
       the point adjacent to the escape route from the counter area.

 3.    Quantities of waste paper were discovered under the seating in the
       stand. This should be removed and placed in a satisfactory storage
       area.

 Training of Safety Stewards and Staff

 To ensure that the Safety Stewards and Staff are conversant with the safety
 precautions they w ill be expected to administer, a meeting should be arranged
 with the Fire Service, suitable to all parties.

 Notices - Exit Signs

 1.     These signs to have suitable sized white lettering on a green background,
        the size of lettering to be agreed on site.

        The position of the exit signs are indicated on the plans by a green
        rectangle containing the le tte r 'E '.

 2.     If the proposed rewiring of the emergency lighting system is adopted
         as discussed by Mr.           and Divisional Officer Jones then, with the
         reduced lighting output, it may be necessary to provide a number of
         illuminated exit boxes.
Emergency Procedure

Emergency procedure notices should be placed at strategic points throughout
the ground.

A ccess for Emergency Vehicles

1.       Adequate roads should be provided to ensure that speedy and direct
         access can be obtained by emergency vehicles to all exterior parts o f , .
         the stadium.

2.       Ensure that parked vehicles will not obstruct emergency vehicles on
         these access roads.

Public Address System

The existing public address system to be upgraded, with the Police having an
over-ride facility from their Police Room.

Police Facilities

A suitable permanent Police Room (with facilities as shown on the sketch plan
marked AA ) to be provided in the 1980 close season.

F irst Aid Facilities

 (i)     Structure

         The existing facilities are considered to be below an acceptable standard
         and it is suggested the Club consider providing a more permanent
         structure which is not likely to require up-grading for a very long tim e.
         The internal finish, particularly of the Treatment area, should be of an
         impervious nature so that it can be easily cleaned and rendered fairly
         sterile and require no decoration. This can be achieved by the use of
         tile s or form ica type finish e t c .. . .

 (ii)    Waiting Area

          The Waiting Area could be arranged within corridor space to minimise
          the cost, where sitting cases could wait for attention on chairs.

 (iii)   Treatment Area

          The Treatment Area should be sufficient to accommodate two or three
          patients at any one tim e, and consideration should be given to the needs
          for privacy within the treatment area, bearing in mind that the three
          patients may well be lying on couches.
(Iv)      Lighting

          Good lighting is essential and strip lighting would be satisfactory. The
          provision of a power point would also be a basic requirement.

(v)       Water

          A supply of hot and cold water is essential; the cold water suitable
          for drinking. A hand basin and a large Belfast type sink should also
          be provided. The Club might consider whether it would be cheaper in
          the long run to provide stainless steel basins which are not subject to
          chipping.

(vi)      Toilet Requirements

          The Club should provide at least one male and one female toilet, for
          the use of the public, and should consider whether they should provide
          an additional toilet for the use of the staff.

 (vii)    Storage

          Storage facilities are required for six stretchers, and for two sets of
          wheels for stretchers, blankets and other bed linen. This storage should
          be lockable.

 (viii)    Equipment

           The following is a minimum list to provide a basic serv ice:-

           Treatment couches with lift up ends, two or three in number depending
           on space available and/or number of cubicles, if the accommodation is
           cubicled.

           Six Stretchers.
           Two sets of stretcher w heels.
           20 Blankets.
           Six P illow s.
           One Minute-Man Resuscitator.

 (ix)      Telephone Facilities

           A telephone facility would appear to be basic in 1979. This could be
           achieved by an extension from the main switch, or by sharing with
           police.




                                      6.
             (x)        Car Parking

                    The Club might also consider what facilities could be extended to the
                    St. John's personnel for the parking of staff cars.

        S.   Crowd Capacity

             The following numbers will be considered to be satisfactory, provided that the
             recommended work as detailed above is carried out:-

                        Spion Kop               16,850
                        South Stand Upper        5,567
                        South Stand Lower        3,310
                        West Stand               4,465
                        West Terrace             7,200
                        North West Terrace       2, 900
                        North Stand              9,882
%
                        Total Crowd Capacity     50,174




%
    i




              8. 6.79




                                                7.
EAS TW O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                    BOWMAKER HOUSE
               C o n su ltin g            E n g in e e rs                                                                  23 KING FIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                           SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
W. Eastwood                 B.Eng., Ph.D ., C .Eng., F.I.C.E.,                                                             Tei.: (0742) 583871
                            F.I.Struct,Er, F.G.S., M .C ons.E .

A. A. Wood                  B.Eng., Ph.D ., C.Eng., F.I.C.E..                                      *
                            F J.S tru c t. E., JVU.W.E.S., M .C ons.E ,

A. G. Burdett               G .M .. B .S c.(E n g ), C .Eng., M .l.C .E

Associates:
Geoffrey Spir               C .E n g ., M .I.C .E .. M .l.M ech.E .

C. S. Greaves               B.Eng., C .E n g ., M .I.C .E ., M .!.S tru c t-E ,

R. C. A. Eastw ood          B.Sc., C .E n g ., M .l.C .E ,, M .I.S tru c t.E .

Consultant:                                                                                             ■   O u r-R e f:    WE/AJC/KH/1610
A. L. Percy                 B .Sc., C .E n g ., F.I.C.E.,
                            F .l.S tru c t.E ., F.I.M un.E., M .R .T .P.I.                                  Your R e f :




 South Yorkshire County Fire Service,                                                                                       12 December 19
 Fire Service Headquarters,
 Division Street,
 Sheffield 1.


•F Q X -         Cl ' " ‘L s i i ) . * . » i      •; i'f. - J l i T ..     iC>-JOli0S .




 Dear Sirs,
                                Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                    South Stand Emergency Lighting
              Following our recent meetings, we now confirm the proposals
 which have been discussed and agreed with Mr. K. Jones.
              We enclose a coloured up copy of our drawing 1610/41B,
 together with the corresponding circuit identification sheet
 which indicate the proposed circuit arrangements and additional
 light fittings to be installed.                                                           The red coloured areas are
 those where the predominant illumination is provided by the
 battery-supported circuits, the yellow and uncoloured areas are
 those where the predominant lighting is served from mains-only
 circuits.
              Either system on its own, we believe will provide adequate
 illumination on all escape routes to satisfy the provisions of
 B.S.5266.                      Normally both systems are in operation,fed by mains
 power to provide the required level of normal illumination.
 In the event of mains failure the emergency system is automatically
 transferred to the battery supply.
              The two main exits El and E2 from the upper access level will
 be checked for illumination level under failed emergency circuit
 and two additional mains fed lights will be added if necessary to
                                                                      Registered in England -   No. 1134531
                                                                 SHEET




EASTWOOD & PARTNERS




   meet the required illumination level.
          We understand that the above proposals will be acceptable
   only for the duration of the existing battery life.     When the
   time comes for battery replacement, we would propose further
  modifications which, in addition to reducing the battery
   load, would remedy the shortcomings of the existing installation
   in regard to physical separation of the cable routes and
   switchgear between the normal and emergency systems.     These
  modifications would achieve compliance with B.S.5266 by locating
   switch or fuse gear in separate fire protected zones and by


   emergency circuits run parallel.
          Work is now in progress to implement the present proposals,
   and we anticipate that this will be completed by the Christmas
  break or shortly after.


                                    Yours faithfully,




   c.c.    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.
           South Yorkshire County Council
          .
                 S o u t h                             Y o rk s h ire                       C o u n t v            O
•if    Si
w> v *          !•'. A .   ' v’ O k n t ,   L L B .,     Chief    Executive                               Co      ;rr.;
                                                                                                          3;j:
                 ■   C.    ! "! ; >rn: ; , W . A . ,   U ..B .   (CanUib),    Courtly   Stcrufarv         Scf.i!:    '* ■:■■
                           t         : of A d m in istratio n                                             TtjiepE'.'iiHr: i/-.-.-
                                                                                                          iSTD .-220

                                                                                                          £x: ,422.. ,

                iOr F?                                                 You' Rof.                          D:no:
              DV/MB/583/5                                              EE/CB                        21st December, 19’



    Dear Sir,

    Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

    Following approval by the County Council and clarification of certain
    structural aspects of the South Stand construction, I am now able to forxaliy
    issue the attached General Safety Certificate in respect of the Hillsborough
    Stadium.

    As previously mentioned to you, the fee payable has yet to be determined by
    the County Council and I will, of course, contact you further on this point
    as soon as possible.

    I would1particularly draw your attention to the following paragraphs dr " '
    Schedule 2 of the Certificate:-

     8(1)     - the existing First Aid facilities are accepted on an interim br.&i:-.
                 only pending the erection of purpose-built facilities in the 1980
                 close season;

    12 (1) - the arrangements for Emergency Lighting in the South Stand (as set
              out in the letter from Messrs. Eastwood & Partners to the South
              Yorkshire County Fire Service dated 12th December, IS79) are
              regarded as acceptable only for the duration of the existing
              battery7 life;

     14       - the existing Police facilities are accepted on an interim basis only
                 panning the erection of purpose-built facilities in the 1980 close
                 season;

     30       - use of the Stadium in excessively high wind conditions
                                      and
              - use of the Stadium in excessively high snowfall conditions.

     Perhaps you would also treat this letter as the formal notice of issue requir .d
     by Paragraph 7 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976.




     Mr. E. Hngland,                                                                                      /r.honU] y.w hnv'.;---
     Soerotary,
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.,
     Hillsborough,
     Sheffield,
     South Yorkshire.
     s6 isw
T. ' '   *


             Mr. E. England                  -   2-               21st Decsrrbe



             Should you have any queries on the Certificate, Mr. D. Vaughan or. tuy stair
             will be happy to discuss them with you.

             Finally, I would like to take this opportunity of recording the County Cour.ci
             appreciation of the co-operation and goodwill which the Club and its Consults its
             has extended to the Officer Working Party over the months of the necessarily
             involved detailed investigations.

                                                       Yours faithfully




M



                                                       Chief Executive
•v'::




~.J ~±?y. Crri
                South Yorkshire County Council
               F. A . M a lie t t, L L .8 .,   C h ie f E x e c u tiv e                         C o u n ty Hall
                                                                                                B a rn s le y
               J.C . H a rris , M .A ., L L .B .,(C a n ta b ), C o u n ty S e c re ta ry       S o u th Y o rk s h ire S70 2 T N
               D e p a r tm e n t o f A d m in is tr a tio n                                    T e le p h o n e : B a rn s le y
                                                                                                ( S T D 0 2 2 6 ) 86141
                                                                                                Telex: 547675



               OurRef:DV/JD/583/5                               YourRef:c 2088/REC/IR           Date:21st January,              1983

                                                                                                E xt. N o.
               T h is m a t te r is b e in g d e a lt w it h by

Dear Sir,

 Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975.
 Sheffield Wedensday Football Club P L C .

 Following your letter dated 3rd December,                                I took this matter up with the Chief
) Constable.

 As you are aware, the County Council issued a General Sarety Certiiicate under tne
 Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, in respect of the Hillsborough Staaium on 21su
 December, 1979.    The detailed pre-determined Emergency Evacuation Procedure was^
 drawn up later by |            ~~      " " | in consultation with the then Divisional
 Commander of "F" Division of the South Yorkshire Police (Chief Superintendent R.
 He r ola), and fowarded to the Club by your letter dated 9th April, 19b0.

 This was done in accordance with the Schedule of Responsibilities o± the ’various
 disciplines represented on the four Area Officer Working Parties, but. Oi course,
 this in no way affects the operational responsibility of the South Yorlcsnire P o n c e
 for "on the day" safety and security.

 The Chief Constable informs me that he considered it advisaole that the present
 contingency plan for evacuation of all or part of the ground shoula oe amendea
 slightly in that when a situation arises the police control room staif as- the
 ground will now pass the following message over the public address systcr i to indicate
 to police officers and stewards that emergency evacuation procedures are in force:-

    "Will Mr. Derek Knights please go immediately to the Secretary's office."

 In the event of an emergency evacuation becoming necessary, a verbal massage wili.
 then be passed by the police officer in charge at the Stadium (again via uae
 public address system) giving specific instructions as to the action to oe taken oy
 the public.  Wien the situation has been resolved, the "all clear will o e notiiie^
 by the following message passed over the public address system:-

     "Mr. Knights need not now attend the Secretary's office.

■Whilst I appreciate that you were not consulted in advance on the minor amendment to
 the pre— determined Emergency Evacuation Procedure which I nave o u t l m e u , I trust
 that you will find it acceptable.

                                                                                                 Yours       faithfully,



HrThe                                                                                       1
     Divisional Commander,
 Sheffield (West) Division,
 South Yorkshire County Fire Service,
 Division Street,
 Sheffield.                                                                                       Chief- Executive.
 SI 3^G                                                                                     I
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                                                                                                              /«/,
                                                                                                                17 Bowmaker   House
                                                                                                                 23 Kingfieid *oacj         U liO
              C o n su ltin g    E n g in e e rs
                                                                                                                 Sheffield S11 S^«
W. Eastwood                 B .E n g . P h .D . F .E n g . F.I.C.E.                                              Te!.: (0742) 58387-
                            F.I.Struct-E.. F.G .S.. M .C ons.E .
                                                                                 OIu                             Teiex:       547266
A. A. Wood                  B.Eng., P h .D . C .E n g . F.I.C .E.
                            F A S m i e tE . M .I.W .E .S . M .C ons.E .                                                          and at:
A. G. Burdatt               G .M . B .S c-(E n g ), C .E n g . M . I . C . t ;
                                                                                                                   36 High Ho lb o rn
R. C. A. Eastwood           B .S c . C .E n g . M .I.C .E ., M.I.StrucT.E.'~
                                                                                                                   L ondon W C1V 6AA~
Associates:                                                                                                        T el.: (01) 2 4 2 7436
Geoffrey Spir               C.En*., M .I.C.E., M.I-M«ch.E.

C. S. Greaves               B.Eng., C .Eng., M .l.C.E., M .I.Struct.E .
                                                                                                Our R e f :   WE/JAS/PM/4699
A. J . Clough              B ^ ., C .E n t., M .C.I.B.S., M J.M och.E.

J . A. Strange             C.Eng., M X S truct.E .                                             Your R a f :

Consultant:
A. L. Percy                 M .T«ch.(H on.), B.Sc.. C .E n t., F.I.C.E..
                            F.LScrucc.E., F.l.M un.E., M .R.T.P.I.




               Department of Administration,                                                                   7 February 1983
               South Yorkshire County Council,
               Barnsley,
               South Yorkshire.  S70 2TN


               For the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan




               Dear Mr. Vaughan,
                            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                                                    Score and Message Board
                         The Club propose to have erected a new score and
               message board in the south west corner of the ground.
                Enclosed are four prints of our drawing 4699/1 showing
                the general arrangement.
                          It is intended to have the score board working for
                    possible semi-final game on 16 April 1983.                                                    The
                supporting steel frame will therefore be erected before
                the end of March.
                     Copies of detail drawings and calculations will be
                sent to Mr . I                                                   [later this week.
                          The comments of the Officer Working Party will be
                welcomed.


                                                                                    Yours sincerely,




                 c.c. Mr. E. England


                                                            Registered in England - No. 1134531
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
.MEaSCR-iNCUM
                                               Dr :hs aitenticn of           /cur      FP19/2/4
! o

                                            i 3'ease ccniac: 3 •tfaugnan   j Our
  rcm                                                                               ~ T irt DV/AA/33"
            •aiar Executive                   si.                           •3ar


]SunjSc:|   Safetv of Soorts Grounds Act 1975                               Jats          10.2.3



            As you ara aw a r s , it is the policy for the Ofticsr Wori-cmg Parties to make
            routine inspections of the Football League Grounds in South Yorkshire
            twice yearly, roughly on a summer/winter basis.

            Accordingly, arrangements have' now been made for the following
            inspections to take p l a c e :-

            Data                                    Time ana Ground

            .ionaav _:_st renruarv   IQS'           2.30 p.m. at the Hillsborough Stadium of
                                                    the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC

            Wednesday 23rd February 1983            2.30 p.m. at the Millmoor Ground of the
                                                    Rotherham United Football Club Ltd

            Thursday 24th February 1983             2.30 p.m. at the Bramall Lane Ground of
                                                    the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd

            Perhaps you would kindly arrange to be represented at both Headquarters
            and Divisional levels as usual.

            So. far as the Oakwell Ground of the Barnsley Football Club Ltd, is
            concerned, you will recall that this was inspected as recently as
            21st Decamber.   Unless 3/ou have any views to the contrary, I intend to
            regard that visit as the routine winter visit.

            This leaves the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club
            Ltd.  As you will recall, it appeared in October, 1982, that the Club were
            now anxious for the Officer Working Party to prepare a Report on the
            Ground for them. However, since that date, the climate has cooled,
            possibly connected with the on-going discussions between the Clubs and the
            Police Authority on police charges. As it appears likely that these will
            soon be concluded to the Clubs' advantage, I will raise the Safety of
            Sports Grounds Act aspect again with the Club shortly.   The Ground is not,
            of course, yet designated by the Secretary of State,   Accordingly, in
            the absence of conditions being such that there is a need for the County
            Council to seek an emergency order under Section 10 of the Act from a
            Magistrates Court, real progress can only be made with the Club's
            voluntary co-operation.
                                                                                                                                                                   C -2 o ? 3



S h e ffie ld W e d n e s d a y ^ , , Football Club pic
                                                                                                                                      Registered Office
                                                                                                                                      Hillsborough, Sheffield So 1SW
                                                                                                                                      Telephone" 0742-343122
Chairman:    H. E. McGEE
                                                                                                                                      Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6
Manager;      H, WILKINSON
                                                                                                                                      Registered No. 62478 England
Secretary:    E. ENGLAND



             The Chief Fire Officer,
             South Yorkshire County Council,
             Fire Service Department,                                                                                                  13th October 1983
             Furnival House,
             42-46 Furnival Gate,
             Sheffield, S1 4QP




             Dear Mr. Wright,

    '        S AFETY          OF SPO Rx S^'GaCjU N liS *                               9 f0      ’    '




             Further to your letter of the 7th October re your visit and
             appraisal of the emergency procedure at this ground on
             Tuesday, 4th October, when your Divisional Officer Johnson
             came to see me after the match and explained that in his
             opinion there were dead’ areas in our ground,* as it appeared
             that stewards had not heard the emergency announcement, to
             say the least this surprised me, as only this last close
             season have we had the P.A. System further improved.

             I have taken the opportunity this morning to try out the
             system in all the areas that were supposedly *dead,' and
             I must report that everything that was said, was heard
             clearly and distinctly.

             I have informed Hammerton Road police of this, and it
             has been suggested to me that perhaps, it would be a
             sensible idea for one or two of your officers to come
             to the ground at say 1.00 o'clock on Saturday, 29th
             October when we play Huddersfield Town and go around the
             ground with the policc and hear the broadcasts for them-                                                                                                           /
             selves.                                                                                                                                                            I


             Yours sincerely,




             Secretary.                       -                                                                                                                       .... -----
                                                                                                                                                                                —     feft
             c.c. South Yorkshire County Council
                  Hammerton Road Police
                                                                                                                                                                                             J

             D irectors: M. S h e p p a rd . J . P , , F .C .A . (V ice-C hairm an), S . L. S p e ig h t, O .B .E ., C. W o o d w a rd , K. T. A dd y , E. B arro n , G. K. Hulley,
                                O/ -.Uit xt.
                                               ADO May                    AO


The Oecr^tsry                                            0 o~v z c :   Pira Service '10
Sheffield Wednesday 7cctbaII Club PLC
Hillsborough
SH2FTIELD
S6 1SW




Dear Sir

Thank you for your letter dated 13.10.83. As you suggested, 2 Fire Prevention
Officers visited the ground before the match on Saturday 29 October to carry
out further checks on the effectiveness of the public address system when used
for emergency procedures.

In conjunction with the County Police, the public address system was checked
and found to be satisfactory in all areas.

If you rsauire any further information, please do not v^sitate co contict
this Department.

Yours faithfully




d i v i s i o n a l c o m m a ?tder
