                                                                               ..J-       '


                                                                              c::U2-




     n ri f - A c r                           50 Queen A nne's Gale London S W 1H 9 A T
NEWS RELEASE                                  Tnlnplionc 01-213 3030/4050/5050
                                               (Night line 01-213 3000}




                                                                       January 16, 1986


                                SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
                      HOME SECRETARY STATEMENT ON POPPLEWELL INQUIRY


         The   Government     "accepts the need to strengthen urgently" the safety
    measures at sports grounds, the Home Secretary the Et Hon Douglas Hurd
    CBE MP said today.        “Consultations will begin immediately with the sporting
    authorities and organisations concerned" vith a vie* to extend
                                  the Safetv of Sports Grounds Act 1975 to all groun
    designation this summer under the batet/ oi
    with spectator accommodation tor more than 10,000 spectators at which
    soccer,',rugby union, rugby league and cricket is played.

           All eligible Football League grounds here already been designated as have
    Scottish premier league grounds, Eugby League Division one and two
    grounds kna the three national Rugby Union stadia.

           The principle that safety controls should also be extended to other
    sports grounds vith stands capable of holding over 500 spectators and
    to indoor sports facilities with accommodation for over 500 spectators
     where adequate controls do not already exist was also accepted by the
     Home Secretary.        The first step will be to establish the facts about
     those grounds and facilities affected and the full practical effects

     of the recommendations.
            The Home Secretary was responding to the Final Deport of the Committee
     of Inquiry into Crowd Safety       and   Control at Sports Grounds set up following
     the fire at Bradford City football ground and the events at Birmingham City
     football ground last May.         He expressed the Government's gratitude for the
     speed and conscientiousness «ith which the Chairman and his two assessors

     had discharged this difficult task.

            The Final Report makes 15 recommendations on crowd safety and control
      at sports grounds.        The full text of the Home Secretary’s response is
      attached giving details of the request to local authorities, and chief
                                   2


  *    officers to inspect as necessary both indoor and outdoor sports
premises and proposals to publish a consultative document on lcgiaLative
                              .,   , .   4.•   _ n-p   safety recommendations
changes in order to achieve the objectives of the salety

of the Final Report.
       0„ the question of crowd control, the Home Secretary referred to
the steps already taken to strengthen the powers of the p»!ice and courts ,
in particular new police powers of search and arrest m       t e     o ice
Criminal Evidence Act and on further measure,, including a new o fence
of disorderly conduct, proposed in the Public Order BUI .          He un e r ^ o
 to look further at Hr Justice Popplewell's recommendations when we
 had time to see how these measures worked in practice.      The latest flares
 available suggest that in London so far this season there has been a
 reduction of over W    per cent in the number of people arrested an
 ejected! in Manchester the reduction is over 5




 MODE FOR EDITORS
         The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA) implemented the main
  proposals of the Wheatley Report into Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds
  established following an accident at Ibro* Park in 1971 when 66 people

  were killed and many more injured.

         Designation under the SSGA means that the owner or occupier of a
  stadium must apply to the local authority (county council) for a safety
  certificate if spectators are to be admitted to the stadium.




      • A brief check list of action taken or under way by Government and football

       cluba is attached.
         nomTPAHTSM-        WHAT HAS BEEH DOHE/IS BEING DOHE
FOOTBALL HOOLIGAHISM.


x     SPOKXX«C EVENTS . »      «     0,   ^        BTC, ACT l j »        -    “ f
           of                        - r f n a   Z . T u J ^                  *•    “
special coaches and t r a m . .
Associated police powers.

2.    PUBLIC ORDER BILL
          (a)      controls on                                diLrL^reasonably^Pprehended
                   crowds.  Where ser     v          eate limited),
                   conditions can be imposed (eg the gate

                   Exclusion order scheme.
          (b)
                                    , v      onrf fireworks made an offence (as
          (c)      Possession of smoke bom           interim report),
                   recommended by Popplewell in his inter

                   Extension of alcohol controls to m inibuses^
           (d)
                            .            fhat th ro wi ng a missile at or towards           a person
                    Cla rif i c at i o n that t n r o w i u 6
           (e)
                    constitutes an offence.

                    Ne„ offence of d i s o ^ r l y _ c o n i u c t where distress, elan, or
           (f)      harassment likely to be caused.

           (g)      Offence of incitement to sti, y                                         “ ll
                     cover c o n d u c t which i*.in en               ible   application to racist
                     as conduct which is H K e i y u    F
                     chanting)•

     3.   POLICE & CRIMINAL EVIDENCE ACT                                                .

            U)       I:‘« : r e " " c n s ^ n ^ n r b r e n s : s p l c i : r b
                                                                              o febeingCeintpossession

                     of offensive weapons.

                                         t arrest extended so as to provide a |enfral
             (t)     T o i l " r a " Sestf C l ^ i n s retrospectively, if one of tbe
                      general arrest conditions is met.


     4. CCTV Being provided by the ^ " ' ^ ^ J b s ’have been equipped to date),
     and Second Divisions (25 out of the                                       ^




      Office evidence gathering camera                                                            Home

                                                        « “    “ l"   admission6 t ^ b e ^ re fused to

                                              police.          .
                                      POPPLEWELL FINAL REPORT:
                                     H h m p SECRETARYLS_STATEMENT




                              •                               —    Mr Soeaker, I should like to make a
1                With permission, Mr bpea*ei.,
statement on the Final Report of the Inquiry into Safety and

control at Sports Ground, under the chairmanship of Mr Justice

popplewell which was published today.                             The House will recall that

    the Inquiry was established f o U o w i n g the fire at Bradford City

    football ground and the events at B i r m i n g h a m City on 11 May 1985.



    2             now   that the Inquiry’s w o r k is completed, my Rt Hon friend

    the s e c r e t a r y of State for Scotland and I renew the G o v e r n m e n t        s

    qratitude to the Chairman and his tw o assessors for the speed anc

    conscientiousness                with .which they have discharged their difficult

     t„ k .           in addition to dealing with the events at the Heysel

        S t a d i u m in Brussels on 29 May and di s c u s s i n g the causes of

        hooliganism,        the Final Report makes fifteen recommendations on,

        separately, c r o w d safety and c r o w d c o n t r o l .


                                  4-rnl there are a number of recommendations
        3             On crowd control, tnere
        about the maintenance of order at football grounds:                       wider powers

        o£ police search and arrest;                    a new offence of disorderly con uc
                                                           i i.v.e recent alcohol legislatio
         at sports gro un ds ,         and a review of the

            as   it   applies   to   e x e cutive boxes.      Continued   progress « t h

            membership      schemes     is   a ls o   recommended.


                                                                              /The Police and .
                                        -   2   -




4   .          The Police and Criminal Evidence Act which came into force

on 1 January has already extended the police powers of search and

of arrest in ways which will help them deal with troublemakers at

football grounds.           I shall examine Mr Justice Popplewell*s

'recommendations for further powers when we see how the new Act

works in practice.


    5   .      on disorderly conduct, the Public Order Bill now before the

    House seeks to create a new offence which will cover hooliganism

    in football grounds as elsewhere.               I shall consider carefully the

    recommendation for a wider offence when we see how the offence in

    the Bill works in practice.


        6.The Government has already taken a number              of steps to deal

        with     forms of misconduct about which Mr Justice Popplewell

        expresses particular concern.       The Public Order Bill seeks to

        implement a recommendation in his Interim Report that the

        possession of smoke bombs and similar devices at sports grounds be

        made an offence.     We have taken action to ban some other items

        which may be used as missiles.          The alcohol legislation which was

        passed in the summer makes it an offence to be in possession

        drinks can or bottle in any area of the grounds from which the

        pitch may be     viewed directly.



         7.        During the Parliamentary proceedings representations were

         made about the effect on the revenue which clubs derive from


                                                               /executive boxes
executive boxes.    The Government    undertook to monitor the

situation,   and I have received some information from the Football

League and representations from a number of Rt Hon and hon

Members.     I have asked for more information from the football

authorities and will wish       consider that carefully,   in the li^ht

of the Inquiry's recommendation, before deciding whether to allow

some relaxation of the controls on alcohol in executive boxes.           I

shall report my conclusions to the House while the Public Order

Bill is before Parliament.



8.     On membership cards, I fully endorse Mr Justice Popplewell s

recommendation.     The Public Order Bill contains provisions to

enable the courts to ban convicted football hooligans from           -

attending matches.     This shows our determination to do what we can

to keep troublemakers away from football grounds, and to restore

 the good name of British football.      It needs to be matched by

 equally determined action by the football clubs and the football

 authorities.    My Rt Hon friend the Prime Minister has emphasised

 to them the value of an effective membership card system.       The

 football authorities have made some progress on this.       In the

 light of the exclusion order scheme in the Public Order Bill I

 hope that they will now redouble their efforts.



 g.    i turn to crowd safety.       We accept the need to strengthen

 urgently the measures already announced by and taken following my

 predecessor’s statements on 13 May and 24 July.



                                                  /10.   We accept
                                         4



     10       We accept the recommendation that all sports grounds and

     sports stadia in England and Wales with accommodation for more

     than 10,000 spectators and where Association Football, Rugby

     League, Rugby Union and Cricket is played which are not already

     designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act should be so

     designated.     Consultations will begin immediately with the sports

     authorities and organisations concerned with a view to introducing

     the necessary Orders as quickly as possible, but in any event by

     the summer of this year.



      11.      In Scotland my Rt Hon friend intends to introduce similarly,

      as soon as practicable, an Order designating stadia of clubs with

      accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators in the First and

      Second Divisions of the Scottish Football League.



      12.      We accept the principle of the recommendations that safety

      controls should be extended to all sports grounds and stadia with

      stands for over 500 spectators,        and to indoor sports facilities

#   , with accommodation for over 500 spectators where adequate controls

      do not already exist.     We need more facts.      Present centrally-held

      information is limited to stadia and grounds with accommodation

      for 5,000 or more,     and indoor premises with an overall capacity of

      more than 1,000.     The first step will be to establish the full

      practical effects of these recommendations.         All relevant local

          and fire authorities in England, Wales and Scotland are to be

          invited to inspect all such stands and premises not previously

          inspected and report upon them to my Rt Hon friend and myself.

          Powers are immediately available under both the Safety of Sports



                                                         /Grounds Act


                                                                           n      “VRTSt
                                    5



Grounds Act and the Fire Precautions Act to deal with any

exceptional hazard which might be found in the course of the

inspections.   Similarly, chief fire officers and firemasters will

be invited to keep under review the places they inspected under

previous initiatives last year with the object of maintaining

safety standards at those places.                                       ,.


 13.    when we have considered these inspections we shall quickly

 issue a consultative document and propose ways of achieving the

 objectives of the Inquiry's Final Report, fitting this into the

 review already under way on the future of the Fire Precautions

 Act.   Further legislation may well prove necessary.      There will be

 no avoidable risk meanwhile because any necessary emergency action

 can be taken under existing powers.



  14.    Eo fat, the figures this season show a marked improvement in

  the number of arrests and ejections from football grounds.      Our

  measures against hooliganism should have a cumulative effect.         But

  it is too soon to be satisfied,       we have to deal not only with

  hooliganism but with safety;   not only with football grounds but

  with sports grounds in general.       Thanks in large part to

  Mr Justice popplewell I believe we are on the right track.




                                                                    ;
NEWS RELEASE                             50 Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                         Telephone 01-213 3030/4050/5050
                                         (Night line 01-213 3000)



                                                        July 2 k , 1985


                       SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS

              Home Secretary welcomes Interim Report of
                         Committee of Inquiry


     "There is no single, simple method of making sports grounds safe and
free from violence," the Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Leon Brittan QC MP,
said today, "but I believe that the steps taken in the last few months,
coupled with the implementation of the important recommendations of Mr
Justice Popplewell's inquiry, have already made and will make a significant
contribution towards preserving football as a major spectator sport .

     The Home Secretary was responding to the publication of the Interim
Report by the committee which was established following the fire at
Bradford City football ground and the events at Birmingham City football
ground.   Paying tribute to the ’speedy, clear and thorough way in which
the Chairman and his two assessors have tackled this difficult and important
 task’ the Home Secretary said "No-one reading the report, or who followed
 the public hearings in Bradford, can doubt that the Inquiry has investigated
 these matters as thoroughly as possible".

      The Popplewell committee makes 32 recommendations (8 of them provisional)
 in its report; these recommendations, and the'government’s response to them,
 are contained in a written statement also published today (copy attached).
 In particular the government is asking local authorities, police and sports
 authorities to respond immediately to the spirit of the recommendations to
 improve safety arrangements at sports grounds.

      The Home Secretary went on however to report the actions already taken
 in the immediate aftermath of the events at Bradford and Birmingham.      First,
 under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act all qualifying grounds of clubs in
 Divisions 3 and k of the Football League and Divisions 1 and 2 of the Rugby
 League have been designated, requiring clubs to apply for safety certificates
 before admitting any spectators.
    Secondly reports received from Chief Fire Officers indicate that all
uncertificated grounds of the Association Football League and of the 1st
and 2nd Divisions of the Rugby League have been inspected.   Spectator
accommodation at the larger cricket grounds, Rugby Union grounds, race
courses, motor racing circuits, greyhound tracks, tennis clubs and athletics
grounds has also been inspected.   Chief Fire Officers have sent copies of,
their findings to the management of those sports grounds visited, indicating
what remedial measures have to be taken.   In some cases this wall involve
complete closure of a stand until rebuilding or remedial work has been

completed.

     Fire safety standards at most of the soccer and Rugby League grounds
have been found to be generally satisfactory but some improvements have been
shown to be required and a number of potentially serious fire hazards have
been revealed.   These include stands which are wholly or largely made of
timber, unprotected voids beneath timber floors in stands, combustible
materials stored beneath stands and inadequate gangways or final exit doors.

     Management of sports grounds have responded in a co-operative way and
have either set necessary work in hand or are considering how best to comply
with the requirements.   The attention of the governing bodies of the main
sporting activities is also being drawn to the Report's recommendations in
anticipation that full co-operation will continue to be given to ensure
proper spectator safety measures are in operation at all sports grounds.

     Thirdly the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Bill has been
 passed and will be in force by the beginning of the football season.

      Fourthly, steps have been taken to enhance police effectiveness.
 In England and Wales the Association of Chief Police Officers has introduced
 a new system for exchanging information about the conduct of fans which
 should assist in anticipating and preventing trouble.   Three of the Home
 Office photographic vehicles will be available to be deployed at football
 matches, together with 2 experimental high-definition tripod mounted cameras.
 This is in addition to the £ 500,000 worth of equipment purchased through
 funds provided by the Football Trust.

      Fifthly, the Minister for Sport has helped to promote and draw up a
 Council of Europe Convention on Spectator Violence.
10.    Stewards in all grounds should not only be trained in fire
precautions and fire-fighting (see Recommendation 7 above) but should
also be trained in how best to help the police in evacuation^

(Paragraph 3-10*0


W .    Suitable and adequate exits should be provided in all sports

grounds.   (Paragraph 3-138)                                             ---

15.    No smoking should take place in combustible stands, that this
should be a condition of entry to the ground chat         to thc-t eft
should be prominently displayed and this should be a condition of

entry to the ground.    (Favagraph 3 -1•
                                       ^1)

The relevant sports authorities will be invited to draw the attention
of sports grounds managers to these reacmaendations, and certificating
authorities will be asked to consider reflecting the recommendations
in new or amended safety certificates as appropriate in        ca^e of
designated grounds.    The fire and police services will be asked to stand
ready to advise on equipment and assist with training as appropriate.




RECOMMENDATION


 9.    There should be urgent consultation between the Health anu oafe~y
 Executive and the fire authorities and local authorities as to how best
 to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and reports.

 (Paragraph 3-95)


 The HSE has appointed a member of its Executive to review liaison
 arrangements between its inspectors and the fire authoiities.     He will
 consult Government Departments and ethers in this review, the results of

 which will be made public.




 RECOMMENDATION


 16.    Fire Authorities should identify and visit all sports stadia in their
 areas and should prohibit or restrict the use of any stands which, in their
 view, constitute a risk to spectators because of the inadequacy of the fire
 precautions.     (Paragraph 3-1^2)
INQUIRY INTO CROWD SAFETY AND CONTROL AT SPORTS GROUNDS
INTERIM REPORT JULY 1985 ( CMND 9585 )




GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO RECOMMENDATIONS




GROUND MANAGEMENT


RECOMMENDATIONS


1.       Evacuation procedures should be a matter of police training
and form part of the briefing by police officers before a football
match.    (Paragraph 3-9).



2.       The local authority team responsible for issuing safety
certificates in respect of designated grounds should, as heretofore,
include police officers.      (Paragraph 3-15)



Certificating authorities and chief officers of police will be
invited to act upon these recommendations (see also Recommendation 10).




RECOMMENDATIONS


6.        Those managing sports grounds not governed by safety certificates
should give serious consideration, with the assistance of fire authorities,
to the presence in a ground of suitable fire fighting equipment.
(Paragraph 3-5*0


7.        Stewards at all sports grounds should be trained in fire fighting.
 (Paragraph 3-55)


8.        In designated grounds it should be a term of the safety certificate
 that an adequate first-aid room should be provided.    (Paragraph 3.99)




                                        1
GREEN GUIDE


RECOMMENDATIONS


4.    The Green     Guide should be amended to include in Paragraph 11 a
provision that, wherever practicable, roads within a quarter of a
mile of a sports ground should be kept entirely free of parked vehicles.

(Paragraph 3-35)


11.   Paragraph     6.14.6 of the   Grsen Guide should be amended to read:
"Ail exit gates should be manned at all times while tne ground is used
by the public and be capable of being opened immediately from insiae
by anyone ir. an emergency."    (Paragraph 3-111)


12.   The Green Guide should be amended to contain a specific provision,
in relation to stewards,


       (i)        that they should be trained and instructed to
       deal with any emergency relating to fire or evacuation
       (see also Recommendations 7 and 10);


       (ii)       that they should b e .given written instructions
       about the action to be taken in cases of emergency;


       (iii)      that they should receive practical instruction
       and training appropriate to their responsibility;


       (iv)       that no one should be employed as a steward
       unless they have been so instructed and trained; and


       (v)         that they should be adequate in number, physically
       and mentally capable of performing their duties, effectively
       deployed, effectively supervised and readily identifiable.
       (Paragraph 3-117)


19.    The next edition of the Green Guide should make it clear
that it applies to ail sports grounds.      (Paragraph 3-154)
Chief Fire Officers in England and Wales were invited by the Horae Secretary
on 16 May tc inspect all sports grounds and were reminded of the powers
available to them to take emergency action if, in their view, fire hazards
constituting a risk to spectators are revealed.   The Secretary of State
for Scotland similarly asked Firemasters to inspect sports grounds in Scotland.
Reports received show that fire brigades have not hesitated to recommend
emergency action where necessary, including in a number" of cases a prohibition
on the use of stands or a restriction on the number of spectators allowed
into them.




RECOMMENDATION


17 -   In order to ensure a complete record of sports grounds a
local registration system should be set up.   (Paragraph 3-150)


Consultation will take place with the local authority associations to
establish hew such records may best be compiled and maintained.    The
recent visits of the fire brigades (see Recommendation .16) should have
in practice marshalled much of the relevant data already.




STRUCTURES


RECOMMENDATION


13-    Building of new permanent stands of combustible materials
should be prohibited as a general rule.   (Paragraph 3-132)


This recommendation will be given speedy and urgent consideration
by the Departments who are responsible for building regulations.
being considered in a Football League working group: that group’s
attention will therefore be drawn to the Inquiry's Recommendation 20.
The governing bodies’ attention will also be drawn to Recommendation 23
which might be influenced by decisions upon Recommendation 20.




RECOMMENDATION


21.    Closed circuit television should be introduced at League football
grounds in England and Wales and in the Premier Division in Scotland.
(Paragraph 6.54)


The Football Trust has allocated £500,000 for the provision of CCTV equipment
in League grounds during the 1985—86 season.    The Trust's attention, and
that of the Football Associations and the Football Leagues, will be drawn
to this recommendation.




MISCELLANEOUS


RECOMMENDATIONS


3.     Early attention should be given by the Home Office Directorate
of Telecommunications to consider the practicality of producing a more
suitable personal radio for the police.    (Paragraph 3-33)


18 .   Consideration should be given as how best to deal with temporary_

stands and marquees    (Paragraph 3-151)


24.    Consideration should be given to the design of a standard,
efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.    (Paragraph 6.63)


Each of these will be studied as the Inquiry advises.    Recommendations
 18 and 24 may best be taken forward in the context of the Inquiry's next
 stage and when it turns to examine the Green Guide as a whole.
These points will be noted for inclusion in the next edition of the Gre~n
Guide which will be needed after the Inquiry's final report is received.
Action will not however depend upon the availability of a fresh edition and
certificating authorities and chief officers cf police (Recommendation 4)
will be invited to take such steps a3 are open to them now.




CROWD MANAGEMENT


RECOMMENDATIONS


5.    Consideration should be given to making it a criminal offence
in England and Wales to have a smoke bomb or similar device at sports
grounds.   (Paragraph 3.42)


22.    There should be a specific offence of throwing a missile at
sports grounds. (Paragraph 6.57)


The case for inviting Parliament to create new criminal offences on
these lines will be studied urgently in connection with the Government's
intention of introducing legislation in the next session of Parliament
following its review of the law relating to public order.



                                                                              #


RECOMMENDATIONS


20.   Urgent consideration should be given by football clubs in
England and Wales to introducing membership system so as to exclude
visiting fans.     (Paragraph 6.48)


23.   Football clubs should review their arrangements for entry and
the organisation of their turnstiles.     (Paragraph 6.62)


Both these recommendations are for football authorities and clubs, but the
Government hopes that they will be given serious consideration.   Tne
Government has been encouraging the Football Association and the Football
League to introduce a scheme of membership cards and the options are currently



                                      5
PROVISIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS


(To be reviewed in the Final Report)


1.      I am minded to recommend that in England and Wales the police should
be given the unfettered right of search before entry to football grounds by

s t a t u t e (Paragraph 3 -Hi)


2.      I am m i n t e d   to recommend that Section 10 of the Fire Precautions Act 1971
should be amended with a view to giving the Fire Authority power in cases other
than those which are regarded as wholly exceptional            (Paragraph 3-61),


3.      Linked with the above, I am            minded to recommend that consideration
should be given to introducing legislation giving powers for the Fire Authority
to apply to the High Court, for an injunction (or to the Court of Session for
an interdict in Scotland) under Section 10 of the F p r e c a u tions Act 1971.

(Paragraph 3-61)


 4.      I am m i n d e d . to recommend that Section 10 of the Safety at Sports Grounds
Act 1975 should be amended in like manner to Section 10 of the Fire Precautions
 Act 1971 (see Provisional Recommendations 2 and 3) and an application to the
 High Court for an injunction (or to the Court of Session for an interdict in
 Scotland) should be an alternative remedy.           (Paragraph 3-76)_


 5.      I am m i n d e d to recommend that the Secretary of State should exercise hi£
 powers to designate ail sports grounds, whatever their size to include indoor

 as well as outdoor activities.         (Paragraph 3-145).


 6.      I am minded to recommend immediate designation of any ground
 capable of holding over 5,000 spectators, to cover all sports grounas^
 not merely football grounds.           (Paragraph 3.146)


 7.      I am minded to recommend that consideration should          be gi^en to
 providing the police with additional powers of arrest under the
 Public Order Act, 1936-          (Paragraph 6.66)


 8.      I am minded to recommend that consideration should          be given to
 creating a specific offence of chanting obscene or racialist abuse

 at a sports ground. (Paragraph 6.6?)


 These are noted and the Government will stand by to assist the
  Inquiry in its further consideration of the natters.



                                           7
                                         Departm ent                                           2 Marsham Street                       ,
                                         o f the                                              London SW1P 3EB
                                        [Environment                                     Telephone 01-212 3434


Press Notice                                                                        17 July 1985

      pnnTfiAf.T. SPECTATOR VIOLENCE - MEETING OF MINISTER'S WORKING GSOOP


       Neil      Macfarlane,             Minister           tor    Sport,           today       chaired          a    meeting
 of    the working          Group        set      up     to co-ordinate measures to deal with foot-

 ball hooliganism..

        In a statement after the meeting Hr Macfarlane said;


        ■My     working           Group      today        continued           the       discussions          between           the
 Government           and     the       football           authorities             on    measures          to    be       taken,
 jointly        and     separately,            to       deal    with     the       problems          of    crowa       contro
 and     safety        confronting             the      game.       The        Football          League         presenteo         a
 memorandum and reported specifically on membership caras.


         "The     issue           of     membership             cards         is    one        which       concerns             the
 responsibility              of        football         clubs      for        ensuring         safety       and       security
 within        their     own      premises.              The    Government expects them to take tnat
  responsibility             seriously            and      regrets       the        delay.       I    am    glad       to      note
  that     the        Football         League        has       established          a     working          Group       to      give
  this    option        the       full      but      speedy       consideration             it requires.                  I look
  forward        to    seeing          an 'early         report,        which       will       be     completed           by    tne

  end of August.

         "In      the        meantime,              a     Government/football                    package             is     being
  constructed           for the new season.                      The Government has already announced
  a range of actions, within its responsibilities,                                          to reduce and contain
  hooliganism.              There        will be         a strengthened role for the Police, with
  new powers under                the Public Order bill to be introduced next session.
  Legislation            has       almost           completed           its         passage          in    Parliament             to
  restrict        alcohol          at       matches        and     on    journeys           to       and    from       them;      we
  know'alcohol              can    incite and            inflame        trouble.           I     took       the initiative
  to     agree        binding          measures         with      European         Governments             and       witn      JEr*.
  A    Convention           has     been       agreed       upon        and    should be             aaopted very              soon,
  discussions           have        started          with      UEFA.          To    meet        public      concern            about
  safety,        Divisions             3 and 4 Football                 League clubs are to be designated
  under         the    Safety          of    Sports        Grounds        Act;          Chief       Fire    Orf icers           h=ve
  been     inspecting all sports grounds;                               and there         is a full inquiry unoer
  Mr Justice Popplewell.                       His i n t e r i m report will be available very soon.
             "The Football        authorities          are     developing      plans     for    more     all
    ticket      and     morning       matches.         Known    hooligans      will    be    banned     from
    grounds.          CCTV     will     be     installed       quickly   at^ as       many     grouncs    as
    possible,       covering      at    least .Divisions         1 and   2.     Problem matches          are
    being, identified           early     so    that    effective     precautions        can    be    taken.


             "The   resolve    and     the    effort    is there..       The   Government       is deter­
    mined      that' all possible            steps will be taken to restore the good name
    of       football    and    our    country.         Our     discussions     of     possible      actions
    will      continue with the Football Association and the Football League."



                               Press Enquiries:    01 212 3496/3/4/5/2
                                    (out of hours-. 01 212 7132)
                                   Public Enquiries:    01 212 3434
                                  (ask for Public Enquiries Unit)

                                                        0000----




•        .




                                                         -2F-
 I * ®    <Ts




M C U l/C R E L E A S E                            50 Queer, Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
IM tV V C n C L C M O L                            T e l e p h o n e 01-213 3030/4050/5050

                                                    (Night line 01-213 3000)
                                                                     June 27, 19S5




                       ;H0L AT FOOTBALL HATCHES:
                  n r \i                           'TOUGH BUT FAIR MEASURES'


                The Home Office today published a Sill to control ths sale and
    possession, of alcohol at and on the way to and from sporting events.
     Commenting on the Bill the Home Secretary, the Et Hon Leon Brittan QC HP,

     caid,

                 "We are putting forward tough but fair measures which go to the
                 heart of ths problem of drunken behaviour and hooliganism at
                 football grounds.      The Bill is based upon the current Scottish
                 legislation, but also reflects ths difference between football
                 grounds in Scotland and those in England and Wales.

                 "Broadly the Bill will make it an offence to possess alcohol
                 when entering a football ground or in football conchas or trains
                 on the way to a match.      Drunkenness in the ground or at the entrance
                 to it will also be made illegal.         The sale of alcohol inside grounds
                 will be tightly controlled, but clubs will be able to apply to local
                 magistrates for an exemption order allowing them to sell alcohol
                 in bars out of sight of the pitch: in considering the application
                 magistrates will give particular regard to public order and safety
                 considerations and the club's past record in this respect.

                 "I have discussed these measures with EM Opposition and the Alliance

                 parties and been assured of their agreement to^hem.              They share the
                 Government's wish to do everything possible to remove this stain

                  from a great British game."


     The Sporting. Events (Control of Alcohol etc.) Bill

                 The Bill’s provisions will apply to designated sports grounds ana
      designated sporting events, (it is expected that the Secretary of State s
      initial designation order will relate only to football grounds and niatcheo,
      including, in particular, Football League Clubs and international fixtures).
          Clause 1 prohibits drunkenness and the possession of a n n k on trains,

coaches and mini-buses on the way to or from a designated sporting event.
Offences in connection with possessing drink, drunlcenneso an^. possession of

a ’controlled container' at grounds are created by Clause 2.

          Clauses 3-5 plac‘s a general ban on the sale of alcohol wit nan
designated sports grounds but provide for exemption orders      to   be granted
by magistrates if they are satisfied that public order and safety arrangements
would not be threatened.       Exemption orders will be valid for only five months
which means that football clubs obtaining exemptions early in the season will
need to reapply to the courts for fresh exeraptionsfor the second half of tne
season.   Clause 6 empowers a police officer to close any bar in the ground if
trouble breaks out.        Clause 7 provides the police with the necessary powers
to enforce the provisions of the Bill and Clause 8 sets out the penalties.
These are outlined below.        Clause 9 includes an interpretation of the terms

used in the Bill; the main ones being:

             'designated sports ground' - means any place wholly or partly used
             for sporting events where accommodation is provided for spectators
             and which has been designated by the Secretary oi State;
             1designated sporting event'- means any sporting event or proposed
             sporting event designated by the Secretary of State.

The provisions also apply to travel within England and Wales en route to
 sports grounds and sporting events designated by tne Secretary        oa   S i a ^ fo*
 Scotland.     Hatches played abroad may be designated for tne purpose of
 controlling drinking on special trains and coaches.       Clause 10 amends tne
 corresponding Scottish legislation.       The major provisions of the Bill are as followe

 Possession of drink and drunkenness:
             on coaches, trains and mini-buses -
             Alcohol will be prohibited on a public service vehicle
             or railway passenger vehicle which is being used for tne
             primary purpose of conveying passengers to or from a designated

             sporting event.
             offences -     it will be an offence knowingly to cause or permit
             intoxicating liquor to be carried on such a vehicle; the operator,

             hirer or his servant/agent will be liable (Cl(2))
                       -    a person who has intoxicating liquor in his possession

              while on such a vehicle will be guilty of an offence (Cl(3))
                       -    it will be an offence to be drunk on such a vehicle (C1(h ))
                               - 3 -

        at sports grounds -
        Possession of intoxicating liquor or a 'controlled container'
        (i.e. a bottle, can or other portable container which is capable
        of causing injury) will be prohibited in any part of a designated
        sports ground from which the event may be directly viewed,
        offences - 1''it will be an offence to be in possession of, intoxicating
        liquor or a controlled container at any time during’the period of a
        designated sporting event in any part of the sports ground from which
        the event aay be directly viewed (c2(l) (a)) or while entering or

        trying to enter the ground (c2(l)(b)).
                  —           a person who is drunk in any part   01   the ground during
         the period of a designated sporting event or who is drunk on entering
        a ground will be guilty of an offence (c2v2)).


Restricting the sale of drink within sports grounds
         The sale of intoxicating liquor will generally be prohibited during
         the period of a designated sporting event (c3(l)).     However, clause 3 (2)
         makes provision for a magistrates court to grant an exemption order ior
         licensed premises or registered club premises inside the ground, but
         only in respect of areas out of sight of the pitch.-    In granting such
         an order the court must be satisfied that ir is not likely uo be
         detrimental tc the orderly conduct or safety oi spectators. (c3(6)>.
         Where such an order ali-eady exists but a police inspector considers
         the sale or supply of intoxicating liquor at a particular designated
         sporting event is likely to be detrimental to the orderly conduct
         or safety of spectators, and it is impracticable for an. application
         for variation of the order to be made to a magistrates court, he may
         give written notice to the holder of the order, (or his designated
         representative) that the existing order should be modified or should

         cease to have effect (c3(7)f(9)).
         Clause 6(1) makes provision for any bar within a designated sports
         ground to be closed at any time during the course of a designated
         sporting event if it appears tc a constable in uniform that the
         continued sale or supply of intoxicating liquor is detrimental to
          the orderly conduct or safety of spectators at that event.,
         offences —   it will be an offence to sell or supply or to authoiise
          the sale or supply of intoxicating liquor in contravention of conditions

          or restrictions imposed under Clause 3 0 0 )-
                                        - 4- -


                            - it will be an offence to fail to close a bar if required

         by a constable to do so (c6(2))


Powers of enforcement

         Clause 7 provides a police constable with powers to enter any part
         of a designated sports ground to enforce the provisions of the Act
         (c 7(1)), to search persons in or attempting to entar a ground (c7(2))
         to stcv                  service vehicles and tc search such vehicles or

          railway passeager vehicles (c7(3))*


Penalties for offences

         Offences will be triable summarily.            For the offence of:
         -     being in possession of intoxicating liquor on a vehicle (cl(j))
         -     being in possession of intoxicating liquor in or on entry to a
         designated sports ground during a designated           sporting   event   (c 2(1))

          -    selling or supplying intoxicating liquor in contravention of

          restrictions and. conditions (cp(iO))
          -    failing to comply with the request of a constable to close a

          bar (co(2))
          the penalty is a fine not exceeding £^C'0 or 3 months imprisonment

          ex' b o * t H •
          For the offence of knowingly causing or permitting intoxicating
          liquor to be carried on a vehicle; the penalty will be a fine not

          exceeding £1000 (cl(2))
          For the offsnces of:
          -     being drunk in a vehicle (d(^))
          -     being drunk in or on entry to a designated ground (c2(2))

             the penalty will be a fine not exceeding £100.


 Amendment of Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1950
             Clause 10 of the Bill contains amendments to Part V of the Criminal

 Justice (Scotland) Act 1930.            It extends the provisions of section 69 in
 relation to public-sarvice vehicles to trains; and it applies the Act to
 sporting events designated under ths present Bill and to designated sporting
  events outside Great Britain, so that travel in Scotland en route to designated
  sporting events in England and Wales or outside Great Britain would be caught

  under the Act.
                                - 5 -




Notes to Editors

A public service vehicle has the same meaning as in the Public Passenger
Vehicle Act 1981 and includes buses, coaches and mini-buses which are used

for hire or reward.




The Bill does not extend to Northern Ireland.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
COUNTY HALL, BARNSLEY, SOUTH YORKSHIRE S70 2TN ____________________
N 0.   85/216/LM                                                          Date:         6 June     1985




SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


The majority of sports grounds in South Yorkshire are "satisfactoiry"

from a safety point of view according to South Yorkshire County Council

Chief Fire Officer Mr Harry Wright.                     In a report to the County Council

Fire Service Committee Mr Wright said that                           an initial survey had

revealed a total of 30 sports grounds at which stands were provided

for spectators and accommodation provided for players and officials.

Only in four cases had recommendations been made for minor adjustments

and negotiations were now taking place to remedy the faults.


The report follows the recent Bradford City disaster in which more than

fifty people died.       The terms of reference of the review were to

examine all sports grounds of whatever size or sporting activity and to

give interim advice on any matter which gave rise to a risk of fire or

emergency evacuation.          Mr Wright said of the four grounds:                        "I should

like to point out these faults are of a minor nature and are being

corrected with a tremendous amount of good will".                                 He added "I am

satisfied that any faults will be remedied by the start of the next

season if they are not, necessary action will be taken to ensure the

safety of the public".


The forthcoming "Summer" Officer Working Parties inspections (comprising

 representative of the Police, the Fire Service, the County Council and

 the District Council's Building Surveyor) will take into account the

 lessons of the recent tragic events at Bradford and any revised advice

 and requirements which may be issued by the Home Office.
               FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT
          THE PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICE OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL
              OKI RARMRI FY ff>9 9 f i \ 9 Rfi141 E x t n s . 3 3 2 . 1 6 2 o r 165
  Information from:
  SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL.
  COUNTY HALL, BARNSLEY, SOUTH YORKSHIRE S70 2TN_____________________
  iki_                                               Hatfii     1A M't" 1^8^
  No: 85/1B8/LM                                      uai8       14




COUNTY COUNCIL DENIAL


South Yorkshire County Council yesterday, denied that they threatened to^
close Rotherham United Football Club’s villmore ground, after investigations
in 1980, showed that more exits were required, in ca?e of an emergency.


Former police Superintendent, Douglas Lock, in yesterday's edition o' the
Momine Telegraph, 14 May 1985, said that when safety implementations had
beer, suggested by the Authority, "the directors were extremely reluctant to
do anything about it and we had to threaten to close the ground."


A Co’m t y Council spokesman said, "To suggest that Rotherham United had to be
 threatened is a misrepresentation of the situation.          There were differences
 of opinion abo-t the means of implementing improvements between the County
 Council's Officer Working Parties and the directors of Rotherham United, but
 these w,re discussed and resolved.       We never got to the stage where we were

 •banging the big drum'."


 The County Council has, since 1979, had a policy of -winter- and "summer”
 inspections of all five Football Leagu* Grounds in South Yorkshire, by
 Officer Working Parties (comprising representatives of the Police, the
 Fire Brigade, the County Council and the District Council's Building Surveyor,,
 Officer Working Parties have met with Rotherham United Football Club 23
  times since 1979-     Whilst former Superintendent Douglas L-ock was a
  Sub-Divisional Commander at Rotherham for six months, he was not present at

  these meetings.


                                    END




  For further information, please contact: Lindsay KacFarlaine ext. 275




                 FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT
            THE PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICE OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL
              ON BARNSLEY (0226)286141 EXTNS 332,162 or 165
     South Yorkshire County Council
                                                                 Department of Administration
    Chief Executive & County Clerk:                              County Hall
    J. C. Harris, M A , LLB.(Cantab)                             Barnsley
                                                                 South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                                                                 Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                 (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                 Telex: 547675

     O u r Ref: DV/AA/583/2       Y our Ref: LSH/AW
                                                                 Date:      13 May 1985


                                                                 Ext. No.      422
     This matter is being dealt with by   D. Vaughan




Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

I attach a copy of a Press Release issued by the County Council
today in response to requests for information by the media on
the situation in South Yorkshire following Saturday s tragic
events at Bradford.

It is reasonable to assume that revised advice and/or requirements
will be issued by the Home Office in the near future, and naturally
this will be taken into account at the forthcoming summer
inspections by the Officer Working parties.

In the meantime and recognising that the season has ended, I would
particularly stress the vital necessity for safety stewards to be
fully aware of and trained in their duties on the manning and
opening of doors and gates on egress routes and in the use of fire
fighting equipment.

                                              Yours faithfully,



                                                       C.   H A R IS ’

                                              Chief Executive.


P.S. Could you kindly indicate whether the Club's development
proposals (outlined on a confidential basis at the meeting held
at the Ground on 30th January, 1985) are, in fact, to proceed.

 I would add that the Building Authority advise that they hope to
 be able to let me have their report on the existing Ground very
 shortly.




 Hr. L. S. Holloway,
 Chief Executive,
 Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd.,
 Belle Vue,
 Doncaster.
 DN4 5HT
                                                            LcPl

                South Yorkshire County Council
                                               .                   Department of Administration
                Chief Executive & County Clerk:                    County Hall
                J. C. Harris, M.A., LLB.(Cantab)                   Bams|ey
                                                                   South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                                                                   Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                   (STD 0226) 86141
                                                                   Telex: 547675

                Our Ref:                    Your Ref:              Date;
                DV/MH/583/4                 GES/JK                 l3th May« 1985

                This matter is being dealt with byD . Vaughan      Ext- No-   422




    Dear Sir,

    Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

    I attach a copy of a Press Release issued by the County Council today
    i n r e s p o n s e to requests for information by the media on the situation in
    South Yorkshire following Saturday’s tragic events at Bradford.

    It is reasonable to assume that revised advice and/or requirements will be
    issued by the Home Office in the near future, and naturally this will
    taken into account at the forthcoming "summer" inspections by the Of ice
    Working Parties.

    In the meantime and recognising that the season has ended, I would
    particularly stress the vital necessity for safety stewards to be fully
    aware of and trained in their duties on the manning airi opening of doors
    and gates on egress routes and in the use of fire fighting equipment.

    Yours faithfully,




     Chief Executive




^    Mr. G. E. Smith,
     Company Secretary,
     Sheffield United Football Club Ltd.,
     Bramall Lane,
     SHEFFIELD,
     S2 4SU.
               Information from:
               SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL.
               COUNTY HALL, BARNSLEY, SOUTH YORKSHIRE S70 2TN_________________ __
                                                               Date: 10th May 19 85
               N o !85/185/LM




    SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS          SOUTH YORKS^IR-^


    Of the five Footpall league Grounds in South tt.rk.hire .three (Barnsley,
    Rotherham United and Sheffield Wednesday) have already been granted General
    Safety Certificates by the County Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Act, 1975, following their designation by the Secretary of State on the
    carrying out of improvements.

    The Bramall Lane Ground of the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. was designated
    S  the Secretary of State in July, 1984 on the Club’s promotion to he Second
    Division. The Club has already carried out a n u m b e r of improvements
    Ground, the remainder to be completed during the 1985 close season.

    Only the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. remains
    undesignated (the Club remaining/n the^Third Division), but the County Council
    is continuing to work on a goodwill basis with the Club.

    The County Council has also since 1979 had a policy of "winter" •
                                                                    and " s u » e r"
    insoections of all five Football League Grounds by Officer Working Parties
    (comprising representatives of the Police, the Fire Service, the County Cou™ ^
    and the District Council's Building Surveyor).  Such inspections have been welcomed
    by the Football Clubs, who have always displayed a responsible attitude on safety
    matters.

    Naturally the forthcoming "sunmer" inspections will take into account the lessons
•   of the r e U n t tragic events at Bradford and any revised advlCe and retirements
     which may be issued by the Home Office.




                              FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT
                         THE PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICE OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL
                           ON BARNSLEY(0226)286141 EXTNS 332,162 or 165
                 PRESS RELEASE ON SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


Of the five Football League Grounds in South Yorkshire, three (Barnsley,
Rotherham United and Sheffield Wednesday) have already been granted General
Safety Certificates by the County Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act, 1975, following their designation by the Secretary of State and
carrying out of improvements.

The Bramall Lane Ground of the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. was designated
by the Secretary of State in July, 1984 on the Club’s promotion to the Second
Division. The Club has already carried out a number of improvements
Ground, the remainder to be completed daring the 1985 close season.

Only the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. remains
undesignated (the Club r e m a i n i n g ^ the^Third Division), but the County Council
is continuing to work on a goodwill basis with the Clu .

The County Council has also since 1979 had a policy of "winter" •
                                                                and "summer'"
inspections of all five Football League Grounds by Officer Working Partie
(comprising representatives of the Police, the Fire Service, the County Council
and the District Council's Building Surveyor). Such inspections have been welcomed
by the Football Clubs, who have always displayed a responsible attitude on sa e y
matters.

Naturally the forthcoming "summer" inspections will take into account the lessons
of the recent tragic events at Bradford and any revised advice and requirements
 which may be issued by the Home Office.
                 PRESS RELEASE ON SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


Of the five Football League Grounds
Rotherham United and Sheffield We n    y            Safety of Sports Grounds
Safety Certificates by the County Council                  State and the
Act, 1975, following their designation by the becreuary
carrying out of improvements.

The Bramall Lane Ground of. the
by the Secretary of                            f   „ S b . r o? improvements to the
G r o u n d ^ the remainder to be completed during the 1985 close season.


Only the Belle Vue Ground of the                                        County Council
undesignated (the Club remaining in the Third Division; ,
is continuing to work on a goodwill basis with the Club.

 The County Council has also sinee 1979 had^apol

             representatives of the P lice     the                      ^ H e e ^ L e d



 matters.



 which may be issued by the Home Office.
                 PRESS          ™   SAFRTY AT SPORTS GROUNDS



Of the five Football League
I S t f S r S u t " £ ^ t y         Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act, 1975, following their designation by the Secretary
carrying out of improvements.

The Bramall Lane Ground of.the Sheffield Unite, Football Club^Ltd. was d e b a t e ,
by the Secretary o S t a t e - July 1984 o n ^ C ^    , , ^ „ ts „ the

G ™ ; h e T^ i r t o      W   toileted during the 1985 close season.    . ,.

Only the Belle Vue Ground of the                                the County Council
                                       ^       d
                                               thD the cii:

                         i         1 Q 7 Q had a oolicy of "winter" and  summer
 The County Council has also since ^        Grounds by Officer Working Parties
 inspections of all five Football      8           pire Service> the County Council
 (comprising representatives of the o        ’      g h inspections have been welcomed

 r/tSVottb'aircfubr-          s i^ ^ iU             . —
 matters



 which may be issued by the Home Office.
      ■s^tv                        y           <        ^     w       ^       ,             tv>«-                                                            ,      i-            ^

          llvkut                   <           U                 < » U ( h ^                            \ A J ^ W > P                                   _       U-*.                      « ( ^ ^ J


                           j v ^ - i                                   ( W > “i                                                                                                               l»Y^_

          -p .             U ~cz\                           £g ~~ 1u .                  'w t w                  "® «.                                                       o ( r         *> f t * b


          6 « w * u ,                                             , i m r ,                       ^ 1 1 * - ^               ^                                                                      M
          **                                            et-                                       ^            c‘* n ^                    ^                         “T                    ^                 '
          fita-                                                                                   Ctrre^J'                  ©4r                     ^
t^J-< y                                                                                                               .-                                                                      1            i _. /
           ■lUa&t                                                                                         W                         ^                                                                           -f
                               /                                                  nT-----             S H -tC T c                   Vv\             -J ~ v l I Vi       i     t^ L ^ S H ’


                                                                                                                                                                                                   C*V /S (trV"V #
            cW             -t£k.                                                   p H S W ^ L ^                           "T&                '®*«-

           lk*_                    6 u u
            c-fc           Jv^^c^^su,                                                ts
           -U,         te-                          c ^ l s t i ^                                                                                    W      f       "         C ''''W '


           0«U,                        (Ct                   B * l k                   v-’« * c                                               c^r           f e              ^ « ~ w w * o . -

            (      W                           'f   w c i w h                     c u u                     fcw                 h   >»a         w       5

           C^t^L                   ClyjJ^j                                         --------                      vvs"TX^.                      TKtv*t                   't^-v'w t*ttW\ ^ t ^                         ^
                                                                  ✓           ’ « ~^'                                 —<                  -                  --fe                     W-enk
           ^                < W r ,
           a           ,           ^                a                     W        «                     v ^ u                  IK.                      < ^ o               .                         .

                   ^                                                                                           „u,
           T V                                                                                        Wi>-*>     , “> v w «                     H7*[                                          />           “'v'“ ~'

            t          «           « ^ A w o w ‘'                                                                                                                                                  "*

           4 ^                     ^           <        W    t                                                                                              by_                   0(^                      w ^           ^
                                                        j-_ _                       " ._ — -~^TJ                      ~l I                     ^            '~^ t •••*                                 IIr i--*HaM3tti-i


            C      ^
                  »’
                           Z           ^        x
                                                                      7      .                    /"-         ’ I
                                                                                                                      ^Li^r^C                        'IjLaSl
                                                                                                                                                            ^                 ^
                                                                                                                                                                            i^fcv-v^c
                                                                                                                                                                                          ^
            ^ w tet-                       t        "tut              ^utA-fcA.                   C ^ ^        a J.                     «?<-                    s          ^
                                   ,                                                          Z                                           S                     vvvo p'j2.c^;i^^      '•^
                                       s                    &v.icUL-i— r p <-^-n -o - ^ .                                                                            »     ,
                                                               vTtt?WcCcvU^1a.)«,                                                       JT«.                                          T ^ J                      ,

            ■ q t tSw?oT^l N                                 TU . ^           1^          s       _     3      - ^ a ^ = = ^ C!'' ,-J~ ~ ^                                                         ‘
                                                                                                                            r             ^          ••‘," *“ **—                     w
K )C t4'-M -<ill'j ,   ""Ttvft.                                             * ■ *> U.                “      vvo            l(TV'S

V\J—
   \ 0      C2tl>L»L   WCfcD             OL^££'VwCC'       to ii.              l ' ^ Jb <a <i*vt>S       C>£~~    "EE'Ui

               ""C>tu4 v-C         -^Ai^e+AZCj         eiXT         ^                                             <u^\

      '                   ‘                      <•                               —                  T7 ' *

 We                               ^ -(       ^           IVh s h ^      l                        ,
                                                          1 ). V A - U Q H A i \ J

          Information from=
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
          COUNTY HALL, BARNSLEY, SOUTH YORKSHIRE S70 2                T   N   _______________
           N o : 85/ 1857S                                   Date. 10th          1985




SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS II* SOUTH YORKPHIRI


Of the f-ive FoocDail League Grounds in South Yorkshire, three (Barnsley,
Rotherham United and Sheffield Wednesday) have already been granted General
Safety Certificates by the County Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act, 1975, following their designation by the Secretary of State on. the
carrying out of improvements.

The Bramall Lane Ground of the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. was designated
by the Secretary of State in July, 1984 on the Club'- promotion to the Second
Division.  The Club has already carried out a number of improvements to the
Ground, the remainder to be completed during the 198} close season.

Only the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. remains
undesignated (the Club remaining in the Third Division), but the County Council
is continuing to work on a goodwill basis with the Club.

The County Council has also since 1979 had a policy of "winter" and "summer"
inspections of all five Football League Grounds by Officer Working Parties
(comprising representatives of the Police, the Fire Service, the County Council
and the District Council's Building Surveyor).  Such inspections have been welcomed
by the Football Clubs, who have always displayed a responsible attitude on safety
matters.

Naturally, the forthcoming "summer" inspections will take into account the lessons
of the recent tragic events at Bradford and any revised advice and requirements
which may be issued by the Home Office.




                             FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT
                      THE PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICE OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL
                        ON BARNSLEY(0226)286141 EXTNS 332, 162 or 165
                                                   Department                                                       2 Marsham Street
                                                   of the                                                          London SW1P 3EB
                                                   Environment                                                Telephone 01-212 3434


   Press Notice                                  389                                          16 August 1984

                         MINISTER FOR SPORT LAUNCHES PUBLIC CONSULTATION PROCESS
                                       ON SOCCER SPECTATOR VIOLENCE

  Announcing       the     publication           today        of        a    Departmental           report         on    soccer       spectator

iv violence*, Neil Macfmrlane, Minister for Ss^rt, said:-                                                                                            *«*•


       "Everyone          is     aware      of    the     Government's                   determination             to    do     all     that    is

       possible,          with       the   football      authorities,                 to    tackle       the       problem      of     'football

       hooliganism.' Working                    together,          we       have    taken a series             of measures            which,   as

       the report          concludes,           have helped             to    limit      violence        associated with              football.

       But    following          serious        incidents      towards the end of last season, my Ministerial

       colleagues          and    I decided that              the       time       had     come    for    a    review of our approach

       and of the options                  for dealing with the problem.                           We therefore set up a working

       group       of    officials         from the      four           Government          Departments            principally        concerned

        (Environment,            Foreign        and Commonwealth                   Office,    Home Office               and Transport)         and

       it is their advice which is being published as a report today.


       "The     Report          contains         the    collective                 views     of    the    Official            Working     Group,

       although           on     particular        issues           the        advice        emanates          from       the        responsible

       Departments.             My    colleagues        and    I are           grateful       to    the       Working         Group    for this

       report       and    in    particular        for    the       speed with which it was produced.                                 We push«d

       them hard          as    we    thought      it    important to form some views before a new domestic

       season opened.


       “We accept the thrust of this report.                                  It is a reasonable and thorough assessment

       of    the    problem and            of    the possible                options.         It rightly           endorses       the current

       partnership between                 the Government and the football authorities and the emphasis

       upon careful planning, preparation and coordination to deter and reduce violence.

       It    identifies          a    number      of    additional             measures           which       might      be    taken.      These

       measures         are     mainly      for the      football             authorities,          but       we    stand      ready    to give

       all the help we can.                     I hope the Football Association, the Football League, the

       Football Trust and others concerned will think about these options seriously in

       the next few weeks, as we propose to do.




       •FOOTBALL SPECTATOR VIOLENCE - Report of an Official Working Group                                                      (HMSO fc3.80p)
"What    we    are     starting        today     is a process        of consultation.             We    in Government

will think carefully about this report and its advice to us.                                      We seek the views

of all the other bodies involved,                       notably of course the football                   authorities.

 I wrote       to    the    Chairman      of   the Football          Association,        the Football League and

the   Football       Trust                              two days        ago,   inviting them to join me over

the coming weeks to discuss it.


"We     look    also       for   the     views     of    the     general       public.      Football      hooliganism

affects and concerns many people and we have chosen to publish this advice from

our     officials      as    a   Departmental           report, in       order    to     give    as    many people       as

possible       the   opportunity         to    comment.         None of us would pretend that we have a

monopoly       on    ideas       to    combat     soccer        spectator      violence.         Other        bodies     and

individuals          have    different         experience         and    expertise       and     I     believe      it    is

important       to     enable         everyone    to     make    a   contribution.          The       start    of   a    new

domestic season is the right time to start such a debate.                                       I look forward to a

wide and fruitful one, inspired by this report, over the next three months. “




                                          Press Enquiries:  01-212    4672
                                          Night Calls (6.30pm-8.00am)
                                          Weekends and Holidays:   01-212 7071

                                          Public Enquiries:  01-212 3434;
                                          ask for Public Enquiries Unit
FOOTBALL’S LAST CHANCE




                (CONTROL
OF ALCOHOL ETC) ACT 1985
               ■    j                                          .                                      1985 the classes of si      sporting
        lcohol has long been abused and
    .




                                                   Elwyn Richard Nicholas
A
                                                                                                      designated are as follows:                  'J
        undoubtedly if it were to be
                                                                                                      • Association Football matches in which
        discovered today it would be totally       outlines the new legislation                       one o r both of the participating teams
        prohibited. As any frequenter of
                                                                                                      represents a club which is for the time
the courts will observe — people commit                                                               being a m em ber (whether a full or an
crime because they are more readily                measures to deter supporters and the
                                                   operators and hirers o f vehicles from             associate member) of the Football
persuaded to do so under the adverse
                                                   carrying alcohol on board. Quite simply            League
influence of it; they give rise to more                                                               • International Association Football
violent passion because of it and                  the object of the section is to eradicate
                                                   the problem of so called supporters                 matches
dishonest propensities are nurtured to                                                                 • Association Football matches (not
satisfy the need for it o r because of             arriving at matches in a drunken stupour.
                                                   Offence: Section 1(2) of the Act declares           already       specified   above)    in  the
expenditure on it.
                                                   that a person who knowingly causes or               competition for —
     While some might believe that alcohol
                                                   permits intoxicating liquor to be carried               (a) the E uropean Cup
 abuse is a twentieth century problem ,
                                                    on a vehicle to which this section applies             (b) the Cup W inners’ Cup
 legislation has long since been identified
                                                    is guilty of an offence (a) if the vehicle is a        (c) the E U F A Cup
 as a solution to curb intem perate habits.
                                                    public service vehicle and he is the               9 Association Football matches which
 T he Payment of Wages in Public Houses
                                                    operator of the vehicle or the servant or           come within the jurisdiction of the
 Prohibition Act 1833, The Beerhouses
                                                    agent of the operator; or (b) if the vehicle        Scottish Football Association
 Act 1830, the Licensing Acts 1872 and
                                                    is a hired vehicle and he is the person to          • Asssociation Football matches at a
  1902 and 1964 all provide evidence of the
                                                    whom it is hired o r the servant or agent of        sports ground outside Great Britain in
 fact     that   intoxicating   liquor    has
                                                                                                        which one or both of the participating
  bedevilled society for many a long year.           that person.
                                                                                                        teams represents:
     T he alcohol problem manifests itself in                                                               (a) the Football Association Ltd
  many and varied ways: it affects health,          Guilty knowledge                                        (b) the Football Association of Wales
 the family, industry and crime. In short it
                                                       Q uite clearly guilty knowledge on the           Ltd
  strikes at the heart of society.                                                                          (c) a club which is a member (whether
     Legislation is all about solutions for         part of the alleged offender must be
                                                    proved. T he expressions 'cause" and                 full o r an associate member) of the
  contem porary problem s and thus the
                                                    ‘perm it’ are in common usage; suffice it            Football League
  Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc)
                                                    to say that the former denotes an element            • Association Football Matches at a
  A ct 1985, which came into force on
                                                    of compulsion or authority; while the                sports ground outside Great Britain (not
  August 9, 1985, was bound to be enacted
                                                    latter denotes willing acquiescence or               already specified) in the competition for:
  sooner or later. Mid 1985 provided the
                                                    passive tolerance. T he term ‘knowingly                  (a) the E uropean Cup
  climate for legislation controlling alcohol
                                                    permits’ would also embrace wilful                       (b) the Cup W inners Cup
  abuse at sports stadia and thus the
                                                    blindness.                                               (c) the E U F A Cup
  Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc)
                                                        Section 1(1) of the Act describes the            in which one o r more of the participating
  Act 1985 creates offences in connection
                                                    vehicles to which the section applies.               teams represents a club which is a
  with alcohol on coaches and trains,                                                                     m em ber of the Football Association
  alcohol containers at sports grounds and          Essentially it extends to trains and public
                                                    service vehicles. M ore precisely the                 Limited or the Football Association of
   makes special provisions concerning
                                                     sub-section dictates that this section               Wales Limited.
  perm itted hours within sports grounds.
  The A ct also provides the police with             applies to a vehicle which:
                                                        (a) is a public service vehicle o r railway
   powers to close bars in sports grounds,
                                                     passenger vehicle; and
                                                                                                        Hard to imagine
   powers of search and powers of arrest;                                                                  It is hard to imagine any professional
                                                        (b) is being used for the principal
   and this has been achieved without so
                                                     purpose of carrying passengers for the             football matches falling outside the scope
   much as a chirp from the libertarians and                                                            of the section; and quite clearly the
                                                     whole o r part of a journey to or from a
   those others who caused all the                                                                      offence will encompass public service
   unnecessary fuss about the coercive               designated sporting event.
                                                        T he expression ‘designated sporting            vehicles and trains being used to convey
   powers for the police contained in the
                                                     event’ is defined in section 9(3) o f the Act      people to a football match no m atter
   Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.                                                               where it is to be played; be it within or
   At the outset let the point be clearly            which provides that the term —
                                                        (a) means * sporting event or proposed          without the U nited Kingdom,
   made that the Act to date applies only to                                                               By virtue of section 1(5) of the A ct
   Association Football matches. The                  sporting event for the time being
                                                      designated o r of a class designated by           ‘public service vehicle’ and ‘o p erator’
   disgraceful scenes which have become all                                                             have the same meaning as in the Public
    too familiar and the body of public               order made by the Secretary of State: and
                                                         (b) includes a designated sporting             Passenger Vehicles Act 1981. In this
   opinion      which   has    expressed     its                                                        connection it should always be borne in
   abhorrence in respect of them , have               event within the meaning of Part V of the
                                                      Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980.             mind that it is the use to which a m otor
    allowed Parliament to tackle the drink
                                                         T he section continues that an order           vehicle is put which makes it a public
    problem in a num ber of ways.                                                                       service vehicle and not its construction.
                                                      under the section may apply to events or
                                                      proposed events outside G reat Britain as         Accordingly, a ‘tran sit’ type van could be
  Offences in connection with alcohol on                                                                 a public service vehicle if it were being
                                                      well as those in England and Wales.
  coaches and trains                                                                                     used for hire o r reward. It is also
   Section 1 of the Act creates offences                 By virtue of the Sports Grounds and
                                                      Sporting Events (Designation) Order               opportune to highlight the fact that the
  which are designed as preventive                                                                                     POLICERKVIF.W6SF.PTF.MBKR.1-J85
FOOTBALL’S LAST CHANCE


                                                                                                                                  ‘••f’

section is aimed at vehicles and trains            The expression ‘designated sporting
‘used for the principal purpose o f             event’ has already been defined in fuU.
carrying passengers for the whole o r p art     Section 9(2) of the Act provides, inter            W h ile Police Review is happy to
of a journey to o r from a designated           alia, that a designated sports ground              answer requests fo r in form atio n
sporting event’.                                means any place (a) used (wholly or                w e regret w e are unable to
  T he decisions of the court cannot, of        partly) for sporting events where                  respond unless queries are
course, be pre-judged but it would seem         accommodation       is    provided     for         accom panied by a stamped
that normal service trains o r norm al          spectators and (b) for the time being              addressed envelope.
service buses will fall outside the scope of    designated or of a class designated by
the section; even though they may carry a       order nwde by the Secretary o f State.
substantial    proportion      of    football   U nder the provisions of the relevant
supporters. There is thus still scope for       designation order the sports grounds              By virtue of section 6(3) o f the A ct, a
the infamous ‘service crews’ to travel with     falling within the purview o f the offence      person who fails to comply with a
alcohol. Wait until they get to the ground      are:                                            requirem ent im posed under sub-section
though!                                         • The hom e grounds of all Association          (1) above is guilty of an offence unless he
Offence: Section 1(3) o f the Act provides      FootbaU Clubs which are for the time            shows that he took all reasonable steps to
a self-explanatory provision: A person          being    members      of the      Football      comply with it.
who has intoxicating liquor in his              Association Limited or the Footall              Power o f entry: Section 7(1) of the A ct
possession while on a vehicle to which          Association of Wales Ltd                        provides that a constable may, at any
this section applies is guilty of an offence.   • Any o th er ground in E ngland and            time during the period of a designated
Offence: By virture of section 1(4) of the      Wales used occasionally or temporarily          sporting event at any designated sports
A ct a person who is drunk on a vehicle to      by such a club                                  ground, en ter any part of the ground for
which the section applies is guilty of an       • Wembley Stadium                               the purpose of enforcing the provisions of
offence.                                        • A ny ground not specified above, in           this Act.
   It will be noted that simple d ru nk en­     England an d Wales used for any                 Powers o f search and arrest o f persons:
ness will be sufficient and no aggravating      International     Association     Football      By virtue of section 7(2) o f the Act a
circumstances need exist.                       match                                           constable may search a person, he has
                                                • Shielfield Park, Berwick-Upon-Tweed           reasonable grounds to suspect of
Offences in connection with alcohol,            (though in England plays in the Scottish        committing o r has committed an offence
containers etc at sports grounds                League)                                         under this Act and may a n e st such a
   Offence: Section 2(1) of the A ct                                                            person.
provides that a person who has                                                                      With effect from January 1. 1986. the
intoxicating liquor or an article to which      Simple drunkenness                              anticipated date of the commencement of
this section applies in his possession —           The period of a designated sporting          the Police and Criminal Evidence Act
   (a) at any time during the period of a       event is fully defined in section 9(4) of the   1984, the powers of search will be subject
designated sporting event when he is in         A ct. Irrespective of whether a match may       to the procedures outlined in section 2
any area o f a designated sports ground         be cancelled it includes the period two         and 3 of that Act and the relevant Code
from which the event may be directly            hours before and one hour after the end         o f Practice made thereunder.
viewed; or                                      o f the match.                                  Power to stop and search vehicles: By
   (b) while entering o r trying to en ter a    Offence: By virtue of section 2(2) of the       virtue of section 7(3) of the Act a
designated sports ground at any time            A ct a person who is drunk in a designated      constable may stop a public service
during the period of a designated sporting      sports ground at any time during the            vehicle (within the meaning of section 1
event at the ground, is guilty of an offence.   period of a designated sporting event at        o f the Act) and may search such a vehicle
                                                that ground or is drunk while entering or       o r a railway passenger vehicle if he has
                                                trying to en ter such a ground at any time      reasonable grounds to suspect that an
Intoxicating liquor                             during the period of a designated sporting      offence under that section is being o r has
   T he expression ‘intoxicating liquor’ has    event at that ground is guilty of an            been com mitted in respect of that
the meaning ascribed to it by the               offence.                                        vehicle.
Licensing A ct 1964.                               The expressions ‘designated sports               A gain, as from January 1, 1986, the
   By virtue of section 2(3) of the A ct the    ground’ and ‘designated sporting event’         pow er to search will be subject to the
section applies to any article capable of       and ‘the period’ thereof have been fully        provisions of sections 2 and 3 of the
causing injury to a person struck by it,        defined previously. It is worthy of             Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
being —                                         reiteration that simple drunkenness will        which have been fully analysed in the
   (a) a bottle, can o r other portable         b e sufficient.                                 ‘Greaves and Pickover’ series of articles
container (including such an article w hen      Licensing provisions: Sections 3 to 5 of        in this magazine.
crushed o r broken), which (i) is for           the A ct inclusive contain provisions              Even prior to the passing of the
holding any drink; and (ii) is of a kind        enabling a magistrates’ court to make           Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc)
which, when em pty, is normally                 orders in respect of licensing hours within     Act 1985 the law was adequate to deal
discarded or returned to, o r left to be        sports grounds.                                 with those anti-social elements who
recovered by the supplier; or                   Police powers: Closure o f bars: Section        m asqueraded as football supporters. This
   (b) part of an article falling within        6(1) of the A ct provides that if at any        recent      legislation,  which    became
paragraph (a) above; but does not apply         time during the period of a designated          operative on August 9 ,1985, strengthens
to anything that is for holding any             sporting event at any designated sports         the arm of the law.
medicinal product (within the m eaning of       ground it appears to a constable in                All that is now required is the will to
the Medicines A ct 1968).                       uniform that the sale or supply of              enforce it and some inspirational
   Even in the depths of winter the A ct        intoxicating liquor at any bar within the       leadership committed to tackling the
will extend to the whisky contained in the      grounds is detrimental to the orderly           problem fearlessly and fiercely. It would
hip-flask; b ut not to the hip-flask itself.    conduct or safety of spectators at that         be prestigious for the service to hand the
‘T herm os’ flasks are also outside the         event, he may require any person having         gam e of soccer from the hands of the
scope of the Act; but if they contain           control of the bar to close it and keep it      hooligans to those who have a genuine
intoxicating liquor. . .                        closed until the end of that period.            interest in the national game.           •
              f,
POLICE REVIEW SEPTEMBER. I9HS
    A SPECIAL. COMMIT­                 preventioii bt.any onetime
    TEE is- to oversee all fire        at every -'ground i<i the .
    hazards and fire preven­           country,” he said.'
    tion work at every sports
    stadium • in South York­          B u t th e r e w as ' n o
    shire, it was. revealed last   immediate commitment of
    night.                         g o v e rn m e n t m oney. I t
                                   a p p e a r s t h a t 'M a r g a r e t
        But public facilities at Thatcher and other minis­
    many soccer grounds up ters have- still to be con­
    and down the country are v in c ed t h a t th e f u n d s
    likely to be severely re­ cannot be found by foot­
    s tr ic te d n e x t Season ball itself.. .
    Because o f getting safety
    improvements carried out           Before any decisions can
    in time for the August be reached, it was agreed .
    kick-off, the Government that much more needs to
    acknowledged yesterday. be doen to assess the size of
    The alternative would be to the task. . „                     ___
    close grounds.
                                       M r V odden criticised
                                    current fire preveiiition leg­
        T h e m o v e in S o u th
                                    islation as “ Wolly” ; d e ­
    Yorkshire is expected to be
                                    pending as if did on codes
    approved by South York­
                                    o f practice fof many sports
    shire County Council’s fire
                                    grounds and buildings, he
     servicfes committee meeting
                                    said the Bradford tragedy
     on June 6.        ■ .
                                    and the Brightside ware­
                                    house, fire last yeai had
      ' Fire chiefs will present proved this.
     detailed reports on every
    stad iu m in th e county,
    h ig h lig h tin g th e safety     Fire prevention officers
    risks and any work that had already visittd one o f
    needs to be done, said the the regions largest non­
    committee's deputy chair­ football stadiums within 48
    man Alex Vodden.               hours o f the Bradford fire
                                   disaster, its secretary said
                                   last night. ,                .
        Powers to deal with fire
    prevention are to be dele­         O w lerton stadium , In
    gated to a sub committee.       Sheffield, which stages
                                    greyhound, speedway and
        “ T h e re    m ust    be stockcar racing as well as
    hundreds of grounds where playing host to Sheffield
    they get large numbers of Eagles rugby league team,
    people occasionally. That was inspected by officers
    committee has to know on Monday, said secretary
/   what is happening in fire Albert LittleWood.
                           Sheffield, Tuesday,                   May 14, 1985                                                                                         , „


‘Closure threat forced Rotherham to^adt                                                                                                                                         * *




                                                                        1

                                                                                                                                                            people ihjured in incidents
                                                                                                                                                            such as last Saturday’s fire j
       By MARTIN EDWARDS                                                                                Four other* ln|ured In Saturday’*                   c o u ld            be        re a d ily
                                         tH E death toll In the Bradford football                       *         ....i<_•<1_iUaIp lluatt
                                                                                                      blaze were still lighting for their lives
                                          fire disaster rose to 53 yesterday when                                                                           compensated.
                                                                                                      In the same hospital
j.POLICE chiefshad another of the Injured died In hospital.                                                                                                  • All 92 League clubs to
vto;threaten to close He was Roy Mason, aged 75, of Fifty-three other Injured were be                                                                              covered by the Safety of
                                                                                                                                                            Sports Grounds Act 1975.
 ‘i'down a South! Sllsden;                             n«»ar Keighley, who had b®en undergoing surgery and treatment at
                                           critically III in Plnderflelds Hospital, various hospitals In Yorkshire.
                                                                                                                                                             H o m e S e c r e ta r y L eon
 ^Yorkshire soccer Wakefield.                              sufferinglrom45pcburn*>
                                                                                                                                                             B r i t t a n a c te d on th is
                                                                                                                                                             yesterday.
      ground because                                                                                                                                          • A p o lice o v e r - r id e
                                                                                                                         easily   have  seen a  disaster
      club directors were b o sse s a t R o th e r h a m . which would have resulted on the scale of the Brad­ facility on public address
                                                                                  in   a    sudden      and  deadly
  “ ilnwilling                       to United after investigations flash fire had it ignited.                            fo rd b la z e h a d th e sy s te m s w hich w o u ld
                                           in 1980 showed a stand in                                                                         not been enable Senior officers to
  •*lVnprove a stand the Millmoor ground was a B ut M r: L o c k sa id Improvements                                        implemented.                       ta k e          - c o n tr o l       in
  ^branded a de£th serious fire hazard.                                           emergency Services had tp
                                                                                                                             Mt   Lock,  who   served    in   emergencies.
  ^lfap; it Has beeh E x p erts.fro m the fire threaten                            the club
                                                                                                stiff action against                                           6 A ban on the sale of
                                                                                                         then Under the police force for 30 years drirtks to avert the possibil­
  Vrrevealed.                              service  found      there was  just     chairman Anton Johnson before his recent retire-, ity o f fans being slow to re­
                                           a single exit from the stand                                          v ita l m e n t. p u t f o rw a rd a
   !-?•; Form er police super- through which hundreds of _                                     before
                                                                                                                                                               act to danger.
  :~c jt v te r id e n t D o u g la s people would have to pass                    im   p r o v e m  e n ts   ;  w ere charter for soccer which he
                                                                                                                           said should be acted on • Stands to be built with
       ■Lock has spoken for in an emergency.                                        undertaken.                  •, ■      .immediately to com bat ample entrances and exits.
   ' ■the first tim e about .the                                                      “ T h e d ir e c to r s w e r e ; safety hazards.
                                               Narrow passageways at extremely reluctant .to do                                                                     M r Lock said the extra
    y :incideht in the wake o f the back o f the Valley
                                                                                    anything about it ahd we /.Among his recommen- cash, needed for this could
        iasTSaturday’s blaze at Parade ground were a key had Jo threaten to close the - dations are:                                                   ,        come from such sources as
    'i; B radford, which left 53 fa c to r in the B radford ground. Then later they • Clubs should insure the pools prdtnoters, the
         tje d p le     dead        a h d disaster.                                 put in more safety exits and themselves against risks media and-oilier organi­
         hundreds injured..                  .  The   investigation        also     took the tarmac away, he and Injury to people ,and sations that benefit from
          . He toid the fooffiirig revealed that the stand had said.                                                        property inside atid outside soccer.
                                                                                                                                                                   .He called for emergency
         telegraph h i had to fight been constructed using a                            He said the ground could their grounds. In this way. legislation over the issue sc
          the o p p o s itio n o f club      ta rm a c a d
                                                         a a  m
                                                              in   m a te r ia l.
                                                                                                                                                                that improvements can bt


                                              il letters warned
                                                                                                                                                                introduced in time for next
                                                                                                                                                                seasorli . :
                                                                                                                                                                   ■ Rotherham United sec­
                                                                                                                                                                  reta ry N orm an D arnil
                                                                                                                                                                  said yesterday he. was no
                                                                                                                                                                  a w a re o f t h e q u e s tio i
                                                                                                                                                                  marks over the. safety o
                                                                                                                                                                  the g ro u h d 'in ' the 198'
                                                                                                                                                               • investigatiort, which wa
                                                                                                                  to! and be offired a grant, the trust
                                                         ' ' Coun Gunnell later emerged from                                                                   l held 'befort he joined th
           JUHIN vj u inin ci-L , leader of West                                                                  said yesterdayi                     . .. .
                                                             talks at the Home Office with a                                                                       club.             '; \ 1
        "■ Y o rk sh iri.i. C o u n t y C o u n f c il,.                                                           i-Steel   to r a  new    fo o t costing
       ■? V estcrday m a d e p u b lic, le tte rs            promise    that    the   letters     he   made     - £38,0t)0 was delivered in March but           ■    .' But  h  i said   th* club hs
                                                             public would fortn a part of any • •■Mf" H eg in b o th a ih sa id it Was r e c e n tl y s ^ e n t a b o t
           written to Bradford City FC In July                                                                                                                     £250,000 on safety prcca-
           last year,.w arning them o t an                   investigation that took place.                        dicided to wait Until yesterday, lions’ and regular inspe
            Unacceptable Crowd Safety hazard                    In One letter, dated July 18. the               "  when  the  season   had ended,    before     •
                                                                                                                                                                    tions were carried out t
            at the g r o f i n d . ; - .                " council outlined s a f e t y prov!S.ons . .beginningwork.                                   . •" ! the. fire service1to rensu
            • .They were a ls o . warned that the, , needed to comply with the IV n . ’ ■ He said He had not seen the letters • th e g ro u n d was u p t
       , innairi stahd                   timber ^           : Safety of Sports Grounds Act. ^ ; from.the county council.                                           •JtetidSrdy.t ^           ’
            WaS A fird nSK.’ . .i                       ■      : A letter from their engineer w ai                  j-Asked whether he would navi                       Three :6t. the remainir
               Tlie corfespondehce Was made V inclosed to help the club obtain a- ! ailowtd. tjeoj)le• to watch football tout1clubs In South Yor’
            feublic at a" Prtss conference in                 grani from the Football Grant ' from the stand had he.known it was shire — Sheffield Wednc
            London; a f t e r ,c lu b ; c h a ir m a n         Improvement. T tust to rebuild the ; lirisafe;,. M r Hegihbotham rephed: daV, Barnsley and ShefHe
            Stafford Heginbotham: denied ever, v*’tnain grandstand roof.                                      i ' ’“ of; cdurse 1 wouldn t. I am a U n ite d                                        a»:
             irecelving letters, from, the county •Vs          : Bradford City FC used this letter, 1 iiU m ari' b e in g .i O f c o u rs e                         designated...
            toliridil setting, ,out; lire brigade ' and one from the police, to apply                               Wouldn't.*’                     '                    iri United'scase, the nt
             recofftniendalionsV!; .,
             recommendations.;,-.,                  • •                               i                              -i i                          ■                 status was achieved ji

          Brittail extends safety Small clubs face                                                                                                                   after; their promotion
                                                                                                                                                                     the Second Division 1:
                                                                                                                                                                     season
          «rt tfl iiil Divisions       improvements
  Closure threat                                                      fo r c e d                      Rotherham tovact
                                                                                                                                                                         * *




                                                                     1

                                                                                                                                                          people injured in incidents
                                                                                                                                                          such as last Saturday’s fire
    By MARTIN EDWARDS                                                                               Four others Injured In Saturday’s c o u ld                           be      r e a d ily
                                         THE death toll In the Bradford football blaze              ' were still    ....«    L .
                                                                                                                               t _I   ..  lkAti
                                                                                                                                              > t t
                                                                                                                                                  uAfl
                                                                                                                         fighting for their lives compensated.
                                         fire disaster rose to 53 yesterday when
' P O L IC E chiefs had another of the Injured died In hospital. In the same hospital.                                                                     • All 92 League clubs to
                                                                                                                                                          be   covered by the Safety of
. to. threaten to close                      He was Roy Mason, aged 75, of                          Fifty-three other injured were Sports Grounds Act 1975.
                                          Sllsden,   near      Keighley,   who    had  been
: d o w n a S o u t h critically Hi in Pinderfieids Hospital, undergoing surgery and treatment at H o m e S e c r e ta r y L eon
X Y o r k s h ir e s o c c e r Wakefield, suffering from 4 5 pcbums. various hospitals in Yorkshire.                                                       B r it ta n a c te d on th is
                                                                                                                                                           yesterday.
    ground because
                                                                                which  would     have  resulted       easily have seen a disaster • A p o lice o v e r - rid e
    club directors were b o sse s a t R o th e r h a m                                                                                                     Facility on public address
                                                                                   a sudden and deadly on the scale of the Brad­ sy ste m s w h ich w o u ld
 - u n w illin g                    to United after investigations in                                                 fo  rd     b la z e   h a d   th e
                                              1980 showed a stand in flash fire had it ignited.
 ■» i m p r o v e a s t a n d in          the Millmoor ground was a               B u t M r L o c k sa id implemented.
                                                                                                                      im provem ents not been enable Senior officers to
                                                                                                                                                            ta k e       co n tro l        in
   • b r a n d e d a d e a t h serious fire hazard.                             emergency Services had to
                                                                                                                          M  r  Lock,    who  served   in   emergencies.
 ;; trap, it has beeh                        E xperts from the fire threaten stiff action against the police force for 30 years • A ban on the sale of
                                                                                the club -r. then under
  Vrevealed.                              service  found there was just chairman Anton Johnson before his recent retire­ drinks to avert the possibil­
                                          a single exit from the stand                                                                                      ity o f fans being slow to re­
       : F o rm er police super­ through which hundreds of _                              b e fo re        v ita l m e n t, p u t f o rw a r d a
                                                                                                                       charter    for  soccer  which   he   act to danger.
     in t e n d e n t D o u g la s people would have to pass im p ro v e m e n ts                          w ere
                                                                                                                       said should be acted on • Stands to be built with
     Lock has spoken fo r in an emergency.                                       undertaken.
                                                                                                                       .immediately to com bat ample entrances and exits.
  ‘ the first time about the                                                       “ T h e d ir e c to r s w ere safety hazards.
                                              Narrow passageways at                                                                                             Mr Lock said the extra
   : incident in the wake o f the back of. the Valley
                                                                                 extremely reluctant to do
                                                                                 anything about it and we                .Among his recommen- cash needed for th;s coulc
      last Saturday’s blaze a t Parade ground were a key had to threaten to close the • dations are:                                                         come from such sources a;
    ' B radfo rd , which left 53 fa c to r in the B rad fo rd ground. Then later they • Clubs should insure the pools promoters, the
      p e o p le         dead      a n d disaster.                               put in more safety exits^and themselves against risks media and ether organi
       hundreds injured.                    . The investigation also took the tarmac away,*' he and injury to people and sations that benefit fronr
           He told the M o rn in g revealed that the stand had said.                                                    property inside and outside soccer.
                                                                                                                                                                He called for emergency
       Telegraph he had to fight been constructed using a                           He said the ground could their grounds. In this way.
       the o p p o s itio n o f clu b la   ta rm a c a ud da umi m a te r ia l.
                                                                          •«*«                                                                               legislation over the issue sc
                                                                                                                                                             that improvements can bt


                                           il letters warned                                                                                                 introduced in time for next
                                                                                                                                                             season.
                                                                                                                                                                 Rotherham United sec
                                                                                                                                                              .retary N orm an D arni!
                                                                                                                                                              said yesterday he was no
                                                                                                                                                              a w a re o f th e q u e s tio
                                                                                                                                                               marks over the safety c
                                                                                                                                                               the ground 'i n • the 198
                                                                                                                                                            ' investigation, which wc
                                                                                                             for and be offered a grant, the trust
                                                               Coun Gunnell later emerged from . said yesterdayi                                            ■ held before he joined th
        joHN GUNNELL, leader of West                                                                                                                   _
                                                            talks at  the    Home    Office     with  a                                                        club.            • ;
         Y o r k s h i r e C o u n t y C o u n c il,                                                             Steel for a neW b o f costing
      * y'esterday m a d e p u b lic le tte rs              promise that the letters he made                 £38,000 was delivered in March but                   But he said the club hr
         written to Bradford City FC in July                public would form a part of any • M i" H e g in b o th a m sa id it Was ' re c e n tly ' s p e n t a b o '
         last year, warning them o f an                     investigation that took place.                   decided to wait until yesterday, £250,000 on safety preca
         Unacceptable crowd Safety hazard                      In one letter, dated July 18. the              when the season had ended, before tions and regular inspe
                                                                                                                                                                tions were carried out t
         at the ground.                                     council outlined s a f e t y provisions           beginning work.                                   the .fire service to ensu
          ■ They were also warned^ that th e . needed to comply with the 1V/5                                 ' • He said he had not seen the letters th e g ro u n d w as up
          main stand -      f-t.madd o f timber y r Safety of Sports Grounds Act.                         . from the county council.                  . , standards
          was a fir* risk. K                                  ■A letter from their engineer was ■ .‘•Asked whether he would have                                  Three of the remainir
             The correspondence Was made . enclosed to help the club obtain a- - allowed people to Watch football four clubs in South Yor
          public at a Press conference tn ■ grant from the Football Grant ' from the stand had he.known i t was shire — Sheffield Wedne
           Loridon: a f te r .c lu b c h a ir m a n ! Improvement Trust to rebuild the .lurtsafe„.Mr Hegiribotham replied: day. Barnsley and ShefTie
           Stafford Heginbotham denied ever . main grandstand roof.                          ..    ,/      ' ' “ O f course I w ouldn't. I am a U n ite d — . a r e                         al
           receiving letters, from the county , . ' Bradford City FC used this letter, ’( . H u m an , b e i n g . . O f c o u r s e I designated..
           fcouricil setting out fire brigade .                                                                w ouldn't." •
                                                              and one from the police, to apply                                                                    InUnited'scase. th en
           recommendations.
                                                                                                                                                                 status was achieved j*
         B rittan                 extends safety Small clubs face                                                                                    _           after, their promotion
                                                                                                                                                                 the Second Division 1:
                          ■       il                                                                      irn rv rrw p m                    fitlts               season. !.' •...........
         I f'
                                   How safe are                                                                                                            battles
                                                                                                                                                              police blame the I
                                                                                                                                                            refused to follow po
                                                                                                                                                                                   rival




                                      local
                                                                                                                                                            the ground.
                                                                                                                                                               But united claim par
                                                                                                                                                            the trouble was caused
                                                                                                                                                            police who„did not n
                                                                                                                                                            en o u g h o ffic e rs, a t
                                                                                                                                                            ground. ■
                                                                                                                                                                Trouble broke o ut s
                                                                                                                                                             a smoke flare was f
                                                                                                                                                             from th e v isitin g ; f:
                                                                                                                                                             enclosure at the Golds'
                               By Prakash Gandhi and M arvin Close
                                                                                                                                                             Ground where United
                          I O C A L soccer clubs today put their fans                                     The stand at Hillsborough                          were gathered. It wen
                          minds a t rest in the wake o f the devastating fire                                                                                 harmlessly.
                          X h     r i p H through B radford C l / s m am                                                                                         But then about 500
                                                                                                                                                              from both sides, leapt
                          StWCTned supportM , who fear a possibI<:                                                                                          I the pitch and starte
                          the inferno which has so far claimed 52 lives, were                                                                                 mass brawl.
                          given safety assurances by the region s clubs.                                                                                         T h ere was one a
                              Second Division Sheffield United have spent more                                                                                 inside the ground an
                           than £200,000 bringmg the club up to the reqmrements                                                                                more in streets surrc
                           o f the Safety at Sports Grounds Act, (1975).                                                                                       ing the stadium.
                              “ In addition to the capital expenditure,theschem e
                                                                                                                                                                             R ival
                            has cost us 1,000 seats because we have widened gang                         United’s Bramall Lane ground                               B rig h to n c h a ir
                            w a y s t d improved old exits and provided new ones,
                                                                                                                                                                Bryan Bedson said:
                            said chairman Reg Brealey.                                                                                                          t r a d itio n to allow
                               “ We have the facility to get people out quickly.                                                                                Brighton fans on tc
                            There is no way anyone could be                                                                                                      pitch at the end o f th
                               At Hillsborough First D.v.s.on Shefneld Wednes                                                                                    game of the season.
                            day also say their fans have nothing to tear.                                                                                            “ U n fo rtu n a tely
                                                     Certificate                                                                                                 Sheffield United su:
                                “ We are in possession of a certificate in accordance                                                                            ers climbed the fenc
                     >w                                                                                                                                          g o to n to th e p itc h .lt
                                                                                                                                                                 have been very ugly.
                                                                                                                                                                    John Calvert, sec

                            3         &«sksssssss                                                           Barnsley's Oakwell ground                            of the United supp
                                                                                                                                                                 travelling club, who
                                                                                                                                                                 the match, said: “ Th
                            “ " S e r e is timber present at the ground, but we ha­                                                                              not seem to be e
                            ven’t got a stand made of timber.                   nftn                                                                             police to cope wi
                               Third Division Rotherham United spent £200,000                                                                                     trouble.”
                            meedng 3 % requirements under.the Act before they
                            were relegated from Division Two.                                                                                                      • At Chesterfield'
                               The majority of the ground occupied by spectators is                                                                                against Rochdale, f
                            concrete and although the main stand contains timber,                                                              -V.': •'a.*'1
                                                                                                                                                           *'      were arrested for
                             the main construction is steel and concrete.                                                                                          and public order <
                               The club also has stewards manning the gates                                                                                        and two were eject
                                                                                                                                                                   th e g ro u n d fo r
                                                                                                                                                                    behaviour.
             4                                                                                                  Chesterfield’s Saltergate
                                avoid a tragedy on the scale of Bradford.
                                                                     “ We believe our ground is as safe as it possibily
                                                                  could ” said secretary Michael Spinks. "That doesrit
                                                                  mean to say we are complacent. We will be talking to
                                  ETfilEEs                        the fire service to review our present arrangements
                                Free idvice on
                                all p r o r t n m e th o d i          Third Division Doncaster Rovers chairman Ian
                                                                   Jones plans to meet fire officers to d i s c u s s precautions
                                 from 17 per unit                  at Belle Vue following the Bradford disaster.
                                                                      “ It’s a question o f money,” said Mr. Jones. Clubs
                                               fACt-BOOY'LtO*      would dearlv like to spend more money on improving
                                                Piinl«a«Saf<
                                                Co»n*Uc & Medical  bo u n d s but if you consider it was going to cost B r a d ­                       By David        H irs t
'■ • V i '
                                                Treatment Advice    ford £400,000 to bring their ground up to standa ,
                                                                    then unless you get a football ground improvemen                T H E R O M E O s erg ean t, w h o to o k
                                                                    granU it s financially impossible to do all at once.            Yorkshire miner’s daughter Sue H ard ,
                                                                     a spokesman for Division Four champions Chester­               brink o f a bigamous m arnage was rus
                                                                  field said their Saltergate ground was up to the                  hospital on the day they were due to we
                                                                  standards set down by fire and police services.                                                        Father-of-twc
                                                                                                                                                                      B eattie receive
                                                                                                                                                                      treatm ent a t 1
                                                                                                                                                                      H o s p ita l a n d
                                                                                                                                                                      c h a rg ed th e s
                                                                                                                                                                      Hospital staff
                                                                                                                                                                      comment on w!
                                                                                                                                                                       treated for.
                                                                                                                                                                         The fact eme
   3 1                                                                                                                                                                 as Sue, aged 26
                                                                                                                                                                       Drive, Armthc
     *
     ,
     ’1,•. .s*4                                                                                                                                                        caster, revealed
    ‘2/.* **                                                                                                                                                            begged for her
    :^ V M                                                                                                                                                                The 38-year-
                                                                                                                                                                        policeman told
                                                                                                                                                                        ter how his w-
                                                                                                                                                                        became so tang
                                                                                                                                                                        not reveal t h e !
                 i»p*3
                 :
                                                       ..... .... .




Control                                                                                                                                                                             Jfi.




and cu
    R etired police superintendent D ouglas Lock con­
    cludes his view s on football hooliganism .
I R E L IE V E the r o o t cau se            At Hillsborough we devidcd
n r hoolilianism lies w ith              the ground into sectors (com-
01 nooiikaina                            m unity beats) and policed
the aw ay fan. In ^             P         thesc sma„ areas wifh , he same
cnee m o st if n o t all tro u o ie                 b d ofnccj. a, every
in g r o u n d s is provoked by
 the away su p p o rters.                     This cnabled an officer to get
     Il seems that if a club brings        l0 ^now |,js pari of the ground,
 5 000 supporters, and of those            ancj as spectators always tend
 just 100 are hooligans, you can           lQ stan(j week jn wcek out, in
 e x p e c t trouble. If the same club             s;)nle spot, real fans and
 travels with onl> 500 support-            troublemakers, he soon recov­                                                                                                                 r :                                 W*
 ers. you can bet your bottom              njscd t|,c unusual and identi-
  dollar that our 100 idiots arc
  amongst them. The idiosyncra-
                                           fje(] potentially dangerous inci-
                                           dcn(s which mjg|„ develop into
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sffif
  sy 0r football is that while              public order problems,                                                                                                                                     m                      *
  gates generally have fallen over              i>erhaps more important, Ihe
  the past 25 years, away support , crowd soon identified and buill
  has risen!                          i i up a rapport with him.
      This is not to say thali a                 { exlended lhis jdea further
   home club is w'thout il hi«jo -          a lso m e o fthe larger games last
   umi element: all club* nave tins            ,aso n j,y in v itin g police
   minority.
   |UIIIUM*7* Normally/ they* only' oo in      f|-jcers    f t om
                                                   v c i* iiu   m the v isito rs’                                                                         '       "“7
   react at home to away suppor-             towns to matches at Hills-
   tes* provocation. Generally*              borough. These officers were
    Tans are better behaved at               able to give valuable informa­
    home. ‘There is the old maxim            tion on their supporters’ activi­
    of "not messing on your own              ties earlier in Hie season. They
    doorstep".                              a|so
                                             also pointed
                                                     pointed outout to
                                                                    to iny
                                                                       my tofficers
        One answer to that problem possible troublemakers,
    is to have close po'iw supcr-                 [ had lhouBht 0 f extending
     vision, with a sufficient num-           (he concepl further by having
     her of officers. 1 find that when        vjsili       fans escorted from
     the odds are against the thug                ^ towns ,0 Hillsborough by                                                                                                    h i
     (football or mugger) he'b-usu-
     ally found to be a bully_and a
     coward. The question begged
                                              ^
                                              ^ ^
                                                      QWn police Accepting the
                                                 femise tiial fans behave better
                                                          esence 0f officers who
                                                                                                                                   I                                    /    i* "T £ !




     is: How many officers are                ^ v jhem why do wie „ ot
     ••sufficient’'?                        j,ilVe
                                              lUivv. contingents o f police * ..
         It is difficult lo arrange Tor travelling    ••• to away games   — ..ith
                                                                               witn                                                                                                 mm
   the unknown, n me                        them o n the football special
   police officer involved has no           t r a j nSi 0 r a c c o m p a n y i n g
   precise information he canpot              coaches?
     calculate his requirements ae-                 wouid be very similar to                                       mm.
     curately. My solution in over-         ^ practice we adopted o f es-
    coming this is simple. I wouw           cor,jn„ buses carrying working
     make entry for away fans by            mjner5 jn the recent NUM
                                                                                                                          1
     ticket only.               . ..         dispute.                                 i
       The fans could buy ihejr,,                     benefits would be two-                                                           •*(\1*%S   t&.-KVY•:v....‘
                                                                                                                                                                .fi
                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                     m    m
    tickets from their own\ c u
    the occasion o he last home
    match, and d u r m t in
    prccedmg the gam . from their
                                                      ^
                                                         conduct of fans en
                                                              be supervisedi
                                             hopefully eliminating the type
                                                      which o c c u m iM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mm
    own club. The sal*. ol t
    w o u ld cease at no
                                             ^ Woodall Servjces Area on
                                             the Ml when visiting fans
                                                                                          IS                                                                                                                              P S H
    Thursdays.
      This would mean that oy
                                             c a u s e d £1 5 , ()00 w o r t h o f
                                             dainagC- And on arrival at
                                                                                      I                                                                                                                        $             marK his M M m w l
    T h u rsd ay cv cn 'n g Sl.le' 1         grounds fans could be disem-
    Wednesday Football U u o a n a           barkcd escor(ed to the ground            Superinlendenl L»ck » = * , - , a         ma.oh ball l.om W .d n esd a, chairman 8 e „ McGaa as
    the local
    me          police
          u«.u. police would
                         --- . know           ^
                                              and         rvisetl by
                                                      supervised   by their
                                                                      their own
                                                                              own
     how many Chelsea Ians to                 and local police.
     expect on the following Satur-
     day aftern oo n. The police
     could then raise sn ft teen t
                                                  I suggest that all football
                                                                            At the moment some clubs
                                               fans under the age of 21 should
                                                                         retain all fans alter games,
                                               be made to register with their
                                                                         som e only a fte r sen sitive
                                                                                                                               Football is at crossroads
     officers to police the away               home clubs. They should be
     fans, and final arrangements                                        matches and some not at ail.
                                               issued with an identification
                                                                         C e rta in ly th is s h o u ld be
      for their accommodation in the                                                                                      M Y S U G G E S T IO N S .                    - lR * " ? T S & r t S
                                               card. In the event or a fan
                                                                         b ro u g h t     in to ’ th e se                 thoiieh s<»n>ct.mes c n ,ca             arc           ^              fcUpiMjrlcr!l       W ednesday « ith pride.
      ground could be made.                    being convicted by a court the
         Of course some will say that                                    arrangements.
                                               identification card should be                                                  srssissiirr&                              .«•»'**«<*">>■,                             .... i» ...> •!.«.■>«»■>
      fans
      Tans without tickets can still          canCelled an d th e p erso n   1am sure thal all decent Tans                Miccer I am and always will be            S h effie ld   W ednesday,                     Hillsborough, uhich included a
      travel to iiway games and mill-         banned from the ground. Thiswill co-o|jerai-: with the police.              a lover of this urcat game. If I although already ccrliliedI under                       promotion season to Division
      trale the home support. 1 us is         procedure could be enforced,It is for their safety and does                 hurt some people's pride 1 am the Safety in Sinirls f'ro'iiul                            Q nCf belter croivd heliayiour.
       true. Out my experience ^ a d s                                    not take long. After all, trant-
                                              t|irough a c',vi| court injunc-                                                                                     Act, are guhi|* further in their                      main benefit to the club was
       me to believe that our police                                      lie conditions usually mean
                                              (.on jf tjle p ^ o n persisted in                                                          I .• t- nri»„,v nwn roa- building mid developm ent                        ijlcrcased supporl including a
       have the necessary expertise lo                                    fairly long delays, and during
                                              tr y ;ng t0 en ter a ro otball                                              s c m in g S the present crisis in programme.                                                    proportion of women and
       weed out these individuals. ^            ground.                   the period of their retention
                                                                          the home supporters traffic                     s o c c e r . T h e y d‘» not represent   T h eir m a n ag e r H « |« “ rdI              children.                 .
          While I was the officer in                                     he re­                                           the ixilicies of the Chief Con- Wilkinson has set .i £,ui'da                               Football is al the crossroads,
      charge of police arrangements                AH away pin:5          will have cleared.
                                                                         ^ a
                                                                             This is a most important                     slalile of Sonlli Yorkshire or conduct o 'lit la fithl                  •y                , • illl|M)r,aul that adiuhiislra-
                                                                           point as, in the main, most of                 ai.y oilier police officer.             r                                 -              «<>« make the right choices.
                                                                           the damage and fighting now                         1 hope I aet as a catalyst, to                                                             can 110 ln,n«?r P ™ * ™ *
                                                                           occurs in the mix after a game                  provoke quick and much neede.l [ j s t n              d          iu                     and hope tl.al.the hool.p.is ui»
      J Z U T l ' d i . ) in a nomiul                           ^ " itlj
                                                                           when c o n fro n ta tio n takes
       e r i s s s a s f f s                    s s u . 4 - by .n ***.. place.
       ciple of community policing.             supporters.
                     CV-"


                                                                                             1
                                                                                    » v « m n : niUSBW                               i .
                                                                                  hrr. zq.i-SS'                      f.f




                              M O S T F o o tb a ll L e ag u e
                              grounds were built in the late
                              19th o r e a rly p a rt o f th is
                              c e n tu r y , a n d w ith c e r ta in
                              exceptions they look as i f they
                              were.

                                They normally lack the most                                                               ,ii
                              basic facilities such us dcccnt mod­
                              ern toilets, weatherproof stands,
                              ample refreshment rooms and rest
                              areas.
                                Some in the lower divisions have
                              poor terracing and dangerous sur­
                              rounding walls and fences. Until
                              Unite recently, for instance, a South
                              Yorkshire club used to subject visit­
                              ing ladies to the humiliation o f run­
                              ning a gauntlet of jeering obscene
     .   ■ r -.sv:            louts when they visited the inade­
                              quate toilets.
                                When one considers the vasts
                              amounts of tnoney put into clubs by
                              Ians, from the pools, the TV compa­
•'                            nies and sponsors, and the little the
                              fans get in return by way of creature
                              comforts, it is not surprising, to a
                            . certain extent, that some Ians act as                   DOUGLAS LOCK
                            • they do.
                            |    I have always believed it you           DOUGLAS Lock retired In Feb­                trouble, and home and away
                            I treated people as idiots you must          ruary alter 30 years a s a police­          fans stood shoulder to shoulder
                            : not be surprised whey they act like       m en In South Yorkshire. In that             on the terraces, often compli­
                            1 idiots.                                   time he h a s b een on duly at               menting the o pponents’ ability.
                                                                        every football ground In the                    “ Children lined the tow walls
                                 Another problem with grounds is        county. From 1982 until his                  surrounding the pitch, without
                              that they arc based in the historic       retirement he w as a superinten­             their parents close by, a n d the
                              centres o f population in a town or       dent responsible (or the plan­               players on the pitch could only
                              city. That means that even at that        ning ind control of policing at
                              palace of a ground Hillsborough,                                                       s e e little n o se s and the tops of
                                                                        Sheftield W e d n e s d a y ’s Hills­        heads.
                              off-street parking has had to be          borough ground.
                              used. Generally stations are some                                                         “ W om en a n d g irls co u ld
                              distance from grounds so that away           When ho started his c a r e e r In        a tte n d in th e s u r e k n o w le d g e
                              fans have to be escoried cowboy           the Fifties, he recalls, policing            that they would not be otlended
                              fashion to the ground in a long           football m atches gam e him the              by the obscenities.
                              crocodile by the police.                  opportunity of ea sy overtime
                                                                                                                       “ All that Is a memory ol dis­
                                                                        and the ch ance to be close to
                                                                        the players he admired.                      tant happy days.”
                                                                                                                       In a s e rie s of artlclos starting
                                                                           At O akw ell ten p o lic e m e n
                                            Wilful                      worked a match with a crowd of
                                                                                                                     today Douglas Lock gives Ills
                               This means that they are obliged         25,000.                                      Ideas oh how tho' problem of
                             to pass through town centres or                                                         football h o o lig a n is m c a n b e
                                                                           “ T h e r e w a s no s p e c t a t o r    solved.
                             areas o f p o p u la tio n and often
                             through groups of the home fans.
                             This leads to interaction between         benefits that a town derives from            ball Club and was a matter for the
                             the opposing supporters before, but       the successful club, ie, the trade that      police.
                             especially alter, a game. The result,     football brings, the advertising of
                             the proximity and the animosity,          the town, and civic pride in the               I do n o t accept th a t u nruly
                             build up to a volatile situation          town’s team successes.                       behav io ur outside grounds has
                             which frequently leads to violence,                                                    nothing to do with the clubs. It has
                             damage and serious public disorder.         On the other hand only a. few              everything to do with them. How do
                                                                       have any direct control over the             we enforce this responsibility then?
                                Football clubs have consistently       club’s fortunes and when things go
                             refused to accept any responsibility      wrong and damage occurs directors               The Government should pass leg­
                             for supporters’ conduct once they         dissociate their club from activities        islation requiring all clubs to insure
                             are out of the ground. It is wilful       of fans outside their premises.              themselves against the risk of spec­
                             blindness on Iheir part not to recog­                                                  tators causing injury to persons or
                             nise that it is they and they along                                                    property within the ground and its
                             who attract some 4.000-5,000 Chel­                     Insurance                       immediate environs. In the event of
                             sea fans, for example, to Sheffield                                                    this injury the club’s insurers would
                             on a cold winter afternoon. What                                                       compensate victims.
                             other reasons could they be there           What about the local community
                             for?                                      that suffers from hooligans twice a             This is particularly important
                                                                       month and, having no interest in             when the p e rp e tra to rs are not
                                One searches for the logic in the      football, has the misfortune to live         arrested and injured parties have no
                             thinking o f directors when they          near a ground? I was in a house near         redress through the criminal courts.
                             deny the involvement of the club          Oakwell earlier this season when                Where offenders arc arrested,
                             on ce th e s p e c ta to r s leave the    L eeds fans w en t b e rse rk and            tried and convicted, the insurance
                             ground. Ifo n e accepts that football     dam aged window s o f some 30                companies could apply lor, and the
                             is an industry and the clubs are          houses.,                                     courts should award to them, com­
                             playing for high profits, the logic of                                                 pensation, this to be paid by the
                             the situation becomes clearer. The          Stones were thrown at house­
                                                                                                                    offenders.
                             club exists in a town and on the face     holders who, perhaps foolishly,
                             of it belongs to the town. It usually     went out to remonstrate with the                Without this form o f insurance
                             carries in one form or another the        thugs. When later the householders           d am ag e, caused by rioting, at
                             town’s name. The club management          made reprsentations to the football          present may have to be paid for by
                             exhorts the local public to support it    club, they were told that it was             the local authority, which ultimate­
                             and directors often explain the           nothing to do with Barnsley Foot-            ly means the ratepayers.

                                                          TOMORROW: Safety at the ground
      Urgent nfiedTlbr video cameras in all grounds                                                                                                                                                   X



                                                                                                                                                                           ' 'ft
                                                                                                                                                                  •s%\       I.Xi    - v          t

                                                                                                                                       (US'         ^




                                              4 r                                                                                                                                   ■ • '*




                                                                                                                                                                    DOUGLAS LOCK

         R etired police superintendent D ouglas Lock, who
         lo r th ree years w as In ch a rg e of policing
         arrangem ents at Sheffield W ednesday’s H ills­
         borough ground, continues his analysis of foot­
                ball hooliganism and Its prevention.

    AS short a time ago as 1980,             letter to all club chairmen rec­
    one o f our grounds had a                ommending spectator segrega­
    main stand that was a high               tion. This was supported by the
                                             Football Association in a mem­
    fire risk but only one point             orandum in late 1983. In this
    o f exit.                                document, the Football Associ­
      Thu fire scrvicc had lo be             ation staled lhal positive segre­
   extremely blunl .with ihe direct­         gation should be practised. I
   ors before improvements were              wonder if this look place at the
   made. The then Government                 Luton match.
   rccogniscd this unsatisfactory
   state of affairs way back in 1975         I say this as I saw on television                                           SB
   and, as a result, and to ensure hordes o f fans being escorted
   standard safety within grounds, along the touchline whilst the                                                       1
   passed the Safety o f S ports game was on. Il appears thal this
                                          was how a portion of that group
   Grounds Act, 1975.
       Theoretically the Act applies of fans was able lo invade the
                                                                                                                           m
   to all first and second division pitch.
   d u b s. In practice, num erous            I ask myself the question:
                                                                                                                           ms
   clubs have failed to improve           “ Should the police have allowed                                                  M
   safety conditions within their
   grounds lo the levels laid out in
    the Act.
                                          the referee to start the game
                                          w h ilst th is w as h a p p e n in g ,
                                          having regard to the history of
                                                                                                                            H!!
                                                                                                                            If ,
                                                                                                                                                                        mm.

       It envisages that a club would     the Miliwall fans?"
   ensure terracing, crash barriers,                                                                                                                                                                  W   '
                                              Segregation o f fans is essen­
    walls, fencing, the stand and         tial. Before the issue,of the f i r s t ^
    seated areas were safe and that,*, 'safety certificate the local auth­
   emergency lighting and a loud­         ority, police and fire services
    speaker system existed. The           should be satisfied that the seg-
    loudspeaker system should have . regaled area of a ground is
 I a police emergency override.           totally dedicated to away fans —
    How many clubs have this? Once        notwithstanding the wishes of
     a club has brought Iheir ground       some season ticket holders. The
     up to the safely standard, it        dedicated terraces should be sec­
    applies to the local authority for     tioned ofT into areas by the erec­
    registration and a safety certifi­     tion o f lateral and horizontal
    cate. Once obtained, an annual
    inspection is made by the local
    authority before the Ground
                                           barriers with access passageways
                                           for police/emergency services to
                                           all sectors. A climb-proof fence
                                                                                                                    wi
    Safety Certificate is issued.                                                                               m
                                           should enclose the whole playing
        Additionally the Act required      area.
     that clubs liaise on a regular                                                                                                                                                          Jr
     basis with, amongst others, the           A Safety Certificate also re­
     fire service and the police. This     quires the presence of stewards.
     liaison is especially helpful to the  The clubs themselves have the
     police as it gives them additional     resp o nsibility for recruitin g
  i powers within grounds.                  these people.
•jV .   U n d e r th e c e r tif ic a te ,       My regretful expeience of
■    maximum ground capacity is set           stewards, and I must say that it
     and a schedule which specifies           is through no fault of theirs, is
     where and how many spectators            thal they are usually less than
     will be accommodated in various          useful. Some clubs, including
     areas of the ground.                     Chelsea, have efficient, experi­
    ■ The certificate also allows the         enced, physically able security
     chief police officer, after consul­      stewards. Others have not, and
     tation with a club management,           frequently the police take it
      to decide which sections o f the        u p o n them selves to assum e
     ground will be segregated for the        stewards’ duties. This is not           “tea**#*
     away supporters.                         acceptable. Some football clubs
                                              pay only lip service to stcward-
        Other clauses require police          ing, offering derisory salaries, so
      and club management consul­             it is not surprising to find the
      tation on deciding dates for re­        least able employed in those
      arranged fixtures and whether or
                                              positions.
      not a match is to be all-ticket or
      not. Some clubs are unhappy               Many stewaftis arc unsuitable                                                        mm.
      with some of these conditions,          physically, receive no training
      seeing them as an interference          and have no understanding of                 SETTING a good example. Security fencing at Hillsborough, when It w as installed In 1977
      with the management of their            the nature of their duties. Clubs
      affairs.                                must be forced to employ fit able       a r r a n g e m e n ts   at   f o o tb a ll     One does not have to be an         been installed notices could be
        To remedy the failure o f some        bodies, trained persons in these        matches.                                      expert in policing to be aware of    put up, both inside and outside a
                                              positions and not just match                                                          the potential of using television    g ro un d, inform ing fans th a t
     clubs, and ensure that there is                                                  It is well-known in police
                                              watchers.                                                                             and video. It enables the police     close circuit TV and video was in
     conformity of safety standards,                                               circles that The Football Trust                  to monitor crowd build-up and        use, and might be used in court
     all League grounds should be                I have even seen on the occa­ will provide all close circuit TV
     obliged to register with their                                                                                                 disorderly conduct. Ultimately it    proceedings against offenders.
                                              sions of disorder, stewards take ' and video equipment free of                           valuable for court viewing.       This would, I believe, have a
      local authority, if necessary to        off their reflcctive slipover jackct charge to a football club, the
     make ground improvements,                                                                                                      Some Scottish and English Mid­       deterrent effect on likely hooli­
                                              and merge into the crowd. This proviso being that individual                          lands forces have taken advan­       gans and, in cases where offend­
     •and obtain a safety certificate.        will not do.                         forces have to apply for this                    tage of The Football Trust offer.    ers escaped arrest, video films
        If they fail to do this the                                                equipment of behalf of the clubs.                But many have not.                   could be used by forces for later
     ground should be declared un­               Many police forces cannot                                                                                               identification of suspects.
                                              escape criticism, as some have         The cost of maintenance falls                    Prompt action is needed to
     safe for public admission. To                                                                                                  ensure that all grounds arc ade­
      reinforce my point on spectator         failed to move with the times upon the police, and is compara­
                                              and to incorporate modern tech­ tively small in relation to the                       quately covered by close circuit     Tomorrow: Dealing wilh aw ay
     segregation it is worth recalling                                                                                              TV. Once the equipment has                      fans.
     ^he Minister of Sport sent out a         n o lo g y in to th e ir policing benefits.
                                                                                                                                                           I
