SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MIMORANDUM
                                       For the attention of   Your
  To
          Chief Fire Officer                                  Ref.

                                       Please contact          Our
 From     LFCOp
                                       Tel.                    Ref.


Subject   Major Accident - Hillsborough Football Ground       Date    24.05.1989



          Sir,

          I was on duty on Saturday, 15th April, 1989 as Temporary Senior Fire
          Control Operator and was responsible for mobilising duties at the time
          of call for the Hillsborough Football Ground.

          I monitored a call which Fire Control Operator S. Davies was taking
          from the Police, they were asking for the cutting gear straight away
          to a major accident at the Hillsborough Football Ground, the operator
          asked several times for a road, but they were unable to give one, at
          this time I asked the operator to ask the Police if it was Penistone
          Road, which they confirmed.

          Fire Control Operator Davies tried to find out why the cutting gear
          was required, and eventually a male caller came onto the line and
          stated that they did not know exactly what was involved except people
          were believed to be trapped.

          I asked Fire Control Operator Davies to type the address details
          "Penistone Road, Hillsborough" on her screen format in an attempt to
          get the computer to display a list of the nearest           available
          appliances.   There was not a match in the computer for this address,
          but there was an option for Penistone Road, Owlerton.    I told the
          operator to select this option as I knew it to be the correct
          district, and a list of the nearest available appliances          was
          immediately displayed.

          The mobilising details for Penistone Road, Owlerton did not indicate
          that the Football Ground was a special risk, and this prompted me to
          make a further search of the data base to see if a special risk
          existed.

          I asked Fire Control Operator Davies to enter "Wednesday Football
          Ground" on the premise line in an attempt to retrieve a better address
          and back up details from the computer, but no options were displayed.

          As I monitored the conversation between the Police Control and Fire
          Control Operator Davies, although the information being passed was not
          adequate for our needs, it was obvious that they were unable to give
          us any more precise details.

          There is not any special attendance recommended for this type of
          incident, I therefore relied on my instinct and instructed Fire
          Control Operator Davies to mobilise six pumps, one emergency tender,
          and the control unit at 1516 hours.
I had initially given consideration to the number of emergency tenders
which may be required to attend, but I delayed in mobilising the
second emergency tender until I had re-assessed the situation.      At
1521 hours I gave instructions for a second emergency tender to be
mobilised from Barnsley Station knowing it was equipped with cutting
gear.

At   1527 hours a message from the first pumping appliance in
attendance, Rivelin 1, was received in Control requesting "make pumps
ten for resuscitation equipment" and I mobilised a further four pumps
to attend.

No further address details for Hillsborough Football Ground were
obtained by the Fire Service Control until receipt of a message from
Rivelin Station pump at 1529 hours requesting "all appliances to
attend at the Leppings Lane entrance". These instructions were given
by radio to all officers and appliances who were still mobile to the
incident.

ADO Mulcrone came into the Control Room during the ongoing incident
and was arranging for further oxygen cylinders to be available should
they be required at the Football Ground. I assisted him in contacting
B.O.C. Brinsworth, liaising with the control unit, and confirming with
the appliances on return to station if they required replacement
cylinders.

At all times I monitored the movements of all the appliances which
were   proceeding to the Hillsborough Football Ground, and when
necessary monitored all other incoming emergency calls which were
being handled whilst this incident was ongoing.

I also worked in liaison with Fire Control Officer E. Cuckson, who was
the Officer in Charge of Control on that day, to make sure that
pumping appliances were brought into station areas which were denuded
of cover.

This kept me fully employed until the night watch came on duty at 1800
hours, and I was able to be relieved of my duties.




Leading Fire Control Operator
                  SOOTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          SUBMISSION BY CFO H.B. WRIGHT, QFSM, MIFireB, FBIM




I am Henry Edward WRIGHT appointed as the Chief Fire Officer    of   the
South Yorkshire County Fire Service on 14th December, 1982.

Previous to that date I held the appointment of Assistant Chief Fire
Officer of the County Fire Service with the main reference of fire
prevention from 1st September, 1978 when I transferred on promotion to
South Yorkshire from the Leicestershire Fire Service, until March 1981
when I transferred to other responsibilities.

During that time I was involved in discussions on the safety aspects of
the Hillsborough stadium, Sheffield occupied by Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club Ltd.

Just prior to my arrival an order had been made under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act, 1978 which designated the ground of Sheffield
Wednesday FC by virtue of its quasi international use. This order
required an application for a general safety certificate to be made
before 1st January, 1979 when the designation order become effective.

The requirements of a general safety certificate with regard to this
stadium was considered by an Officers' Working Party chaired by Mr.
David Vaughan of the Administration Department, South Yorkshire County
Council with representatives from the South Yorkshire Police, Sheffield
City Council Building Inspection Department and the South Yorkshire
County Fire Service. This working party was responsible to the Fire
Service Committee who had delegated responsibilities from the South
Yorkshire County Council.

To assist officers a Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Football) was
issued by the Home Office. Local Authorities were reminded that this
non-statutory document was not a set of requirements to be rigidly
applied   regardless   of individual circumstances.     Indeed maximum
flexibility was to be maintained to take account of the different
circumstances at individual grounds. Particular attention was drawn to
the Act which provided that the terms and conditions should be such as
"necessary or expedient to secure reasonably safety" and that it would
be unreasonable, even if it were practicable, to seek the absolute
safety of everyone attending the sports stadium.

In order to avoid duplication and division of responsibilities a draft
of items relative to the safety in sports grounds had been prepared and
discussed prior to my arrival. This division of responsibility was
checked and approved in April, 1978 at a meeting attended by H.B.
Dunstan and K. Jones.

At an initial meeting with the Club officials on 13th December, 1978 at
Sheffield Wednesday FC, Hillsborough it was agreed that Dr. Eastwood
would prepare and submit a comprehensive survey report on matters
relating to the above Act. This was submitted on 17th January, 1979
and   provided Dr. Eastwood's opinion regarding the West Terrace
(including the lower level at North West Corner).
It was determined that a comprehensive survey of the ground be
undertaken by the Officers' Working Party and a report produced by each
department for discussion prior to meeting the Club officials to
discuss Dr. Eastwood's report.

This meeting was held on 12th February, 1979 and was attended by H.B.
Dunstan, K. Jones, B.A. Ellis and        of the County Fire Service.

Due to delays in meeting with the Club officials a further meeting of
the Officers' Working Party took place on 30th March, 1979 to review
the position prior to meeting with the Club.

The main point made regarding the West Terrace was by the Building
Authority that the crush barriers were below the height recommendation
of the Guide.

At the meeting between the Club officials and the Officers Working
Party on 2nd April, 1979 the reduced capacity of 7,200 spectators as
suggested by Dr. Eastwood to compensate for the lack of gangways was
agreed. The height of the crush barriers was to be subject to detailed
discussion between Dr. Eastwood and the Building Inspectors.

A letter from Sheffield City Council dated 1st May, 1979 confirmed that
the major points were acceptable including the barriers.

On 16th May, 1979 the County Fire Service sent to Mr. Vaughan the
improvements considered necessary at the ground.       This letter was
originated by Station Officer |       ' | and was sent by the Divisional
Commander. This letter states that the exit routes from the West and
North West Terrace were satisfactory.

The positioning of required EXIT signs as detailed on the plans sent
with the letter (1610/1 x A; 2 x A; 4A; 6A; 7A; 8A; 9A; 11 and 12).

These improvements were apparently collated into a schedule to include
all requirements of the working party and sent by Mr. Vaughan to the
Club. Although a copy of the schedule was provided for the County Fire
Service no plans were included.

At the meeting between the Club officials and the working party on 12th
November, 1979 it was reported that the work required on the       West
Terrace had been carried out.       EXIT signs were to be erected after
decorations were complete but their positions not identified in
writing.

The general safety certificate was issued by the South Yorkshire County
Council to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. for their ground
situated at Hillsborough, Sheffield on 21st December, 1979.

Prior to the FA Cup Semi-Final match scheduled for 12th April, 1980 it
was suggested on 14th March that the members of the Working Party
review the situation at the ground and make comment on outstanding
matters. This inspection was undertaken by Station Officers ’
and        land comments made. Their comments were forwarded in writing
to the Chief Executive on 26th March, 1980.       These in turn were
forwarded to the Club on 31st March.

As the Assistant Chief Fire Officer responsible to the Chief Fire
Officer for the satisfaction of the statutory responsibilities of the
Fire Authority as delegated to the Chief Fire Officer I attended
necessary meetings and provided guidance and advice to officers under
my direction whenever required or requested.
I never considered that the provision of reasonable safety on the West
Terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield had not been provided
for and in saying this I was aware of the guidance given by the Guide
applicable at that time and the conditions applicable at this area of
the ground for which the County Fire Service had responsibilities, eg
means of egress.




H.B. Wright,
Chief Fire Officer.




Command Headquarters,
Wellington Street,
Sheffield SI 3FG

HEW/MS

26th May, 1989
                   LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


                              LONDON FIRE BRIGADE




                               FORMAL SUBMISSION


                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
                           CHAIRMAN OF THE INQUIRY
                         INTO THE EVENTS SURROUNDING


                      THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




FROM:




MR G. D. CLARKSON QFSM BA (HONS)
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE




                                                             JUNE 1989
INDEX

                                                                      PAGE

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS                                            1


1.      BACKGROUND                                                    2-3

1.1     (a)       From GLC to LFCDA
1.2     (b)       Technical Guidance


2.      INSPECTIONS MADE TO     SPORTS VENUES BY LFCDA                3-7

2.1     Inspections made in 1988
2.2     The Types of Inspections
2.2.1    (a)   During Performance Inspections
2.3     (b)    Specific Inspections
2.4     (c)    Annual Surveys


3.      SAFETY TEAMS                                                  7-8

3.1     (a)       The Past
3.2     (b)       The Present
3.3     (c)       The Future


4.      DIFFICULTIES BEING ENCOUNTERED BY LFCDA                       8-11

4.1      (a)      Means of Escape Provisions
4.2     (b)       Safety Versus Security
4.3     (c)       Indoor Sports Licences
4.4      (d)      Prohibition Notices - Section 10 of the
                   Sports Ground Act 1975.


5.      GENERAL                                                     11-13

5.1     (a)       Police Training
5.2     (b)       Steward Training
5.3     (c)       Access to Sports Grounds
5.4     (d)       Non-Designated Sports Ground


6.      CONCLUSIONS                                                   13-15


7.      RECOMMENDATIONS                                               15-16


APPENDIX A         List of Sports Grounds Visited by GLC 1985/6
APPENDIX B        Correspondence on Crystal Palace FC
APPENDIX C        Chief Officer's letter to Chief Executives of
                   London Boroughs
APPENDIX D         Correspondence with Home Office on Legislative
                    Inconsistencies
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

1.     That the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 be amended to include a
        provision for the establishment of safety teams.

2.     That the public safety aspects are considered alongside security
        provisions when eracting perimeter fences.

3.     That the provisions to issue a prohibition notice under section 10 of
        the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 be extended to include the fire
        and police authorities.

4.     That schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 be amended so that
        local authority has to consult the fire authority on fire safety when
        considering indoor sports licences and that the local authority have
        regard to observations submitted by the fire authority.

5.     That all sports stadia that have a capacity of 10,000 or more
        spectators should now be designated.

6.     Access arrangements for spectators and emergency vehicles should be
        such as to create a "sterile zone" around the ground.

7.     Police training should emphasise team work and in particular in
        emergency procedures that apply to the grounds attended.

8.     That attendances should be restricted where the standard of steward
        training is inadequate.
1.         BACKGROUND

1.1        (a)    From GLC to LFCDA

1 .1.1     The responsibility for the issue of a safety certificate for a
           designated sports ground within the meaning of the Safety of Sports
           Grounds Act 1975 rests with the local authority.

 .
1 1.2      Up until 1 April 1986 the Act defined the local authority in Greater
           London as being the Greater London Council (GLC).

1.1.3      Until that time, the Director Generals Department (DG) issued the
           certificate and was responsible for administering the Act with
           technical support from the Department of Architecture (AR/BR) and the
           London Fire Brigade (LFB).

1.1.4      AR/BR conducted surveys and laid down requirements on structural
           matters and on "means of escape".

1.1.5      AR/BR consulted the LFB on other fire safety matters for inclusion in
           the safety certificate. The term fire safety included: portable and
           fixed fire fighting equipment; fire warning systems and evacuation
           procedures; private hydrants within the ground and; access for
           emergency service vehicles.

 .
1 1.6      The LFB also carried out two "During Performance" inspectors per annum
           to monitor safety standards.

1.1.7      A joint annual survey was also carried out with AR/BR to ensure that
           the conditions of the safety certificate were still relevant and being
           complied with.

 .
1 1.8      From the 1 April 1986 the position changed. The term "local
           authority" was redefined within the Act to mean: "in Greater London,
           the London borough council or the Common Council of the City of
           London". This change was effected by paragraph 7(3)(a) of the
           Schedule 8 of the Local Government Act 1985.

1.1.9      On the same day, the GLC was abolished and its position as fire
           authority passed to a successor body, the London Fire and Civil
           Defence Authority (LFCDA).

           Paragraph 7(1) of schedule 8 to the Local Government Act 1985 amended
           section 3(3) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 so that the
           London borough was required to send the fire authority a copy of an
           application for a certificate and to consult them about the terms and
           conditions to be included in the certificate.

1 . 1.11   A fire authority was identified as an "interested party" who could
           appeal against the terms of a certificate.

1 . 1.12   Powers of entry and inspection were also extended to include a person
           authorised by the fire authority. The LFCDA have used these powers to
           continue making "during performance" inspections.

1.1.13     Further amendments were made to the Safety of Sports Grounds 1975 by
           the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.




                                          2.
1.1.14    By virtue of the 1987 Act the requirement for a general safety
          certificate was extended by the deletion of the term "sports ground"
          and its replacement by the term "sports stadia".

1.1.15    By virtue of the 1987 Act the local authority were granted the right
          to issue prohibition notices where a general or special safety
          certificate is in force and where it is considered that it is in the
          interest of public safety that it is necessary to prohibit or restrict
          the admission of spectators.

1.1.16    Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
          made a requirement for a special safety certificate for "regulated
          stands" with accommodation for 500 spectators or more. This provision
          came into force on 1 January 1989.

1.2       (b)    Technical Guidance

    .
1 2.1     Following the disaster at Ibrox Park in 1971 where 66 spectators died,
          Lord Wheatley issued his findings. His report contained a technical
          appendix. This appendix was extended to include fire precautions and
          means of escape from an emergency situation. It formed the basis of
          the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" which was published in 1973
          (this became known as the "Green Guide").

1 .2.2    Following the fire at Bradford City FC ground in 1985 where 56
          spectators died, Mr Justice Popplewell undertook an Inquiry. His
          final report was issued in January 1986 and incorporated the
          recommendations of a Working Group which considered the "Green
          Guide". As a result the "Green Guide" was reorganised and extended,
          "so as to reflect more closely the needs of its target audience"
          (published in 1986).

2   .     INSPECTIONS MADE TO SPORTS VENUES BY LFCDA

2.1       Inspections Made in 1988 by Officers of the LFCDA

2 .1.1    Wembley Stadium
          London Borough of Brent
          During Performance Inspections           20
          Specifics                                69
          Comment:- All major events at this venue are made subject to DPs
          "specifics" include visits to review building works being carried out
          or to review arrangements for pop concerts etc.

2 . 1.2   Twickenham RFU
          London Borough of Richmond
          During Performance Inspections           9
          Specifics                                6
          Comment:- A major rebuild is just underway.

 2.1.3    Lords Cricket Ground
          London Borough of Westminster
          During Performance Inspections               4
          Specifics                                 10

 2.1.4     The Oval
           London Borough of Lambeth
           During Performance Inspections              3
           Specifics                                11



                                            3.
          Arsenal FC
          London Borough of Islington
          During Performance Inspections
          Specifics

2 . 1.6   Barnet FC
          London Borough of Barnet
          During Performance Inspections
          Specifics

2.1.7     Brentford FC
          London Borough of Hounslow
          During Performance Inspections
          Specifics
          Comment:-

 .
2 1.8     Crystal Palace FC
          London Borough of Croydon
          During Performance Inspections
          Specifics
          Comment:- Charlton Athletic FC have been

2.1.9     Chelsea FC
          London Borough of Hammersmith
          During Performance Inspections
          Specifics

2 .1.10   Dulwich Hamlet FC
          London Borough of Southwark
          During Performance Inspections
          Specifics

2 .1.11   Fulham FC
          London Borough of Hammersmith
          During Performance Inspections
          Specifics

2 .1.12   Leyton Orient FC
          London Borough of Waltham Forest
          During Performance Inspections
          Specifics

2.1.13    Millwall FC
          London Borough of Lewisham
          During Performance Inspections
          Specifics

2.1.14    Queens Park Rangers FC
          London Borough of Hammersmith
          During Performance Inspections
          Specifics

 2.1.15   Southall FC
          London Borough of Ealing
          During Performance Inspections
          Specifics
2.1.16   Sutton Utd FC
         London Borough of Sutton
         During Performance Inspections           2
         Specifics                                0

2.1.17   Tooting and Mitcham FC
         London Borough of Merton
         During Performance Inspections           0
         Specifics                                3

2.1.18   Tottenham Hotspur FC
         London Borough of Haringey
         During Performance Inspections           5
         Specifics                               24

2.1.19   West Ham Utd FC
         London Borough of Newham
         During Performance Inspections           4
         Specifics                               10

2.1.20   Wimbledon FC
         London Borough of Merton
         During Performance Inspections           8
         Specifics                                7

2.2      The Types of Inspections

2.2.1    (a)    During Performance Inspections

         The purpose of these inspections is to ensure that the terms and
         conditions of a safety certificate  relatingto firesafety are  being
         complied with at times when the certificate is inforce andspectators
         present.

2.2.2    This inspection includes a check of all exit gates to ensure that they
         are either open or immediately openable. Means of escape routes are
         checked to ensure that they are readily available in the event of fire
         and that they are unobstructed, and that all emergency communications
         are working.

2.2.3    The opportunity is taken to ensure that stewards and staff are aware
         of the evacuation procedures and the fire warning systems and their
         use.

2.2.4    Staff and stewards are also questioned at random to determine whether
         they are aware of their responsibilities and duties in the event of
         fire.

2.2.5    In the case of League football grounds, four during performance
         inspections are programmed for each season. Two of these will be made
         to matches that take place in daylight hours and the other two during
         evening matches.

 2.2.6   In the case of Wembley Stadium and Twickenham RFUC, During Performance
         Inspections are made to every major soccer or rugby match.

 2.2.7   In the case of Lords and The Oval Cricket Grounds a During Performance
         Inspection is made to each test match. Additional inspections are
         made to the one day internationals and in the case of Lords to one day
          cup finals.
2.2.8    During Performance Inspections are made to non-league football clubs
         that are hosting major FA cup tie and where large numbers of
         spectators are expected.

2.2.9    Over the past two seasons Sutton United have produced good results in
         the early rounds of the FA Cup, and progressed to the stage where they
         have drawn large well known football league clubs. Problems have been
         experienced with the Local Authority who have allowed an increase in
         ground capacity without consultation. Also no action or advice was
         sought from the Brigade to improve the emergency procedures which
         catered under normal conditions for an attendance of approximately
         1500 spectators.

2.2.10   During Performance Inspections are made as deemed appropriate to major
         sports venues and events that are exempt from a requirement to hold a
         safety certificate.

2.2.11   The All England Tennis Championships held at Wimbledon for instance
         together with the major Greyhound stadia are subject to such
         inspections.

2.3      (b)    Specific Inspections

2.3.1    Some of the sporting venues also hold a special safety certificate or
         apply for occasional licences to hold events such as pop concerts or
         major boxing promotions. In these cases specific inspections will
         include both meetings prior to the events to determine the adequacy of
         proposed fire safety arrangements and an inspection whilst the event
         is in progress.

         This is a common procedure for Wembley Stadium who apply for at least
         12 occassional licences during the summer for "pop concerts".

         Other venues who have applied and where events have taken place are:

         (a)    Tottenham Hotspur FC
         (b)    West Ham FC
         (c)    Queen Park Rangers FC
         (d)    Crystal Palace FC

2.3.2    This inspection will include those elements outlined in paragraphs
         2.2.2 to 2.2.4 above and will additionally involve an examination of
         any matter arising from the event that are considered to have fire
         safety implications.

2.4       (c)   Annual Surveys

2.4.1    An annual survey is conducted each year to check that the terms and
         conditions of the safety certificate are still relevant and that they
         are being complied with.

2.4.2    Whenever possible this is done on a joint basis between
         representatives of the local authority; the fire authority; and police
         authority which collectively makes up the "Safety Team" (more fully
         discussed in section 3 below).
2.4.3   In any event the annual survey to football clubs is completed at an
         early stage in the calendar year. This is because clubs can apply to
         the Football Trust for financial assistance towards repairs or works
         required to improve public safety. Therefore it affords the
         opportunity of such work being completed by the beginning of the next
         season.

3.      SAFETY TEAMS

3.1     (a)   The Past

3.1.1   Up until 1 April 1986 the issue of a safety certificate was the
         responsibility of the GLC.

3.1.2   Within that organisation DGs were responsible for issuing such a
         certificate and were responsible for administering the act.

3.1.3   AR/BR conducted surveys and laid down requirements on structural
        matters and on "means of escape" provisions.

3.1.4   AR/BR consulted the LFB on other fire safety matters for inclusion in
        the safety certificate.

3.1.5   Since all three    departments involved were part of the GLC it meant
         that there was   a reasonably close working relationship and that on
        many occasions    joint visits were carried out by AR/BR and the LFB to
         either, review   proposals made, or to seek solutions to problems
         encountered.

3.1.6   Immediately following the Bradford fire in 1985 the GLC carried out a
        detailed review of all sports grounds (see attached appendix "A").
         For this purpose representatives of the three departments formed a
         "safety team" under the chairmanship of the DGs.

3.1.7   The safety team visited sports grounds, including many that were not
         subject to designation at that time.

3.1.8   In addition the LFB identified all venues through out the GLC area
         that had a stand. These were individually surveyed and the
         owners/occupiers issued with recommendations on measures to adopt to
         bring them up to an acceptable level of fire safety.

3.2     (b)    The Present

3.2.1   After the 1 April 1986, in recognition of the new responsibilities and
         roles of both the LFCDA and London boroughs, the LFCDA wrote to all
         those boroughs with designated sports grounds.

3.2.2   It was suggested that the most appropriate way of fulfilling the
         responsibilities placed on each authority was to set up "safety teams"
         comprising; representatives of the borough in which the designated
         sports ground was situated; the fire authority; and the police.

3.2.3   There were some difficulties in getting all the sixteen boroughs
         involved to agree to this format but the concept of the safety team is
         now operating in each of them.




                                          7.
3.3     (c)    The Future

3.3.1   The LFCDA are convinced that within the existing framework of
         legislation that the "Safety Team" is the best way forward.

3.3.2   In offering guidance, the Home Office recommended the setting up    of
         "safety teams" to local authorities.

3.3.3   However the LFCDA believe that in light of its experience that safety
         teams should be a requirement under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
         1975 and that it should include both the constitution of such teams
         and terms of reference.

3.3.4   In the present informal setting of safety teams, officers of the LFCDA
        have experienced difficulties (as outlined in following sections 4 and
        5) but it has been concluded that without them matters would be far
        less satisfactory.

4.      DIFFICULTIES BEING ENCOUNTERED BY THE LFCDA

        (a)    Means of Escape Provisions

4.1.1   Prior to the abolition, the GLC as the fireauthority   chose to
        discharge matters relating to means of escape atdesignated sports
        grounds through the Department of Architecture (AR/BR).

4.1.2   This not only included the structural fire resistance of elements used
         in such routes used for means of escape but included those provisions
         dealing with how persons should make their escape in the event of a
         fire.

4.1.3   However as from 1 April 1986 the LFCDA became the fire authority and
         the London boroughs were required to consult the LFCDA about terms and
         conditions to be included in the certificate (section 3(3) of the
         Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975).

4.1.4   London boroughs.have consulted on most aspects of fire safety but
         invariably will not seek comment on means of escape provisions.

4.1.5   One possible reason is that many former employees of the AR/BR carry
         out similar functions for the London boroughs and have continued to
        make independent decisions on means of escape provisions as if they
        were still acting as members of the fire authority.

4.1.6   This attitude also prevails at safety team meetings and on several
        occasions the fire authority representative has had to point out
         inadequacies of means of escape provisions that have been solely
        decided by the local authority.

4.1.7   Examples of where this has occurred are listed as follows:

        (a)    Wembley Stadium:- Major refurbishment and building alterations
               taking place, with additional seating being installed.

               London Borough of Brent - did not consult with the Brigade on
               the alteration to means of escape within the stadium.




                                       8.
(b)   Twickenham:- Existing west stand, the Brigade have pointed out
      that the means of escape is inadequate from the upper tier of
      this stand at both north and south ends.

      London Borough of Richmond upon Thames - have not reacted to
      these comments and the situation still prevails.

(c)   Millwall FC:- The Brigade were not involved in any discussion
      with the Club or the London Borough of Lewisham on the erection
      of pitch perimeter fencing or crowd segregation barriers.
      Whilst carrying out a pre-season inspection the Brigade pointed
      out to the local authority that pass gates had not been
      provided in either the perimeter fencing or segregation
      barriers.

(d)   Crystal Palace FC:- The Police have approached the club direct
      and have written to them stating that they wish to alter ground
      segregation, and also change the evacuation procedure without
       consultation with either the local authority or Brigade.
       Correspondence attached as Appendix B shows police
       recommendations on perimeter fencing, evacuation procedures etc.

(e)   It should also be noted that recently    the London Borough of
       Newham who have always consulted the   Brigade on means of
       escape, have chosen to disregard the   Brigade's observations on
       this sujbect in the refurbishment of   West Ham FC west stand.

As a direct consequence the Chief Officer and Chief Executive of the
LFCDA has had to write to his counterparts in the relevant London
Boroughs (all sixteen in fact) explaining that as the fire authority
consultation on fire safety must include reference to means of escape
provisions. A copy is attached as Appendix C.

It was added that if the situation was not rectified immediately that,
in those circumstances where means of escape provisions were
considered by the fire authority to be inadequate or inappropriate,
that as an identified "interested" party that an appeal would be made
to the Secretary of State (section 5 (3)(i) and (ii) of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975).

At this early stage it is not known whether the action outlined above
has brought the necessary results.

(b)    Safety Versus Security

This issue is encountered right across the spectrum of fire safety.
However it comes into particularly sharp focus in public safety
considerations at designated sports grounds.

The LFCDA recognise that due to difficulties experienced in crowd
control that it may prove necessary to introduce security measures
designed to keep spectators within allotted areas to separate them
from rival fans or prevent them from gaining access to the pitch.

At present within the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" Chapter 8;
Clause 101 gives guidance on ground segregation to prevent potential
hazardous migration by spectators.

Many of the clubs in London have erected crowd segregation barriers at
the request of the Police, again without consultation with the
Brigade, and as indicated in 4.1.7(c) without emergency egress.
4.2.4   In the event of a fire it would be normal to consider that proper
         means of escape are provided at the rear of the stands or standing
         enclosures. However sight should not be lost of the fact that in a
         fire situation spectators may decide that the pitch is a wide open
         space in which to seek refuge.

4.2.5   The erection of perimeter fei.ces should take into account public
         safety with a view to both security and arrangements that allow egress
         through the perimeter fence in an emergency.

4.2.6   The erection of perimeter fences at sports grounds in London has been
        at the instigation of the police and/or the club concerned. However
        in no case has the fire authority been consulted on the aspects which
        might compromise other elements of public safety.

4.2.7   Indeed in some cases the police have approached the club direct and
         requested these fences without making any reference to the local
         authority whatsoever.

4.3     (c)    Indoor Sports Licences

4.3.1   Section 42 of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
         amended Schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 so that indoor
         sports events are subject to licensing.

4.3.2   There is a duty for an applicant to notify the fire authority of his
        intention to apply for such a licence.

4.3.3   Schedule 12 to the '63 Act applies to other entertainments licences as
        well and in that respect it has been very rare for applicants to
        fulfil this obligation and therefore it is not unreasonable to assume
        that a similar circumstance will exist in respect of indoor sports
        licences.

4.3.4   There is not requirement for the local authority to consult the fire
         authority and therefore no requirement for the local authority to have
         regard to any observations submitted by the fire authority.

4.3.5   The LFCDA finds itself in an anomalous position since all other local
         authorities in the remainder of England and Wales are duty bound to
         consult the fire authority and to have regard to any observations
         submitted by the fire authority. These requirements are laid down in
         Schedule 1 to the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1972.

4.3.6   Since Schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 is the prime
         source for licensing places of public entertainment in London it
         follows that the remarks on absence of legislative requirements for
         the local authority to consult on indoor sports licences is only a
         small part of a far wider problem.

4.3.7   The LFCDA have already brought this matter to the attention of the
         Home Office and previous correspondence is attached as Appendix D.
         However it is anticipated that another approach will be made in the
         very near future following the results of a review of the LFCDAs role
         in entertainments licensing.

4.3.8   Nevertheless it is important that this be brought to the attention of
         the Inquiry for its consideration.




                                        10.
4 *4    Cd)    Prohibition Notices - Section 10 of the Safety of Sports
               Grounds Act 1975

4.4.1   Section 10 of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 provides powers to
        the local authority to prohibit or restrict the admission of
        spectators to the whole or parts of a sports ground in circumstances
        where it is considered that such admission will pose a serious risk to
        spectators safety.

4.4.2   However most sporting events of the type take place at the weekends or
        evenings. From a point of view of officers of a local authority such
        times represent "out of office" hours and therefore they will not
        necessarily be in attendance.

4.4.3   It has been established that an officer of the fire authority may    take
        action under section 10 of the fire precautions act 1971 but only    in
        those circumstances where fire safety may be compromised.

4.4.4   It has been further established by the Home Office that this may only
        be done in those circumstances where immediate action cannot be taken
        under section 10 of the Sports Ground Act 1975 due to the
        unavailability of the local authority.

4.4.5   It is therefore considered appropriate to amend Section 10 to the
        Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, so that in circumstances where
        there is no officer available from the local authority, that the
        senior police or fire officer present is granted similar powers of
        prohibition and thereby safeguard public safety.

5.      GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

5.1     (a)   Police Training

5.1.1   A policeman's status has been defined by the Courts as that of an
        officer whose authority is original, not delegated, and is exercised
        at his own discretion by virtue of his office.

5.1.2   Police officers receive the benefit of training designed to improve
        their efficiency in a "team" situation. However police officers
        operate as individuals in much of their work and only come together as
        "teams" at large scale events such as football matches. Further,
        their training is concerned with the maintenance of public order
        rather than assisting in means of escape and safety matters generally.

5.1.3   Their main priority at such events is to ensure public order and
        therefore in pursuit of this objective they may overlook implications
        for public safety caused by serious congestion.

5.1.4   It is known, for example, that a police exercise was held at Wembley
        Stadium but this was solely concerned with reviewing police reactions
         in a public disorder situation.

5.1.5   Section 2 (2A) of the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 makes it clear
        that the provision of police officers at a ground is for the
        determination of the Chief Officer of Police.

5.1.6   However there is usually a police presence at football grounds and in
        light of the comments above it would seem appropriate that they
        receive training which would make them more aware of public safety
        factors.


                                      11.
5.1.7   Such training should include an understanding of the emergency
        evacuation procedures and where perimeter fences are installed the
        methods and procedures for the opening of gates in the fence.

5.2     (b)    Steward Training

5.2.1   The responsibility for all aspects of steward training rests with the
        management of designated sports grounds.

5.2.2   However over a period of time the LFCDA has undertaken extensive
        training of these stewards in fire and public safety. The training
        sessions normally last about 4 hours and includes; responsibilities in
        the event of an emergency; emergency evacuation procedures for that
        particular venue and; operating fire extinguishers.

5.2.3   However there is a rapid turnover in stewards and therefore aconstant
        need for re-training.

5.2.4   Such training has both a financial and staffing implications for the
        LFCDA since it is a service which is provided free of cost.

5.2.5   It would therefore seem appropriate to make it a requirement for such
        clubs to provide such training at their expense and a requirement that
        a steward has undergone such training prior to employment in that
        capacity.

5.3     Access to Sports Grounds

5.3.1   Most sports stadia have been in existence for some time. They   were
         built, in the main in urban areas and with restricted access by roads
         running around the perimeter.

5.3.2   It has resulted in serious congestion around most grounds and the lack
        of a 'sterile zone' where spectators can move prior to entry to the
        ground.

5.3.3   The restrictions also impede the movement of emergency vehicles in the
        event of an emergency.

5.3.4   Therefore unless some positive action can be taken to overcome these
        difficulties it is envisaged that these problems will constitute a
        continuing threat to public safety.

5.3.5   However it is noteworthy that congestion does occur at other venues
        such as Twickenham, Lords, The Oval and Wimbledon but has never led to
        any major problems in spectators waiting for admission.

5.3.6   This is partly due to many spectators arriving early but is probably
         equally due to the attitude of these spectators.

5.3.7   Nevertheless the manner of admitting spectators to a ground should be
         subject to some form of "systems procedure" designed to both speed up
         and control their entry to different parts of the ground.

5.3.8   It is noticeable that since Hillsborough that greater flexibility has
        been shown by the willingness to delay the "kick-off" times at
        football matches to assist such admissions to grounds. In some
        circumstances it may be the only option to counteract the shortcomings
        in access arrangements.




                                       12.
5 «4    Non-Designated Sports Grounds

5.4.1   At present the only sports grounds that have been designated are the
        major football and rugby grounds.

5.4.2   However there are many major sports stadia that are exempted from the
        requirement of a safety certificate.

5.4.3   An obvious example is Wimbledon Lawn Tennis Club. Atpresent    it is
        dealt with on the basis of forming a series of"regulatedstands".
        However such an approach does not take account of their interlinking
        by common enclosed walkways and access points between courts.

5.4.4   In such cases it is believed that designation and the provision of a
        safety certificate offers both the best method for ensuring public
        safety and for imposing managerial responsibilities.

6.      CONCLUSIONS

6.1     Safety Teams

6.1.1   It is considered that concept of the "safety team” represents the most
        sensible forum for setting public safety standards at designated
        sports grounds.

6.1.2   As an approach it allows fuller consideration of the "safety versus
        security" issue that underlies public safety discussions.

6.1.3   At present, safety teams have no basis in law and as such owe their
        existence to informal local initiatives.

6.1.4   It would therefore seem appropriate for an amendment to existing
        legislation which would require that the local authority set up a
        safety team so that a properly balanced judgements can be made on
        issues surrounding public safety.

6.2     Perimeter Fences

6.2.1   Perimeter fences are required by FIFA for matches falling within their
        control.

6.2.2   For security reasons they have become a feature at many grounds.
        However, in the LFCDAs experience, there are instances where such
        fences have been erected as a result of a directive by police to the
        club.

6.2.3   Therefore the difficulties that such fences can pose to safety of
         spectators in the event of overcrowding is not given proper
         consideration.

6.3.4   It is in precisely this sort of matter that the joint decisions of the
        safety team can offer a constructive solution.

6.3     Prohibition Notices

6.3.1   The issue of a prohibition notice under section 10 of the Safety of
         Sports Grounds Act 1975 is the exclusive preserve of officers of the
         local authority.




                                        13.
6.3.2   However these officers may not be in attendance because most sporting
        events take place at weekends or in the evenings.

6.3.3   The fire authority have limited powers under section 10 of the Fire
        Precautions Act 1971 and can only take action in those matters
        relating to fire safety.

6.3.4   The police too have power limited to dealing with disorder offences.

6.3.5   In order to ensure that public safety is given the utmost priority it
        would be sensible to extend the powers of prohibition under section 10
        of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 to officers of either the fire
        or police authority in the absence of the local authority.

6.4     Indoor Sports Licences

6.4.1   At present there is no requirement under schedule 12 of the London
        Government Act 1963 for a local authority to consult the fire
         authority.

6.4.2   Neither, therefore, is there a requirement for the local authority to
        have regard to any observations submitted by the fire authority.

6.4.3   This situation only applies to the LFCDA since in the remainder of
         England and Wales proper consultation is required under the local
         Government (miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1972.

6.4.4   It would seem appropriate for this anomaly to be removed.

6.5     Non-Designated Sports Stadia

6.5.1   There are sports stadia that regularly receive attendance of 10,000
         spectators or more but are not made subject to designation.

6.5.2   In these cases they are dealt with as a series of regulated stands.

6.5.3   However such stands may be interconnected and by treating the stands
         in isolation may not allow the opportunity for a comprehensive
         overview of public safety.

6.6     Access to Sports Stadia

6.6.1   Many sports stadia are situated in urban areas on sites bounded by
         narrow roads.

6.6.2   This can lead to severe congestion for spectators and severe
         restriction for emergency vehicles in the event of an emergency.

6.6.3   In such circumstances policing arrangements are of paramount
         importance and should concentrate on establishing these roads as a
         "sterile zone".

6.7     Police Training

6.7.1   Police officers are conditioned to their "original and independant"
         status and are therefore more used to acting on an individual basis.

6.7.2   However in an emergency situation at a sports ground the accent will
         be on team work.



                                       14.
6.7.3   Therefore police training should incorporate this feature and officers
         should be made familiar with the emergency procedures that exist for
         that sports ground.

6.8     Steward Training

6.8.1   Stewards are a key element in public safety in the event of an
        emergency.

6.8.2   However there is a rapid turnover of stewards at most sports grounds
        and therefore the training need may not keep up with demand.

6.8.3   Therefore many stewards will be ill-prepared for the duties imposed by
        an emergency situation.

6.8.4   If a club cannot demonstrate that its stewards are properly trained
         then attendance to those grounds should be restricted to the ratio of
        properly trained stewards.

7.      RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1     Safety Teams

7.1.1   That an amendment be made to the Act which would require a local
         authority to set up a "safety team" to review aspects of public safety
         that fall within the considerations of a safety certificate.

7.1.2   That the composition of a safety team should be prescribed in the Act
         and should include representatives of the emergency services.

7.2     Perimeter Fences

7.2.1   That in those circumstances where the erection a perimeter fence is
         considered, that it should only be installed when it can be
         demonstrated that other facets of public safety have been satisfied.

7.3     Prohibition Notices

7.3.1   That the power to issue a prohibition notice under section 10 of the
         Act be extended to include representatives of the fire or police
         authority in the absence of the local authority.

7.4     Indoor Sports Licences

7.4.1   That schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 be amended so that
         the local authority are required to consult the fire authority.

7.4.2   That schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 be amended so that
         the local authority shall have regard to any observations submitted by
         the fire authority.

7.5     Non-Designated Sports Stadia

7.5.1   That all sports stadia that have the capacity to hold 10,000
         spectators or more should now be subject to designation.
    7.6     Access to Sports Stadia

    7.6.1   In existing sports stadia, with either inadequate access arrangements
            for spectator entrance to the ground or severe restrictions for
            emergency vehicle movements, policing arrangements should be directed
            to making the surrounding roads a "sterile zone".

    7.7     Police Training

    7.7.1   Greater emphasis should be placed on the team work aspect of policing
            at sports grounds.

    7.7.2   Police who attend sports grounds should be thoroughly conversant with
            the emergency procedures for those grounds.

    7 .8    Steward Training

    7.8.1   If a club cannot demonstrate thatits stewards  are properly trained,
             then this should be reflectedin the placement of restrictions on the
            number of spectators based on a direct ratio to the number of fully


•
             trained stewards.




                                          16.
          SSG     IN   NUMERICAL          ORDER                                                        APPENDIX A


1    WEMBLEY S T A D I U M .         EMPIRE        WAY.     BRENT
2    WEST    HAM       F.C..      UPTON       PARK.       E13     NEWHAM
3    TWICKENHAM           R.F.C..        WHIT TON        ROAD.       RICHMOND
a.   Q U EENS PARK           RANGERS        F . C . . SOUTH       A F R I C A R OA D.     W 1 2 HAMMERSMITH
5    ARSENAL         F.C..       AVENALL       ROAD.        N5     ISLINGTON
S    TOTTENHAM          HOTSPURS         F.C..       HIGH    R D . T OT T E N H A M .    N 1 5 HA RI N G E Y
7    CHELSEA         F.C..       STAMFORD BRIDGE             GROUNDS.            SW 6 HAMMERSMITH
8    CHARLTON          F .C ..    FLOYD       ROAD.       SE7     GR E E NW IC H
3    CRYSTAL        PALACE        F.C..     SELHURST            PARK.     S E 2 5 CROYDON
10   FULHAM         F.C. .    STEVENAGE            ROAD.     SW6      HAMMERSMITH
11   LEYTON O R I E N T F . C . . B R I S B A N E R O A D . £ 1 0 WALTHAM F O R E S T
12   MILLWA LL F . C . . C O l D B L O W L A N E . S E 1 4 LEWISHAM
13   BRENTFORD          F.C. .      BR OO K    ROAD.        HOUNSLOW
14   WIMB LED ON        F.C..       DURNSFORD           ROAD.       S U / 1 9 MERTON
15   TERENCE         McM lLLAN       STADIUM.           PRIN CE     REGENT        LANE.     E13   NEWHAM
16   THE O V A L .      KENNINGTON            OVAL.       SE11     LAMBETH
17   LORDS CRICKET G R O U N D .               ST.      JOHNS      W OO D .   NWS W ES TM IN STE R
18   ALL E N G L A N D       TEN NIS C LU B .        CHU RC H      ROAD.      S W 1 9 MERTON
19   THE O U E E N S     CLUB.       PALLISER           ROAD.      W 1 4 HAMMERSMITH
20   DULWICH HAM LET F . C . . DOG                   K E N N E L H I L L . S E 2 2 SOUTHWARK
21   WIMB LED ON I D O G ) S T A D I U M .           P L O U G H L A N E . S W 1 7 MERTON
22   CRYSTAL        PALACE        RECREATION            GROUND.        CRY S TA L P A LA CE PA R K         RO A D
23   HARRINGAY          I DOG J S T A D I U M .      GREEN        LANES.      N 4 HARINGEY
24   WALTH AMS TO W           I DOG I S T A D I U M .     CHINGFORD ROAD.               E 4 WALTHAM F O R E S T
25   W AL THAMSTOW A V E N U E            F.C..         PRIORY      COURT.       E 1 7 WALTHAM F O R E S T
26   D A GE NH AM      F.C..      VICTORIA         ROAD.        BARKING
27   HAYES ST A D IU M .         JUDGE      H E AT H     LANE.      H I L L IN GD O N
26   LO N D O N W E L S H      R.F.C..        OLD DEER          PARK.      RICHMOND
29   RI CHM OND R . F . C . .        O L D D E E R PARK.l ATHL ETI C G R O U N D ) .              RICHMOND
30   RO M F O R D S T A D I U M .    LONDON R O A D . HAVERING
31   CATFORD         I DOG)      STADIUM.       ADENMORE            ROAD.     SE6       LEWISHAM
32   ERITH A N D B E L V E D E R E        F.C..         LO W ER    ROAD.      BEXLEY
33   HORNCHURCH             F.C..     BRIDGE        AVENUE.         HA V E RI N G
34   WELLING        UNITED       F,C..     PARK        V IE W R O A D .    BEXLEY
35   S T . B A R T H O L E M E W S R . F . C . . P E R R Y S T R E E T . C H I S L E H L 'R S T . BEXLEY
36   FULHAM RU G B Y L E A G U E C L U B . C H I S W I C K . HO UNS LO W
37   CARSHALTON             F . C . (.WAR M E M O R I A L    G R O U N D ).      C O L ST ON   AVENUE.         SUTTON
38   W EST L O N D O N       STADIUM.         DU     CANE    ROAD.        W 1 2 HAMMERSMITH
39   CHELSEA         SPORTS       CENTRE.          CHELSEA        MANOR ST R E E T .       SW3 KENSINGTON           ____
40   ENFIELD        F.C..      SOUTHBURY           ROAD.        ENFIELD
41   FINCHLEY F . C . . SU M M E R S L A N E . N 1 2 BARNET (.see SSG 8 5                            for   Ruabv    C lubJ
42   BARNET F . C . . WESTCOMBE D R IV E , BARN ET
43   WEALDSTONE             F.C..     STATION        ROAD.        HA RRO W
44   SU T T O N     F.C..     GANDER       GREEN         LANE.      SU T T O N
45   TOOTING        & MITCHUM          F.C..       SANDY        LANE.     MERTON
     CR O Y D O N    F.C..       A L B E R T R O A D . S E 2 5 S O U T H NORWOOD
     BR OM LE Y      F.C..       H A Y E S L A N E . B R OM LE Y
     LEYTONSTONE             F.C..     CRAN LElGH           ROAD.      E 1 0 WALTHAM F O R E S T
     ROSSLYN         PARK      R.F.C..        UPPER       R IC H M O N D R O A D .      S W 1 5 WANDSWORTH
SSG   5C     HACKNEY S T A D I U M .          WATERDEN        ROAD.       E15      HACKNEY
SSG   51     BLACKHEATH          R .F.C ..         CHARLTON        ROAD.       SE3      GREENWICH
SSG   52     w'OODFORD TOW N               F.C. .    265    SNAKES        LANE.       REDBRIDGE
SSG   53     HARLEQUINS          R.F.C..           STOOP     MEMORIAL G R O U N D .             TWICK.     RICHMOND
SSG   54     BANK O F E N G L A N D S S P O R T S G R O U N D . P R I O R Y L A N E . WANDSWORTH
SSG   55     HAMPTON F . C . . O F F S T A T I O N R O A D . H A M P T O N .    RICHMOND
SSG   56     KINGSTONIAN           F.C..        BURTON      ROAD/RICHM OND               ROAD.         KIN GST ON
SSG   57     FISHER      ATHLETIC          F . C . . 1 MELLISH      PARKJ.         SALTER       ROAD . S E 1 6 .    SOUTH WA RK
SSG   58     HA RI N G E Y 8 0 R 0 U G H        F.C..WHITE         HART      LANE.       N17        HARINGEY
SSG   59     OLD D A G E N H A M         PARK     F.C. .    SIVITER       WAY.       DA GE NH AM .       BARKING
SSG   60     NEW R I V E R S P O R T S C E N T R E . WHITE HA RT L A N E .                      N17     HARIN GE Y
SSG   61     B AR K IN G F . C . . L O D G E A V E N U E . B A R K I N G
SSG   62     MAYSBROOK          PARK        ARENA.      LODGE A V E N U E .          BA RK ING
SSG   63     EAST HAM U N I T E D F . C . . E A S T HAM M A N O R W A Y .                       E6      NEWHAM
SSG   64     C L A PT O N F . C . . U P T O N L A N E . E 7 NEWHAM
SSG. 6 5     HARROW F . C . .            EA R LSM E A D /C A R LY O N     AVENUE.         HARROW
SSG   66     LEYTON W I N G A T E .          LEA    BRIDGE     ROAD.         E17    WALTHAM F O R E S T
SSG   67     HAREFIELD         UNITED        F.C..     8REAKSPEARE              ROAD.      HILLINGDON
SSG   68     WIMBLEDON          PARK       SPORTS      CENTRE.        HOME P A R K A V E N U E .           SW19         MERT ON
SSG   63     HERNfc HI L L       STAD IUM .         8URRAGE        ROAD.       SE24       SOUTHWARK
SSG   70     KIN GS L E Y     T OW N      F.C..     TOWNSEND          ROAD.        NW9     BR E NT
SSG   71     SO UT HAL L       F.C..       WESTERN         ROAD.      SOUTHALL.            EALING
SSG   72     EDGWARE F . C . .            DEANSSROOK          ROAD.       BARNET
SSG   73     WASPS R . F . C . .          HEATON      AVENUE.         BRENT
SSG   74     HURL ING HAM         PARK       SPORTS        STADIUM .      BROOMHOUSE ROAD.                  SWS HA M M E RS M IT H
SSG 7 5      WEMBLEY F . C . . W A T F O R D R O A D l V A L E F A R M S P O R T S C E N T R E ) . B R E N T
SSG 7 6      R A Y N E R S L A N E F . C . . R A Y N E R S L A N E . HA RR OW
SSG   77     HE NO ON       F.C. .       CLAREMONT         ROAD.      NW2         BARNET
SSG   78     UX SR lO G E     F.C..        HORTON      ROAD.       HILLINGDON
SSG 7 9      STREATHAM 8t CROYDON R . F . C . .                     1 5 9 BRIGSTOCK ROAO. CROYDON
SSG   80     NORTHWOOO F . C . .              CHESTNUT       AVENUE          R E C .G R O U N D .     HI LL ING DO N
SSG   81     OSTERLEY          R . F . C . .TENTELON         AVENUE.          SOUTHALL.          EALING
SSG 8 2      HOUNSLOW F . C . . D E N B I G H          ROAD.        HOUNSLOW
SSG 8 3      SARACENS          R.F.C..GREEN             R O A D .C H A S E     SID E.    N14.         ENFIELD
SSG   84     OLD L Y O N I O N S F . C .         PIN NER     VIEW .     HA RR OW
SSG 8 5      F IN C H L E Y   RUGBY        F .C ..S U M M E R S     LANE . N 1 2 .BARNET I s e e          ssa      41    for   F.C.)
SSG 8 6      LOND ON H O S P I T A L         R.F.C..       WADHAM R O A D .           WALTHAM F O R E S T
SSG   87     RAINHAM          TOWN       R.F.C..      W ENNINGTON            ROAD.       RAINHAM . HAVERING
SSG 8 8      FORDS U N ITE D           F.C ..      RUSH GREEN          ROAD.        ROMFORD.           HA VE RI NG
SSG 8 3      QU EE N     ELIZABETH           SPORTS CENTRE.             G R E A T CAMBRIDGE R O A D .               ENFIELD
SSG   90     CRlCKLEFIELD            ATHLETIC        FIELD.       GREEN       LANES.       IL FORD
SSG   91     C Q P TH AL L S P O R T S       C EN TR E.G R EA T       NORTH WAY/ASHLEY A V E N U E .N W 4                       BARNET
SSG   92     WILLESDON          ATHLETIC          STADIUM.        ALL SO U L S       AVENUE.           NW10        BRENT
SSG   93     GUY S H O S P I T A L        R .F.C..    8ROCKLEY          R ISE .     S.E.23.          LEWISHAM
SSG   94     MIDDLESEX H O S P I T A L            R.F.C..      PERRY      STREET.         C H I S L E H U R S T . BE XL EY
SSG   95      Si D C U P R . F . C . .     CRESCENT        FARM.       SID CUP.       BEXLEY
SSG   96     FELTHAM R . F . C . .           PARK     ROAD.        HA NW OR TH P A R K .         HOUNSLOW
SSG   97      STAINES         R.F.U. .       FELTHAM        HILL    ROAD.       HOUNSLOW
SSG   98     C.A.V.         SPORTS        GROUND.       R utSL IP     ROAD.        NORTHOLT.           HIL L IN GD O N
SSG   99      HENDON R . F . C . . G R E A T N O R T H W A Y . C O P T H A L L PLA Y IN G F I E L D S . B A R N E T
SSG   100     P O L Y T E C H N I C S P O R T S G R O U N D . H A R T I N G T O N R O A D . W4 HO UN SL O W
SSG    101    EAST     LONDON          STAOIUM .      COPPERFIELD            ROAD.       E1     TOWER HAMLETS
SSG    102    BARRAS STA D IU M .             HOUNDSFIELD ROA D.                EDMONTON.              ENFIELD
SSG    1 0 3 HAYES F . C . .         CHURCH         ROAD.     HAYES.       H IL L I N G D O N
SSG    104    FELTHAM F . C . .           SHAKESPEARE          AVENUE.          FELTHAM.            HOUNSLOW.
SSG    105    RUISLIP         MANOR       F.C..      GROSVENOR          VALE.        RUISLIP.         HILLINGDON.
SSG    1 0 6 RUISLIP F . C . .           BREAKSPEARE          ROAD.       HILLINGDO N.
SSG    107    PROPOSED         MU LTI       PURPOSE        STADIUM.       W A N D L E VA LL E Y S O U T H .             ME RT ON
                                                                                                                  APPENDIX A
                     SSG    IN    NUMERICAL          ORDER



SSG    1         WEMBLEY S T A D I U M .         E M P I R E WAY . B R E N T
SSG    2         WEST   HAM F . C . .       UPTON      PARK.       E13    NEW/HAM
SSG    3         TWICKENHAM         R.F.C..         WHITTON       ROAD.      R IC HM OND
SSG    4         QU EENS PARK            RANGERS       F . C . . SOUTH AFRICA            ROAD.     W12     HAMMERSMITH
SSG 5            A R S E N A L F . C . . AV EN A L L R O A D . N 5 ISLINGTON
SSG 6            TO TTENHAM H O T S P U R S F . C . . HIGH R D . T O T T E N H A M .             N15     HARINGEY
SSG    7         CHELSEA         F.C..    STAM FORD BRIDGE             GROUNDS.           S W 6 H A M M E R S M IT H
SSG    8         C H A RL T ON    F.C..     F L OY D R O A D .     SE7    GREENWICH
SSG    9         CRYSTAL         PALACE     F.C..      SELHURST          PARK.    SE25       CROYD ON
SSG    10        FU LHAM F . C . .        STEVENAGE        ROAD.      S W 6 HA MMERSM ITH
SSG    11        LEYTON      ORIENT        F.C..     BRISBANE        ROAD.       E 1 0 WALTHAM          FOREST
SSG    12        MIL LWA LL       F.C..     C O L D BLOW      LANE.       SE14     LEWISHAM
SSG    13        BRENTFORD         F.C..       8P00K      ROAD-     HOUNSLOW
SSG    14        WIM BL ED ON F . C . . D U R N S F O R D R O A D . S W 1 9 ME RT ON
SSG    15        TERENCE McMtLLAN STADIUM . PR IN C E REGENT L A N E .                                E13    NEWHAM
SSG    16        THE O V A L . K E N N I N G T O N O V A L . S E 1 1 LAMBETH
SSG    17        L O R D S CRI CK E T G R O U N D . S T . J O H N S W O O D . NW S W E S T M I N S T E R
SSG    18        AL L   ENGLAND TEN N IS CLUB.                CH U RC H      ROAD.       SW19     ME RT ON
SSG        19     THE Q U E E N S C L U B .      PALLISER         ROAD.     W 1 4 HAMMERSMITH
SSG    20        DULWICH HAMLET             F.C..      DOG K E N N E L H I L L .        SE22     SOUTHWARK
SSG    21        WIMB LED ON        lDOG I STADIUM .          PLOUGH         LANE.       SW 17    ME RT ON
SSG    22        CRYSTAL         PALACE     RECREATION            GROUND.        CRYSTAL         PALACE     PA R K      ROA D
SSG    23        H A R R I N G A Y I DOG J S T A D I U M . G R E E N L A N E S . N 4 H A R I N G E Y
SSG    24        WALTHAMSTOW I D O G J S T A D I U M . C H I N G F O R D R O A D . E 4 WALTHAM F O R E S T
SSG        25    WALTHAMSTOW A V E N U E              F.C..       PRIORY COU RT.           E17    WALTHAM F O R E S T
SSG        26    DA GE NH AM F . C . .       VICTORIA       ROAD.        B A R K IN G
SSG        27     HAYES STAD IUM .          JUDGE       HE AT H    LANE.      HILLINGDON
SSG        28     LONDON WELSH R . P . C . .             OLD DEER         PARK.         RI CHM OND
SSG        29     RI CH M ON D R . F . C . .      OLD DEER        PARK.l A TH LE TIC G R O U N D ) .        RICHMOND
SSG        30     ROMFORD STADIUM .               LONDON      ROAD.         HAVERING
 SSG       31     CATFORD         100GJ     STADIUM.        ADENMORE ROAD.                SE6    L E W IS H A M
 SSG       32     ER ITH A N D B E L V E D E R E      F.C..       LO W ER    ROAD.        BE XL EY
 SSG       33     HORNCHURCH             F.C..     BRIDGE     AVENUE.        HAVERING
 SSG 3 4          W E L L IN G U N I T E D F . C . . P A R K VIE W R O A D . BEXL EY
 SSG 3 5          S T . 8 A R T H 0 L E M E W S R . F . C . . P E R R Y S T R E E T . C H I S L E H U R S T . BE XL EY
 SSG       36     FU LHAM        RUGBY     LEAGUE C L U B .        CHISWICK.        HOUNSLOW
 SSG       37     CARSHALTON             F.C.tWAR       MEMORIAL         GROUND I . COLSTON                AVENUE.        SUTTON
 SSG 3 8          W ES T L O N D O N S T A D I U M . DU C A N E R O A D . W 1 2 HAMM ER SM ITH
 SSG 3 9          CHELSEA S P O R T S C E N T R E . C H E L SE A MANOR S T R E E T . SW3 KENSINGTON
 SSG 4 0          ENFIELD F . C . . SOUTHBURY R O A D . ENFIELD
 SSG 41           FINCHLEY F . C . . SU M M E R S L A N E . N 1 2 B A R N E T t s e e                SSG    85    for   Ruabv   C lubJ
 SSG       42     BARNET         F.C..     WESTCOMBE         DRIV E.      BARNET
 SSG        43     WEALDSTONE            F.C..     STATION        ROAD.     HA RRO W
 SSG 4 4           S U T T O N F . C . . G A N D E R G R E E N L A N E . SU T T O N
 SSG 4 5           TO OT IN G 8c MlTCHUM F . C . . S A N D Y L A N E . ME RT ON
 SSG        46     CRO YDON        F.C..     ALBERT       ROAD.      SE25      S O U T H NO RW O OD
 SSG        47     BRO M LE Y F . C . . H A Y E S L A N E . B R OM LE Y
 SSG        48     L E Y T O N S T O N E F . C . . C R A N L E I G H R O A D . E 1 0 WALTHAM F O R E S T
 SSG        49     ROSSLYN         PARK     R.F.C..       UPPER      RIC HM ON D R O A D .        S W 1 5 WA NDSWORTH
SSG    5G      HACKNEY S TA D IU M . WATERDEN R O A D . E 1 5 HACKNEY
SSG    51      BLACKHEATH R . F . C . . CHARLTON R O AD. SE3 GREENWICH
SSG    52      WOODFORD TOWN F . C . . 2 6 5 SNAKES L A N E . REDBRIDGE
SSG    53      HARLEQUINS R . F . C . . STOOP MEM O RIAL GROUND. TWICK.                                         RICHMOND
SSG    54      BANK O F      ENGLANDS            SPORTS       GROUND.           PRIORY      LANE.        WANDSWORTH
SSG 5 5        HAMPTON F . C . .           OFF STATION           R O AD.       H AM PT O N .     RICHMOND
SSG 5 6        KINGSTON I AN F . C . .           BURTON R O A D /R IC H M O N D ROAD.                     KINGSTON
SSG    57      FISHER     A TH LE TIC       F . C . . 1 MELLISH        PARK).         SALTER      ROAD . S E 1 6 . SOUTH WA RK
SSG    58      HA RI N G E Y B O R O U G H      F . C . . W H IT E    HA R T    LANE.      N17        H A R IN GE Y
SSG 5 9        OLD DAGENHAM PARK F . C . . S IV IT E R WA Y.                           DAGENHAM.             BARKING
SSG    60      NEW R I V E R      SPORTS        CENTRE.        WHITE HA R T           LANE.      N17       HA RI NG E Y
SSG    61      BARKING F . C . . LODGE A V E N U E . B AR K IN G
SSG    62      MAYSBROOK PARK A R E N A . LODGE A V E N U E . B AR KIN G
SSG    63      EAST HAM U NITED F . C . . EAST HAM MANOR W A Y . E6                                        NEWHAM
SSG    64      CLAPTON F . C . . UPTON L A N E . E7     NEWHAM
S S G .6 5     HARROW F . C . .           E A R L S M E A D /C A R L Y O N     AVENUE.         HARROW
SSG    66      LEYTON W I N G A T E .         LEA BRIDGE             ROAD.      E17    WALTHAM F O R E S T
SSG 6 7        HAREFIELD UNITED F . C . .                 BREAKSPEAR E R O AD.                 H ILLINGDON
SSG    68      WIMBLEDON           PARK S P O R T S       CENTRE.         HOME P A R K         AVENUE.         S W 1 9 ME RT ON
SSG 6 9        HERNE H IL L S TA D IU M . BURRAGE R O AD. S E 2 4 SOUTHWARK
U ,G 7 0       KINGSLEY TOWN F . C . . TOWNSEND R O AD. NW9        BRENT
SSG    71      SOUTHALL           F.C..     WESTERN         ROAD.        SOUTHALL.             EALING
SSG    72      EDGWARE F . C . .           DEANS8R00K           ROAD.          BARNET
SSG    73      WASPS R . F . C . .         HEATON       AVENUE.          BRENT
SSG    74      HU RL INGHAM P A R K            S P O R T S STADIUM .           BROOMHOUSE           ROAD.        SW 6 HA MME RSM ITH
SSG    75      WEMBLEY F . C . .           WATFORD        RO A D lV A LE        FARM       SPORTS CEN TRE).                BRENT
SSG    76      RAYNERS LANE               F.C..      RAYNERS          LANE.       HARROW
SSG    77      HE ND ON     F.C..         CLAREMONT          ROAD.       NW2          BARNET
SSG    7B      UX BRIDGE F . C . .          HDRTON        ROAD.        HILLINGDON
SSG 79         STREATHAM 8t CROYDON R . F . C . .                       1 5 9 BRIGSTOCK ROAD.                 CROYDON
SSG    80      NORTHWOOD F . C . .             CHESTNUT         AVENUE          R E C .G R O U N D .     H IL L I N G D O N
SSG    81      OSTERLEY           R . F . C..TENTELON           AVENUE.          SOUTHALL.            EALING
SSG    B2      HO UN S LO W F . C . . D E N B I G H R O A D .          HOUNSLOW
SSG    83      SARACENS           R.F.C..GREEN             R O A D .C H A S E     SID E.    N14.        ENFIELD
SSG 8 4        OLD L Y O N I O N S F . C . P I N N E R V I E W . H A R R O W
SSG 8 5        F I N CH L EY R U G B Y F . C . . S U M M E R S L A N E , N 1 2 . B A R N E T l s e e           ssa    41      for    F.C.i
SSG    86       LO NDON H O S P I T A L        R.F.C..       WADHAM R O A D .            WALTHAM F O R E S T
SSG 8 7         RAINHAM TOWN R . F . C . .               W ENN IN G TO N         ROAD.      RA IN H A M . HAVERING
SSG    BB       FORDS UNITED F . C . .              RUSH G RE E N           ROAD.      ROMFORD.           HAVERING
 SSG   89       QUEEN     ELIZABETH S P O R T S            CENTRE.           GREAT      CA M B R I D G E R O A D .      ENFIELD
SSG    90       CRICKLEFIELD ATHLETIC F IE L D .                     GREEN       LANES.        ILFORD
 SSG    91      C OP TH AL L S P O R T S C E N T R E . G R E A T         NORTH W A Y /ASHLEY A V E N U E . NW4                        BARNET
 SSG    92      W IL L E SD O N    ATHLETIC S T A D IU M .            ALL      SOULS    AVENUE.           NW10          BRENT
 SSG    93      GU YS H O S P I T A L      R.F.C..        BROCKLEY           R ISE.    S.E.23.          LEWISHAM
 SSG 9 4        MIDDLESEX H O SPITAL R . F . C . .                   PERRY S TR E ET .         CHISLEHURST. BEXLEY
 SSG    95      SlDCUP R . F . C . .         CRESCENT        FARM.          SID CUP.     B E X L EY
 SSG    96      FELTHAM R . F . C . .          PARK      ROAD.        HA N W O R T H    PARK.      H O UN S LO W
 SSG 9 7        STAINES R . F . U . .          FELTHAM H IL L           R O AD.     HOUNSLOW
 SSG 9 8        C.A.V.      SPORTS GROUND.                 RU ISLIP         ROAD.      NORTHOLT.           HILLINGDON
 SSG 9 9        HENDON R . F . C . .          GREAT NORTH WA Y .                 COPTHALL P LAY ING F IE L D S .                    BAR NET
 SSG    100     P O LY TE C H N IC S P O R T S      GROUND.           HARTINGTON           ROAD.        W4      HOUNSLOW
 SSG 101 EAST LONDON S T A D IU M .                      COPPERFIELD R O A D .              E1 TOWER HAMLETS
 SSG    1 0 2 BARRA S STADIUM.                  HOUNDSFIELD            ROAD.       EDMONTON.              ENFIELD
 SSG    1 0 3 HA YE S F . C . .       CHURCH R O A D .           HAYES.         HILLINGDON
 SSG    104     FELTHAM F . C . .           SHAKESPEARE              AVENUE.        FELTHAM.            HOUNSLOW.
 SSG 105 R UISLIP MANOR F . C . .                      GROSVENOR V A L E .              R U IS L IP .    H ILL IN G D O N .
 SSG    106     RUISLIP      F.C. .       BREAKSPEARE            ROAD.         HILLIN G D O N .
 SSG     107    P R D P O S E D MULTI         PURPOSE        STADIUM.           WANDLE VALLEY SOUTH.                       ME RT ON
                                                                     npf>?.-ncl\x 6


              ,,p   G     '-'OKTOHP, CHAliLTOE ATHLETIC F0CT3AL;. CUs.
       r 1 i**v•    <**   •*




                                                   METROPOLITAN                police


                                                   ..Z "   DIVISION       p o l i c e   s t a t io n
r.G. Noades, ^sa.,
                                                   1 5 1 6 L O N D O N RO A D
Chairman,                                          N O R B U R Y . L O N D O N . SW 16 4 E U
Crystal Palace FootDall &                          T e le p h o n e 0 1 - 6 8 0 6212
        Athletic Club,                                                                    O u r r e f.:
Selhurst Park,                                       Y o u r ref.:
                                                                                          ZM-\2Lts)       ''Sts
LOiiDOH, SE25 6?U


                                                               ird   Ju n e,   1966


    D-ar Mr. Noades,
                                             n of the impromptu meeting_witn
            T am uniting in coniirniax-             Tinkler ar.d yourseli on
    Superintendent Cooper, Chief r n ^ c t o r T.n,
    *uesd=y, 21th              19Eo-
                                          «tch                                  would
    C h i t o n Athletic which was                              ^   outside the stadiua.
    present public order                                   „ith the team
    T understand that you will be co.-s .            nS      £rranged in oraer t..*-
    Ibomus+t a
             dsc*.’' th',+
                     the-  zn
                           an
                              alternative fixou
                                   r, _ n n Athletic
                                                                     _j-—t th
                                                                            <= season m
                                                                           x-
       th Crystal Palace ana Ch^-on
     best possible atmosphere.
                               .        rofer to my letter aated 8th ^ r i
          It is perhaps appropriate -        -          nd ini?rove2 ento .o
     1o66 then I made certain reconur.er.c^ons     e.     ^               .s —
       considered for the 1986/7 sea,son. I tru                          ^ se2son is
     V v frn-v are nowwell advanceq. Given xn*                             der of priority the
     2 £                                                                       the first »atch of
     work which Police would £>=k t0 De'

      the SeaS°n:_                    .. -             incapable of scalins (e.g. 6 * « *
      1)   Erect perimeter               ^              Arthur W t Enclosure,
      high) between the cinder tracr. «r                       _                 a

      2)   Construct a purpose ouilt Police                                       on the
      separate P.A. H o » to replace ;n-.                               in the ..mutes o. the




      »_                                                             cUnbi:* over on to
      ■fhg r^itch.                                                           -| 9 -nQ 3
                                                      . - • ^vipps Comoouncs 1, *     ->
       k)   Heighten                                  adiice^Compounds,
       to prevent supporters climoirfe
                                                    -2-


c\ Construct
      Pon6?       vertical (i.e. &
                  verxicai                             at. o right    angles
                                                                      '
                                                                      —**0 —     to the pitch)• crash ±
                       .............................
■
0L~ie"s in the Arthur                   Wait T-,     E n_ c l o s e   to ^prevent
                                                                            ro v o n t  S tp r a l
                                                                                       lateral     mOV(
                                                                                                   movecen.
o^~‘s n orters. As a minims two such                                  barriers woula be requireo
( i . e o n e below block X and the other                             in the area below blocks
U and V).
6) Concrete over the grass triangular area at the Park Road side- o_
the Compound 3- This prevents access to potential missiles unaer
the grass.
7)      Re-build/repair the turnstiles at the rear of Compound 3.

B1 -rect a barbed wire addition to the wall which separates Coopound
3     the Arthur Vait Enclosure to prevent people climbing ou„ <•.
     a n d



the Compound 3 into                        Enclosure.

     I auureciate that time may prevent the cocple^ ° nI° ^ ia 3 ^r°i
this work by the opening match of the “ ^ ^ ^ ^ n ^ o r t a n i t y .
that you will endeavour to have it completed a. the exiles         ?.
3y these means the safety of the public can best be ensured.


                                          Y<to:s sincerely,



                                           P. C^re
                                           Chief               intendent.
                                                                                                                                             Cy.’;j \\( 'v /'v'('


                                                                                              i i i i i

                                                                                              M E T R O P O L IT A N      P O L IC E


Mr.       R.G .      H oader,            'r .                                                 S O U T H N O R W O O D POLICE S T A T IO N
                                                                                              11; OLIVER G R O V E        •            .
Chairman,                   •
                                                                                              SOUTH NORWOOD            ‘              ' •
Crystal'Fa]nee Football Club,                                                                 L O N D O N S E 2 5 GED ' -    '
oe.l burnt, Tark,                                                                             Telephone 01 - 6 5 3 8 5 6 0     ’
HE.?5oru                                                                                       Yout tef.:                              O u r ’t c f. :




                                                                                                       181.11 A p r i J , 1 9 3 «




Pear Mr.             Hoarier.,

          Wj I li r e O rone, o t.o y o u r p i o c l.i nf; on Mon rlny , 17l.li A p r i l ,
at, Se l hurr-t. P a r k wi l,h C h i e f I n s p e c t o r P e r r y , 1 u n d e r s t a n d t.liat-
y o u iifiv? :;,"rni?r! !.o r e m o v e 1 bo v.’.i r e and s u p p o r t ! up s t a n c ’ h i onr- a t
t h e f r o n t . o f ' V inpound.?. 1 a n il ? , and l.o r e m o v e a s i x C o o t i j e i i l . r o
s e c t i o n o f i h r! b a r r i e r s a I, t h e f r o n t - o f t. h o r e c o m p ou n d s .


          !>i vj'-w of l-lic- l.raf-.ie events at. IIi1] r.boroufdi we are looking
      re?\: I3y at. t.be reqni ivsTtent.n of the ground safety eert.ifi.cal-e ,
"’ r id   0 !!V.I r * .( • ';    a   num ber        o f       m o d i f } c n 15 o n r- w h i c h           1   fe e l   w ill    a c t-     t.o     o t:r
im: I •.>.-> 1 b> > i " f i I.       mi    d o a I .i i •/■    r - f f o c : I. i v ' - 1 v    w ilb   c ro w d    safety        and       control
a I          5.1,■:!•; I        Park.


      ja c ••■ier l.n d.i.".nirn I.bore, mod ifjea Li ons, may i r A i[ ',p t. I.ba t a
moelinr !--t.w<--on nr* ir- arranf.od-for a date soon aft.or t.lie safety
 i       l.ion of the {'round mi J’S,Ui Apri I. l\'<' .are already in the rroro:':'
i'.‘f   jr-v:inp; our con Li nf.eney j(jan:;, and 1 would suggest. that it rvif;!i1.
be ar;-rr:;:ri a t-o t.o ho Id n " t.abl!e-top" exej•r:is]c--*nvoIv ini’ your s La iT, \
other f~c rr/’in’y r.orvj w r- and our::o] vpg dnriniv t.lic cToped :*(••*)r-oii.'

                                                              Yours p i n r e r e J y ,



                                                              S a lly       Hubbard,
                                                              C h ie f      S u p e rin te n d e n t.                    ^Tonoom                   mi-       wicade          j
                                                                                                                           (4K£                               IRA^CM         .


                                                                                                                                R e c              e i v e d                 1

                                     j £ NT. SECT. R E C ’D .........                                                                  2 4 A P R 1989               :

                                     i                                                         ^ ........
                                                                                                                           fire p r o t e c t i o n           s e c t io n
                                     ‘ Saferradto............. »                                                                   FJ ; T E R T A t N H E N T S




                                         STN.O
                                         M E T R O P O L IT A N   P O L IC E

Mr. R.G. lioades,                        S O U T H N O R W O O D POLICE           ST.      ; ion
Chairman,                                11 OLIVER G R OVE
                                         SOUTH NORWOOD
Crystal Palace Football Club,
                                         L O N D O N S E 2 5 6ED
Selhurst Park,                           Telephone 01 - 6 5 3 8 5 6 8
SE25 6PU                                  Yout ref.:                           Our re'.:




                                                 27th April, 1989

 .'nr Mr. Hoe.des,

     Thank you for your letter of 2^th April, 1989> to which I
reply in conjunction with the results of our meeting at Selhurst
Park on 25th April. In view of the large number of issues raised
at that meeting, it will be easier if I deal with them point*by
point.

Folice Control Room.    It was agreed that the siting and internal
arrangement of the Fort.akabin provided to Police will be completed
before the beginning of the 1989-90 season. A direct outside telephone
line will be provided to the control room.

Cinder Track (Sainsbury1s Terrace).   The cinder track in front cf the
Sainsbury Terrace is to be concreted to allow .it to be used as a childrens
enclosure as already provided for in front of the Arthur Wait St-nd and
Holmesdale Terrace. We welcome this proposal.

Direct Internal Coinmunic-. tion. A direct communication facility
(e.g. telephone or intercom) is to be installed between the Directors
Fox and the Police Control Room to allow rapid communication betveen the
senior club official present and the police match Commander in t-h-e e\ent of
a major incident.

Electronic Counter.      A proper electronic means of establishing the number
oi' spectators .in eac:i pr-.rt oif r.he
                                    r.h^ ground
                                         around at, any time before and during the
match is to be installed, a remote monitor, showing the same information
is to be installed in the police control room before the beginning of the
next season.

Sub-division of the Arthur Wait non-members enclosure. A barrier, running
from front to rear of the non-members enclosure, is to be sited in front
of seated block 'U', thereby sub-dividing the area.



                                                                  - cont. -
    P.A. Announcements. With the siting of the P.A. override
    facility in the Police control room, Police will make the
    emergency announcements (i.e. alert, stand-down, and evacuation
    message). The wording of various schedules to the Safety
    Certificate will need amendment to clarify responsibility for
    P.A. announcements.
                                                *
    Crowd Safety Officer. We agree that, whilst C.P.F.C. should
    remain responsible for the structural safety of the ground, a
    Charlton Athletic Club official should be appointed to act for
    that club as Crowd Safety Officer on their match days.

    Extension of Membership, Family and Seated Area.           We support the
    Club in their intention to extend these areas.

    Stewards. The effectiveness of Stewards in enforcing the ground
    regulations needs to be improved. Police can and will take action
    in cases of unacceptable behaviour, but the initiative and support


•
    of Stewards is essential, particularly in areas of the ground which are
    lightly policed. This may on occasion require sufficient commitment
    to become involved as witnesses for a prosecution.

    Stewards will also keep clear the steps between the Arthur Wait Stand
    and the Sainsbury's Terrace.

    Call Signs for Stewards. In order to improve radio communications
    between Stewards and Police, it was suggested that Stewards be
    allocated call signs appropriate to their location and function. I
    suggest a meeting between the Chief Steward and Chief Inspector P e r r y
    to discuss and agree this.

    Outside P.A. facility. Your suggestion to install P.A. loudspeakers
    outside the ground to enable direct communication with waiting
    spectators is certainly welcome and we would support any application
    to the Football Trust to fund this.

           Wishing the Club well in these last few nail-biting matches.

                        _____ Yours sincerely._____



                                 Sally.Hubbard,
                                 Chief Superintendent.



    c.c. Hr. B. Hand-Davis.


                                                f. PSj7l[ i;




                         M l!
                        <•      t-'
                                                              4575

Borough Planning Officer
London liorougn of Croydon                                    IFS/SSG9
Planning and Transportation
 Department
iaberner ilouse
Park Lane
Croydon CR9 1JT




Dear Sir/Kadam,

SAFETY Of SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975
C k I'SiAl, ?ALAC»i i‘C, SiiLriUixSf PAxIa , 5ij2D

Thank you for copies of letters forwarded to these offices wita reference to the
abova-.r.enticned club'by yourselves and the ffolice, regarding safety matters
v/ithin the ground, which have previously been imposed on the club by the General
Safety Certificate which was issued under the above-mentionec legislation.

In the past,' it has not been Council practice to consult the brigade on matters
relating to "means of escape", however, in view of recent events, I must aavise
you that the brigade will, in any future consultation, be commenting on all
matters of fire safety, including means of escape arrangements.

With reference to the letter sent by the Metropolitan Police direct to the Club,
it is brought to your attention that any ainenainents or alterations to the Sarety
Certificate should be ;nade via the Council. Action taken arbitrarily witnout
due regard for other requirements of the Safety Certificate- could have or create
other problems within the ground.

If it is proposed to alter tiie condition of the ground, as detailed in tne
General Safety Certificate, it is recommended that an urgent meeting of the
Safety Team be called to discuss any changes, so that all parties concerned are
seen to be working collectively.

Within the letter from the Metropolitan Police, it has been noted that they are
looking at existing contingency plans.

It is assumed that they are referring to their own overall strategy on match
days, and not the evacuation procedures as approved in Schedule 4 of the General
Safety Certificate for which the Brigade are responsible after consultation.




                                                -1-
       'i  Brigade would welcome any exercise being considered and, once details of the
     ' dats and time are known, the information will be fonrarded to the Area Commander
       of South West Area for operational input.

      The foregoing is forwarded for your information and attention.

      Yours faithfully,




ff    A. R. JONES
      Assistant Chief Officer
      Information and Fire Safety




                                              -2-
                              M E M O R A N D U M


EXT           760-5485
Y O U R REF
M Y REF       BPO/HS
DATE          17TH May 1989
TO            PLANNING AND TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT

SUBJECT       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 197 5
              FIRE SAFETY AND SA FETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 19 87
              SELHURST PARK STADIUM


              AGENDA for meeting to be held at Taberner House on
              THURSDAY, 18th May 1989 at 2.30 P.M.In ROOM 12.11


              1. Report by the Metropolitan Police on last Saturday's
                 incident.

              2. Pitch perimeter fencing.

              3. Alternative Safety staff for Charlton Athletic
                 matches.

              4. Gate 12.

              5. Any other Business.




          v
                                                           Reference           ^ „ $ , < L 3 ...........

                                                                                             ("alax-c       V--C

                                                                           'SvC’i k u J U ^




                        Kio t o                   V-oLc>.



          AtexAtJ                                  iKUe fcKf '                                     ^

     U W *                  Cn^l-d P « W                               -                                 . *=,,

              P&Uu) sisfeJ                         fcf"            d               (j5^ ^                ^

 *        ^                 ,* A                 *to

 W*, A * U                      A . « * s '•* »                                                                    „

 U , '            ~    W    -               —               ^                    ^
                        ^              ^            ^                      ^         +                        ^
^                     b ijj»               *« ,     » U                »         « '4 —                      J-
„     j                * s             v    j        su>=                                t    1"       ~ * “ t e ' f   “



lA    Cjdlkl^SUA-QS>               .



                                                                                   .a co           o-'
              ^                 J L c o Ccoo^a-UG^             "tc^ls.         'y ^-(



                                                              - i f ^               -
 .                           .(I           ^ae     Ig t& x A lJ                s-^yrd-

                                                       ,       J                        W /            -V      — ^
       £t5^                                            ^                                  C   ' C   '




              UO^ifen          C    a^    J           Po W                           p'OvKcU

                                          0   ^-<-£- T!\ e>^                ^Vxx5fc«_               ^Nash

              Cksuito^.                           ;
                               M ^ r A o c j L t ^                   stodK                              ^

          CflA^LaJb                                          U         cM c^ eJ                             P*L cc_c

         tf k e s ^ A n ^                <^U>                               kke      c^ ru u ^ J .

                                                  l^ « A               "«            U >fe^*&
          ^vi>>       *vv^cltjQ— •
               I


       (§fev.      U-.

                        Q ^ p            1^                      vJtovcU        Osf^LBJ-


    ^cur^looJ^                 W x K >                p ^ ^ c o a i ^           ts                      ^
                              ^               ^         U 9 ~           « U o                           ^


    ^          ^vJb            tta ^ U                 V®          ««r H              1




   ^      ^ v ^ J U                 cU ^ o J ^ .

                      U-^> Oo^cJU-                                           r jv


   toi^            ckju^      wruv-k.                      uyvisl C ^ j j ^ z i           Paio-U >

   C a^^Jbt                  \MjUL^ £ j2CV>Q^                      .



     4   >w>~ ^>-
                    ^       U^^A^-vjlcI                 ~{J*P          QUgU ^ kO^—

 (Ji£ ^ e | z ^ _ V l - £ C u ^                                  € > u ^ W m ^ f p C A ^ v-ov,fc


C-ko^          S t ^ K         l^cJoloo^-A                  IcIJU—          A xJ^-d^           ^

- ft. . I _    O.-I        t r>s^   1/4               X .   ,^ J 't _ fes       Cl 1 J-       Oi "(to JV         M
        FORM 4003                                               Reference.................... ........................................


                        y ,                   fe>   ■fc J z e    0 \jL<J2/"         Ik ,       •QjJSt- CAjljdJLocT ^




                               jS$T    \Juo              cQ H^£)           lKx2_db>^-               IW-                       CjTZ>^\cLsQ'^

                                 fei'                  ivKy®                             ^        •‘T c   o   - W   ad         ^         ^   c -


                              cWs^Lj          CLijl     fwoJia          CL*M}A&^>i'^o-ko                   o-llotaJ-OD*^                 ^

                    c    W    JU>u2-      cwl                    02>ia^.                                                        J-4^w>         .




    ,     •
i
Building Control
London Borough of Croydon                                     IFS/SSG9/JLC/PG
Taberner House
Park Lane
Croydon
CR9 3JT

(For the attention of Mr Wilson)




Dear Sir,

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT
CRYSTAL PALACE F.C., SELHURST PARK, SE25

Further to the safety meeting of 18 May 1989 at your offices, the following
points were raised by the Brigade which they were unaware of:-

1.   The Brigade have made comment with reference to Gate 12. However, it would
     now appear that Sainsburys intend to carry out alterations to the car park
     layout which might have an adverse affect on access/egress of emergency
     vehicles. I suggest that details are forwarded so that consideration can     g
     be given to any proposals.

2.   The actual roadway within the car park is not capable of withstanding the
     weight loading of an emergency^ vehicle. I have written to the South West    r
     Area Commander requesting any observations he may have to offer in respect
     to this matter and I will contact you again in due course.

3.   Following the Hillsborough tragedy it is understood that following a
     meeting with council officers, the Police and the club that an opening has
     been made in compounds 1 & 2.

The Brigade were not party to this inspection and would ask that details be
forwarded for information at your earliest convenience.

Yours faithfully,




for assistant unief Officer
Information and Fire Safety
                                              London Fire Brigade
                                              A lb e r t E m b a n k m e n t. London SET 7SD

LONDON FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY       Chief Fire Officer & Chief Executive
                                              G D Clarkson QFSM BA(Hons)

                                              Telephone 0 1 -5 8 7 4 ° 0 0
                                              Telex 9 1 8 2 0 0
Mr M M Caller
                                              M y e xtension
Chief Executive
London Borough of Barnet                      M y reference
Town Hall                                     Your reference
Hendon                                        D ate          MaY 1989
London NW4 4BG




Dear Mr Caller

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

One of the requirements of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 is that the
local authority (in this case the relevant London borough) should consult the
fire authority about the terms and conditions to be included in a general
safetY certificate. Such consultation has taken place, but there has been one
area of notable omission in that local authorities are making independent
decisions on provisions "for means of escape in case of fire” without any
reference to the fire authority.

Most London local authorities have set up "safety teams" to review standards of
safety at such sports grounds. However, even within this arena of discussion
local authority representatives have declined to ask for, or chosen not to
accept, fire authority comments relating to "means of escape" provisions.

For example, it has been decided to erect perimeter fences at some sports
grounds to enhance crowd control. Where this has occurred, there has been no
consultation with the fire authority to consider what measures can be adopted
to overcome any difficulties that such structures may present to people trying
to escape a fire.

Within the context of fire safety, "means of escape" is the single most
important issue. Therefore I shall be instructing my officers that they will
make comments on all aspects of fire safety during the consultation process.
Similarly, officers will be directed to address the issue of "means of escape"
in any future discussions of the "safety teams" and they will formally record
their findings and recommendations for submission to the relevant local
authority.
I trust that this action will be positively received and that it resolves this
issue so that in future the fire authority is fully consulted.

However, if this expectation is not realised, the fire authority will make an
appeal to the Court as an "interested party" in those cases where it is
considered that proper arrangements have not been made to secure means of
escape in case of fire.

•Yours sincerely




G D CLARKSON
Chief Fire'Officer and Chief Executive
London Fire and Civil Defence Authority
r. _ 2    L-L/A
LON DO N FIRE A N D C IV IL DEFENCE A U T H O R IT Y
                                                       i ne County Hcii
                                                       London SE1 7PB


                                                       Clerk to the Authority

                                                       Mrs D M Buckle BSc(Soc)Lond

 J.A.Howard Esq.,                                                                           fom Jt9t
                                                       Telephone 0 1 - 6 3 3            5131
 Home Office,                                          Room
                                                                                        103
 C^ieen Anne’s Gate,
                                                       My reference                     CL/DB
 London SWLH 9AT
                                                       Your reference
                                                       Date                     5 September 1986




 Dear Mr Howard,

 PREMISES LICENSED FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT - INSPECTIONS
 BY THE FIRE AUTHORITY

The Authority's Urgency Committee at their meeting on 14 August 1986
considered a report by the Chief Fire Officer and Chief Executive on the
question of the Authority's future policy for the inspection of premises
licensed for public entertainment and certain other premises of a similar
nature. Copies of the report and the full text of the Committee’s decisions
thereon are enclosed.

Arising -from these'decisions, there are two aspects on which I need to write
to you: (1) The need to seek an increase in the Authority’s approved
establishment; and (2) To express concern about inconsistencies in the
legislation relating to entertainments licensing and similar matters.

         The need for an Increase in the Authority’s approved establishment

The report (in section 2) examines the Authority’s statutory responsibilities
in relation to the inspection of places of public entertainment from the fire
safety point of view and concludes that in certain respects the current level
of inspections falls short of what is required. It goes on (in section 4) to
propose a series of options for discharging the Authority’s own functions in
relation to such premises and for offering to the London borough councils (as
licensing authorities) an agency service for the carrying out of more detailed
inspections.

The Committee decided that the Authority should adopt Option D, i.e. both to
provide a level of service which takes account of its statutory
responsibilities and includes an assessment of the relative risks-associated
with the different uses of premises such as to reflect the'Authority's concern
for public safety, and to provide a full agency service to the 18 London
borough councils which provisionally accepted the offer made by the Authority
in its interim phase to provide such a service. In addition the Committee
decided to repeat the offer of an agency service to the fifteen London borough
councils which previously declined it.
The proposed level of inspections considered necessary to neet the Authority's
statutory responsibilities, taking into account the risks presented by
different uses of premises, is as follows:

Numbers       Types of      Annual        Other           Other Public        Estimated
of premises    premises   Inspections     Daytime         Safety Insps.         Total
                                        Inspection        while in use
       “
 105          Cinemas           1                               3                420
  39          Dance Halls       1                               3                156
   5          Exhib. Halls      1                        Depending on use         -
   5          Libraries         1                               0                  5
 621          Other (clubs,
           discos, rest’rnts)   1                               2              1863
 223          Public Halls
                (small)         1                               1
              Public Halls                                                       300
                (large)         1                               2
 560          Pubs
              (a) discos        1                               2
              (b) video or                                                      1400
                 music only     1                               0
   5          Schools           1                               1                 10
  96          Theatres          1                    1          6                768
  10          University        1                               1                 20
                                                                                4942
                                Plus revisits and specifics @ 20Z               1000
                                                                                6000

Taking into account the devolvement of the inspection function where
appropriate to station commanders and other station personnel (with consequent
staff savings'), it is estimated that the above 6000 inspections a year could
be undertaken with a net requirement over and above the Brigade’s approved
establishment for 1986—87 as follows:

                           Uniformed staff

                           7 x Station Officer

                           Non-uniformed staff

                           2 x Main Grade 11
                           2 x Main Grade 12                        Total 11

The total number of additional staff required to provide an agency service in
the 18 ’accepting’ boroughs is estimated to be as follows:

                           Uniformed staff

                            1 x Divisional Officer III
                            5 x Station Officer

                            Non-uniformed staff

                            1 x Main Grade 10                       Total 7
 The further st3.ff who would be renn*f       <f *->-»** i c      i    •*
 follows: “" e      IO aCCePt the                   ° i f « ?see « ^ , L d ° ? r b r ? - , ln8


                            Uniformed staff

                           2 x Station Officer
                             -6 6
                           No^-ynlformed staff

                           1 ^ |lain Grade 10                           Total 3

 iithrp a r £ a p h h6 t T r h ^   S^ te’s approval is now sought in accordance
 Support Services a n d m *      6  ^Vil            Authorities (Establishment,
              rvices and Management Schemes) Regulations 1985 to an inrease of
 follows*8   n t 6 Autho.rity ,s approved establishment for the year 1986-7, as


                           Uniformed staff

                           1 x Divisional Officer III
                          14 x Station Officer

                           Non-unlformed staff

                           2 x Main Grade 10
                           2 x Main Grade 11
                           2 x Main Grade 12

T^is approval is sought on th^ Understanding that the three positions relating
the Authorities11 °4 “ J f ^ 8T ±Ce f°T borou8hs which Previously refused
the Authority s offer will only be filled if a sufficient number of these
boroughs now accept it.                                   .....     -

The estimated full-year costs (at November 1985 prices) of the above 21
rnSwxvJ'           Lncludinf salaries, national insurance and superannuation
t h e J il             V   f)* 18 t309»976* 0f this      £151.575 relates to
ttie eleven additional positions required to enable the Authority to meet its
f          responsibilities and will therefore be met by the Authority; and
for ^          v t0     tCn P°8ition8 required to provide an agency service
for the Ixmdon borough councils and will be fully recoverable from those
                C?8,
                   tS in tbC current financial year will depend upon the dates
   which the positions are filled. For the purpose of charging the boroughs
for the agency service, the staff costs will be increased by some 36 per cent
to recoup related overhead costs such as accommodation and central
administration.

I would point out that the possible need for the additional.positions for
               i8 T , ! 2 Ught T 8 referred to in paragraph 1(a)(iii) of the
letter dated 6 March 1986 frofi? the former Clerk to the Authority (Mr
T.Musgrave) to yourself (your reference FIR/86 500/24/1). It is also now
clear that the Authority’s Establishment Scheme for 1986-7, as submitted to
you and subsequently approved by the Home Secretary, was based on a
misapprehension of the statutory role of the Authority in relation to




                          ■” «r"*

                                      - 3 -
entertainments licensing. With regard to the proposed agency service to the
18 ’accepting’ boroughs, it is understood that all these boroughs have relied
on the Authority’s offer of an agency service being fulfilled in making their
own arrangements to carry out their entertainments licensing functions.

In the light of the above factors and the important public safety
considerations involved it is hoped that this request will be considered
sympathetically.

(2)   Inconsistencies in legislation relating to entertainments licensing
      and similar matters

The legislation relating to the licensing of entertainments premises is
contained in a number of statutes with differing provisions. Under the
Cinemas Act 1985 the fire authority is required to be notified by applicants
for the grant, renewal or transfer of a licence and ir leciding on the
application, the licensing authority is specifically required to have regard
to any observations made by the fire authority. Under the provisions of
Schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963, which apply in the case of
premises licensed for a variety of public entertainments (see Appendix A of
the enclosed report), there is no such specific requirement on the licensing
authority. In the case of similar premises outside London, by contrast, under
the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 the licensing
authority i s ‘specifically required to have regard to observations by the fire
authority. More significantly, under the Theatres Act 1968 there is no
statutory requirement that the fire authority be notified in connection with
licence applications. The provisions also differ as regards the fire
authority'8 power of entry.    Under Schedule 12 and under the Theatres Act 1968
the fire authority has a power of entry for the purpose of ascertaining
whether licence conditions etc. are complied with, whereas under the Cinemas
Act 1985 an authorised officer of the authority is also empowered to Inspect
for the purpose of ensuring that there are adequate fire precautions and that
relevant provisions (including regulations and licence conditions etc.)
relating to fire precautions are complied with.

The Authority wishes to express   concern regarding these discrepancies and
Inconsistencies, which increase   the difficulty in establishing the respective
roles of the fire authority and   the licensing authority, and to ask that
action be taken at the earliest   opportunity to standardise the relevant
legislation, preferably in line   with the Cinemas Act 1985.

Yours sincerely,




MRS D.M.BUCKLE
Clerk to the Authority
■The Chief And Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association




 27 July 1989
                                                                   10-11 Pebble Close
                                                                   Amlngton
                                                                   Tamworth
                                                                   S t a f f s B77 4RD




 To A l l    Chief Fire       Officers/Firemasters




 Dear    Colleague

 I enclose           fo r y o u r I n f o r m a t i o n a c o p y o f the A s s o c i a t i o n s ’
 s u b m i s s i o n to the I n q u i r y f o l l o w i n g the H i l l s b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r .
 I s h o u l d b e g l a d I f y o u w o u l d d r a w the a t t e n t i o n o f o t h e r
 C A C F O A M e m b e r s In y o u r B r i g a d e to the r e c e i p t o f t his d o c u m e n t .

 Yours      sincerely




 K E ROSE
 General Manager
 The Chief And Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

                                                        10-11 Pebble Close
                                                        Amington
                                                        Tamworth
                                                        Staffs B77 4RD


Copy for Chief Fire Officer/Firemaster




             INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




SUBMISSION OF THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION




                          June 1989
                                        2



INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

SUBMISSION OF THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS * ASSOCIATION




1.    Introduction

1.1   The Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers* Association (CACFOA) is
       the professional organisation representing all Principal Fire Brigade
      Officers in Local Authority Fire Brigades in Great Britain.         The
      Association is non political and is not a trade union.   The objectives
       of the Association include arrangements for members to act as advisers
       to the Home Secretary’s Central Fire Brigades’ Advisory Council, to
       Fire Authorities    and many technical organisations,   including the
       British Standards Institution.

1.2   With regard to matters associated with the Safety at Sports Grounds
       Act, 1975, and its related provisions, many of our members represent
       their respective Fire Authorities.  The position of the Fire Authority
       is that of an ’interested party’ which has the right to appeal against
       anything in, or the omission of anything from, the Safety Certificate,
       or against refusal of a local authority to amend or replace a Safety
       Certificate.  In practice, fire officers are closely involved in the
       drafting of Fire Certificates for sports grounds and generally there is
       an excellent liaison with the Police, the Building Authority and other
       persons involved in this process.

1.3   Fire Service Officers are suitably qualified, trained and experienced
       in the command and management of fire and rescue incidents.        Such
       duties have entailed considerable involvement and expertise in the
       procedures and practical application of emergency evacuation of varying
       numbers of persons from buildings and other areas affected by fire or
       suspected fire.  In these circumstances, we suggest that our views will
       be relevant to your Inquiry.

1.4   It is relevant to point out that     in the past Principal Fire Service
       Officers have given forewarning of the likelihood of various  isas ers,
       including those involving football stadia.    It is unfortunate that a
       disaster or series of small catastrophes have been necessary before
       safety legislation has been enacted.      The information contained in
       Appendix ’A ’ to this submission gives a startlingly clear, prophetic
       picture of a view given by a Chief Fire Officer over 20 years ago
       concerning potential disasters at football grounds.       The conce*"®
       expressed by this officer formed the basis of the report which
       subsequently submitted by Chief Fire Officers to the Wheatley Committee
       following the serious accidents at Ibrox Park Football GroundI in 1971.
       That same report was appended to our submission to Justice Popplewell
       following the tragic fire at Bradford City Football Club;    we make no
       apologies for including the original paper yet again, as M y    of the
       points it contains are current and     valid when looking at Sa e y a
       Sports Grounds.
                                       3


1.5   In this submission we have addressed our views and recoWMrtldations
      mainly to the rescue role of the Fire Service and the legislative
      aspects pertinent to safety at sports grounds.     We have not dwelt on
      the fire related measures.    This is intentional as our views on fire
       safety were expressed to Justice Popplewell in relation to the Inquiry
      held after the Bradford stadium fire disaster.   In these circumstances,
      the following submission relates to relevant measures for crowd safety
       and the means of escape provisions contained in the legislation
      governing Safety Certificates for Sports Grounds and Stadia.

2.    Definition of Sports Grounds and Stadia

2.1   We regard a sports ground as any place where sport or similar
      competitive activities take place in the open air and where the
      accommodation is covered or open with seating or standing facilities
       for   spectators.  A   sports   stadium  is  a sports  ground where
       accommodation for spectators wholly or partially surrounds the area
      used for the activities taking place therein.

2.2   For the purpose of this submission, any reference to sports      ground,
       sports stadium or stadia should be considered to be the same.

3.    The Wheatlev Report

3.1   We have taken into consideration that in May 1972 the Rt. Hon. Lord
      Wheatley submitted to the Secretary of State for the Home Department
       and the Secretary of State for Scotland the report of his Inquiry into
       Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds.   It was from his report that the Safety
       at Sports Ground Act 1975 evolved.

3.2   Lord Wheatley in his report concentrated on the stadia^ of football and
       rugby clubs patronised by paying members of the public who attend in
       large numbers to watch sporting events.   Under the heading "The Nature
       of the Problem", on pages 2 and 3, paragraphs 8 to 11 of the report,
       Lord Wheatley identified the problem areas common to most stadia.

3.3   Following Lord Wheatley's report, and subsequently that of Justic
       Popplewell,  major  steps have been taken     to improve the   safety
       provisions and relative legislation applicable to sports grounds an
      stadia.

4.    The Popplewell Report

4.1   We consider that many people lose sight of the fact that
       Popplewell was not only looking at the tragic fire which engulfed the
       stand at Bradford City with the loss of 56 lives, he was also taking
       into consideration the trouble which occurred on that same fateful day
       in May 1985 at Birmingham City Football Club where crowd disturbances
       caused considerable damage at the ground which resulted in the collapse
       of a wall, killing one young man and injuring seventeen other people;
       hence the title of the Inquiry being "Committee of Inquiry into Crowd
       Safety and Control at Sports Grounds” .
                                           4

4.2   Justice Popplewell made a number of specific recommendations in his
      Report.  In this connection, it would be useful to ascertain the extent
      to which these recommendations have been applied in respect of
      training, the provision of stewards and the manning of exit gates, etc.
      at various premises.   It is for this reason that we would advise that
      Justice Popplewell's recommendations are reviewed and those which have
      not been implemented as statutory requirements be made so, especially
      where they are relevant to crowd control and behaviour.

5.    Safety at Sports Grounds and Stadia

5.1   Whether premises used for sports are called sports stadia or sports
      grounds is immaterial;      whether the competition is concerned with
      football, cricket, rugby, athletics or even horse racing, is equally of
      only passing interest.   The real problems which need addressing are the
      numbers   of  spectators   likely  to attend,   whether  the facilities
       available are suitable and whether members of the public and other
       people entering those premises for any purpose can escape safely and
      without injury if the need arises for whatever reason.

5 2   The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, revised in 1986 and commonly
       referred to as the 'Green Guide* is, in our view, a helpful document.
       However, the status of the Green Guide should be strengthened from its
       present voluntary standard, with no legal force, to a mandatory
       standard similar to the mandatory rules in Part B of the English
       Building Regulations.   This means that the safety requirements for
       sports grounds could only be achieved by complying with the contents of
       the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.   Where local circumstances are
       such that it is excessive to require the standards in the Green Guide
       as a matter of course, either because of the very iimited .
                                                                 attendance o
       the low risk presented by the layout of the ground, then the local
       authority should be able to relax them subject to the agreement of
      other interested parties.

5.3   The Green Guide is aimed primarily at advising on safety and, as su®|j»
       it takes account of the constraints       and difficulties " h ^ h     are
       present.  The general principles of the Guide make the point that the
       inter-relation of all the components in the safety formula is ®“ entia
       and that none of them should be considered in isolation. We feel tha
       the principle which must over-ride all others in the s a f e t y *******
       that it should fail to safety.    This principle is well used^ by Fire
       Officers in assessing fire safety requirements of public buildings and
       places of work and historically has proven to be successful.      Reliance
               not   bo   pl.ce*   »P0„   an,thins other   th.n   the   occup.nls   own
       unaided efforts to enable them to proceed to a place of safety
       event of a fire or any other emergency.

5 4    We believe that casualties may not have occurred at all if the guidance
       contained in the Green Guide" had been followed both before and during
       the incident which is the subject of this Inquiry.          ere    ’
       believe the full emphasis ought not to be on the        Ration       the
       adequacy of the standards in the Guide, but upon their implementation
       and practice by the relevant authorities/organisations.
                                 5

We consider there is a tendency for time to dim awareness of the
importance of some safety provisions and the need to rehearse them,
together  with   the  assessment   of  priorities   between   commercial,
financial and safety natters.     The question of safety can all too
easily recede to the back of the mind, rather than stay in the
forefront as it properly should.    The responsibilities for safety^can
be misunderstood due to the involvement of many interested parties.
There is a particular need for the provisions of the Green Guide to be
mandatory with respect to the responsibilities of management.

Having regard to the problem of crowd control in the event of any
emergency, it is our view that the over-riding factor in the selection
of sports grounds for major national and international events should be
the fulfilment of all the "requirements" of the Green Guide as a
condition of that selection.

It is not our intention to restate our views on aspects of construction
relating to stands, their fire safety and structural integrity;    this
we have already done at some length to Justice Popplewell.

In other respects, we recommend that the following aspects in Sections
6 to 11 of this submission be taken into account and implemented as
appropriate by relevant authorities, developers and operators of stadia.

Restraints of Existing Design and Sites

Having regard to the difficulties in adapting existing sites and
designs to current safety needs, it appears essential for relevant
guidance to be strengthened.    We recognise there can be serious
problems arising external to sports grounds as well as within their
curtilage.

Externally

Many grounds are situated in densely populated suburban areas, the
access to the ground being by way of streets through domestic areas.
It follows that access will be naturally restricted due to the widths
of roads, lack of car parking and the ground being short of external
space.  These factors are confirmed if one looks at the site plan of
Hillsborough Football Ground and are contributory to large numbers of
fans congregating at turnstile areas, as was witnessed there.

These restrictions would have the same limiting effects if the ground
were to be evacuated in an emergency.   It is well known that people
having achieved a position of personal safety slow down or stop to
observe what is happening around the®.

 Turnstiles should be clearly marked and identifiable as to which part
 of the ground they give access and, on occasions when specific tickets
^have  been  issued,  turnstiles  should be   specially designated to
 co-ordinate tickets allowing access to that section of the ground
specified.
 6.2.4     We are satisfied with paragraph 189, chapter 11, of the Green Guide
           referring to "Access for Emergency Vehicles". However^ we would stress
           that the need for regular liaison between the Emergency Services with
      i-'5*'regard to this and other such    matters common to their involvement.
           (See 11.7, Special Risk Plans.)

6.2.5    The Green Guide at Chapter 6, Paragraph 5, covers signposting and we
         doubt whether this recommendation is being favoured; we would advocate
__ir>    that signposting, as detailed in this paragraph, is made mandatory to
         form part of the certificate of the sports ground.

6.2.6    Further consideration should be given to Chapter 5, Paragraph 46, of
         the Green Guide, with regard to contingency plans for situations where
         available entrances at a ground have proved insufficient to stop unduly
         large crowds from gathering outside.

6.2.7    We cannot accede to the option of opening additional entrances without
         adequate crowd control and limitation of numbers.

6.2.8    We have total sympathy with the predicament of the police in such
         situations,  but would rather debate now a tangible solution to
         preventing such a situation arising than accept it as part and parcel
         of spectator activity, which seems more prevalent and problematic to
         football than any other sport attracting large crowds.

6.3      Internal

6.3.1    With regard to internal safety provisions, we appreciate that much
         consideration has been given to these features.        Indeed, we have
         assisted the considerations of means of escape and fire safety.      In
         this respect, we are glad that many of our recommendations have been
         implemented.  However, we would ask that further attention be given to
         matters in the paragraphs which follow.

6.3.2    Perimeter fences appear to be needed to discourage pitch invasions and
         their use is widespread particularly at football grounds.   There does
         not seem to be a common standard type of fence, the design of which
  -]>    varies from club to club.

6.3.3    We would recommend that where it is considered essential to provide
         perimeter fencing, this fencing has sufficient gates to permit crowd
         evacuation on to the pitch in a controlled condition.

 6.3.4   The design and size of gates in perimeter fences should be subject to
          further investigation.

^6/3*5   Control of gates should be vested with the police or suitably trained
          stewards under their command.

6.3.6    One of the strongest recommendations we would make in this submission
         is for the provision of all-seater stands.
                                        7

6.3.7   Whilst accepting that this recommendation will be unacceptable to
        sports  ground managements,   we feel that it would prevent the
        overcrowding from occurring, i.e. when all the seats are full - the
        ground is full!

6.3.8   Justice Popplewell addressed this point and Chapter 6, Paragraph 6.16
        refers.   However, it is still the case that serious incidents arise
        from crowd misbehaviour, and it is our view that further attention
        should be given to the reference made by Justice Popplewell to the
        idiosyncrasies of football fans.

6.3.9   If a view is taken that all-seater grounds are not yet feasible, we
        would advocate that grounds are separated into ’spectator pens' with
        sufficient means of escape provision to accommodate the numbers in each
        pen.

6.3.10 The density of the occupation of pens should be strictly in accordance
       with the Green Guide.    However, emergency lateral movement should be
       provided and sufficient stewards or Police should be available to
       monitor and control access to each pen.

6.3.11 Public address systems should be capable of being used in separate
       areas of the ground, both inside and outside.    They should be audible
       and of distinct clarity to overcome the noise generated by the crowd.

6.3.12 Crowd 'reservoir* areas to the rear of the turnstiles should be
       sufficiently large to accommodate the numbers being admitted to that
       specific area, with sufficient pass door facilities available to permit
       exit from the ground in an emergency.     Cognizance should be given ^to
       the fact that spectators tend to congregate in areas directly behind
       turnstiles waiting for friends to gain admission.

6.3.13 These areas should be strictly controlled by stewards^ or Police to
       ensure free flow in either direction, should the need arise. The Green
  "    Guide, Chapter 6, Paragraph 66, relating to the exit gates should be
       strictly followed.

6.3.14 Ideally, turnstiles should only permit access to specific areas of the
       ground and numbers entering the area should be monitored by the sports
       ground management.

7.      Ground Capacities

7.1     As Lord Wheatley recognised, it is important to maintain flexibility in
         any system of control so as to take account of the differing
         circumstances at individual grounds. Characteristics such as age, size
         and mode of construction vary widely from ground to ground.

7.2     Under normal circumstances, most spectator sports attracting a regular
        attendance do not suffer problems caused by ground overcrowding.     It
        may be that a proportion wish to view from one particular part of the
         ground and, with regard to football, this is very often behind the two
         goal areas.  In general, this does not affect the overall capacity of
         the grounds.
                                       8

7.3   It is worth considering making more extensive use of the         existing
       certification process to limit levels of spectator                ;taking
       account of any specified works which ought to be carried out.

7.4   All of the above would be easily rectified if our recommendation for
       all-seater stands was accepted and ground capacities calculated in
       accordance with the Green Guide.

7.5   We must not lose sight of the special nature of the event taking place
       at Hillsborough and we would recommend that those sports grounds
       designated as being suitable to accommodate such events are limited in
       number and geographically sited to suit all needs.

8.    Stewards

8.1   Justice Popplewell was quite specific in his views on the training, use
      and provision of stewards at sports grounds.      We consider that his
      views, plus the recommendations contained in the Green Guide at Annexe
      ’B* - stewarding, and also Chapter 2 - Management Responsibility in
      relation to stewards, are not being properly carried out.

8.2   We strongly recommend that a mandatory provision be made to the Act
       with regard to the responsibility of sports ground managements to
       provide and train, etc. suitable numbers of stewards to be responsible
       for all apsects of the ground whilst spectators are in attendance.

8.3   The number of stewards required at a sports ground to be determined by
       the Chief Constable and the Local Authority's inspection team.

8.4   Stewards are often only employed on a casual basis and at times they
      may not even turn up.       A responsibility should be placed on the
      management of the sports ground to ensure that the pre-determined
       number required are on duty.    Failure to provide sufficient stewards
       should be reflected in a reduced number of people being allowed in and
       a substantial fine being levied against the sports ground management.

8.5   Even with the recommendations previously made in the Green Guide, it is
       known that stewards are often ill-trained in the nature of the
       responsibilities that go with the job.    It is essential that they are
       fully conversant with all emergency procedures and possess a special
       knowledge of the area for which they are responsible.

8.6   A way to improve the standard of stewards would be for sports ground
      managements to provide a list of points which stewards must know and do
       (as Annexe 'B' Green Guide) and then for them to be tested to ensure
      that they are competent, preferably by the Police.    The management of
      the sports ground would then issue a certificate of competence which
       should be renewed annually.  This is an area where Fire Brigades could
      make a positive contribution in respect of fire safety training.
                                         9

8.7    A specified number of stewards should be under control of chief
        stewards.  Chief stewards should be similarly tested but to-a-highers
        standard to reflect their greater level of responsibility and their
        co-ordinating role.

8.8    All stewards should come under        the jurisdiction   and   control   of the
        Senior Police Officer present.

9.     Evacuation Control

9.1    We are not satisfied that the Police and stewards, at their current
       numbers, would be sure of being able to evacuate quickly all or a major
       part of many sports grounds. This is a matter which must be addressed
        and, preferably, by our colleagues in the Association of Chief Police
       Officers (ACPO).

9.2    From our own experience in evacuation for fire purposes, we would
        suggest that the starting point is to decide on the evacuation
        procedure to be deployed and the part ground staff, principally
        stewards, have to play.    The ideal situation would be to make use of
        the public address system to relay a coded message that will alert
        stewards and other staff to the nature and vicinity of the problem.

9.3    No alarm system should be provided that gives an audible alarm in
        public areas.   As with other areas of public entertainment, public
        areas situated below a stand should be provided with buzzers and lights
        to give staff an indication of a problem.

9.4    Effective means of verbal communication should be provided adjacent to
        stewards* positions so that they can contact the control rooms to pass
        on information or raise the alarm in the event of an emergency.

9.5    Once it is determined that there is a situation which warrants either a
        partial   or total evacuation and stewards       are  in position,    an
        announcement should be made on the public address system asking
        spectators to leave in an orderly fashion as directed by the stewards.

9.6    Any decision to evacuate large numbers of spectators should be relayed
        to all emergency service control rooms for information purposes.

9.7    Should any assistance be required, as much information relating to the
        occurrence must be passed to ensure the correct resources and
        assistance are mobilised; this is of course a matter for local liaison
        but needs to be stressed.

10.    Maintenance of Standards

10.1   A major concern must be that of ensuring that high standards of safety
        are maintained once provided to the satisfaction of the Local Authori y
        inspection team. The following points should assist that objective.

10.2   Any certificate or recommendation should explain fully all the measures
       which should be in force and should state the reasons.
                                       10



10.3   'During Petrformanee• inspections in the form of spot chefcks should be
       made to monitor safety standards and the aspects conditional to the
       certificate by designated members of the Local Authority inspection
       team or Officers acting on their behalf.

10.4   Regular liaison and discussion should take place between management of
       sports grounds and representatives of the Local Authority inspection
       team.

10.5   Instruction and training must be given on a regular basis to all
       employees, both full and part-time.      This must be a management
        responsibility which   should be  reinforced as  necessary by the
        professional assistance of the Police, Fire Officers and First Aid
        Instructors.

10.6   The attitude of clubs and management has, on occasion, been unhelpful.
       We would suggest that this is an appropriate time to introduce tougher
        penalties against management who fail to discharge their duties in
        ensuring standards of public safety and who do not conform to the
        recommendations given to them by official bodies, i.e. Police or Fire
        Service, or disregard the conditions laid down in their certificate or
        the provisions of the Green Guide.  This principle of tougher measures
        should be directed towards the directors and senior management of clubs
        and sports grounds.

10.7   In addition to the conditions imposed, it would be advantageous to
        issue management of sports grounds with a list of 'rules of management
       which explicitly details their responsibilities with regard to public
        safety.

11.    Fire Service Resources

11.1   As indicated at the beginning of this submission, the involvement of
        the Fire Service with regard to the Safety at Sports Grounds Act
        revolves principally around the fire safety and means of escape
        provision.   However, with regard to operational emergency incidents,
        the relevant local authority Fire Brigade is rightly responsible in law
        for all firefighting and associated operations.   In addition, the Fire
        Brigade normally undertakes the command and rescue needs and other
        categories of emergency incident, but existing law is unclear in
        respect of the responsibilities of command and control at non-fire
        incidents.  Therefore, we consider that the local situation should be
        clarified to confirm the vital role of local authority Fire Brigades.

11.2   As this Inquiry is looking specifically at the disaster which occurred
        at Hillsborough, our operational expertise at such an incident would be
        concerned with the rescue role.

11.3   Many Fire Brigades have now adopted the title 'Fire and Rescue Service'
       and for good reason, as a large proportion of the incidents attended by
       Brigades  are non-fire    situations,  involving danger to life and
       requiring a rescue capability.
11.4    The Fire Service is the only emergency service which has the personnel,
        resources, training, experience and capability to deal with most rescue
        situations.

11.5    The practical involvement of the Fire Service at incidents such as
         Hillsborough is limited and mainly revolves around physically removing
         casualties from a dangerous environment, making the scene safe,
         carrying out resuscitation and first aid until the casualties can be
         handed over to the ambulance service.

11.6    It is recognised that at emergency incidents the Police are usually
         heavily involved in maintaining law and order, organising crowd control
         and dealing with the situation in hand.

11.7    There is a need for the emergency services to liaise, together with the
        management of the sports ground, to formulate 'Special Risk Plans
        which should take account of every conceivable type of incident that
        could occur and the resources which would be required to deal with it.

11.8    The Fire Service have special appliances dedicated to accident and
         rescue work carrying specialist cutting and rescue equipment, including
         resuscitation apparatus, backed up by disciplined personnel, trained in
         the use of this equipment and qualified to administer first aid.

11.9    At an incident such as Hillsborough, it is essential that effective,
        on-scene liaison takes place between the Senior Officers of all
        emergency services so that maximum utilisation is made of personnel and
        resources available.

11.10   One qualification we would stress is that Fire Service personnel and
        equipment must not be used for crowd control purposes where a civil
        disturbance has occurred.    The Fire Service would, of course, respond
        and deal with fires and rescue of casualties trapped in buildings or
        fires, in debris or wreckage under such conditions as deemed necessary.

11.11 It is essential that all the emergency services are aware of each
       others' resources, skills and capabilities, as time is of the essence
       when   life is at stake.       A sensible option would be to hold
       inter-service exercises at designated sports grounds involving staff
       with a scenario recommended by the Local Authority inspection team.




5045h
                                                                            APPENDIX 'A'


                                A Chief O f f i c e r ' s View in 1965

                           Safety in Football and Sports S t a di a



1.   Occasion for Disaster
     Cinemas and t h e a t r e s a re a l re a d y s t r i c t l y c o n t r o l l e d by l e g i s l a t i o n ,
     and t h i s has been based p r i m a r i l y upon e xp er i enc e gained from
     d i s a s t e r s which have occurred both in t h i s Country and in o t h e r
     p a r t s of t he world. There have, of c o u rs e, been d i s a s t e r s in
     f o o t b a l l grounds, but so f a r t h e r e appears l i t t l e evidence t h a t
     a nything has been done t o p r o f i t from previous d i s a s t e r s by way of
     improving t h e s a f e t y s t a n da r d s f o r s p e c t a t o r s in f o o t b a l l grounds.

     In 1946 a t Bolton, 33 people were k i l l e d and over 500 i n j u r e d when
     thousands of people forced t h e i r way i n t o t h e f o o t b a l l ground,
     c ru s hi n g o t h e r s p e c t a t o r s a g a i n s t b a r r i e r s , and when t h e s e c o l l a p s e d
     t h e s p e c t a t o r s , i n c l u d i n g women, were s u f f o c a t e d and trampled upon.

     In 1964 over 80 people were i n j u r e d in somewhat s i m i l a r
     c ircums tances a t Sunderland Football Ground.

     In Lima, Peru, 300 people were k i l l e d and over 1,000 i n j u r e d w h i l s t
     t r y i n g t o escape from a f o o t b a l l ground where a r i o t was in progr es s
     and where t he P o l i c e were using t e a r g a s.

     And then only r e c e n t l y 34 people were k i l l e d and many i n j u r e d                        at a
     f o o t b a l l match in Turkey.

     All t h e i n g r e d i e n t s f o r a d i s a s t e r can s t i l l be p r e s e n t p a r t i c u l a r l y
     amongst t he e mo tio na ll y charged, and o f t e n t i g h t l y packed s p e c t a t o r s
     on t h e spion kops of f o o t b a l l grounds. When l a r g e and ground
     c a p a c i t y crowds a r e a t t e n d i n g cup t i e s , and loc al d e r b i e s , one can
     o f t e n observe a cc ess gangways blocked s o l i d l y wit h s p e c t a t o r s , who,
     once i n s i d e t h e ground, a r e u s u a l l y locked s e c u r e l y in u n t i l about
     15 minutes b ef or e t h e game ends.

     L i g h t i ng pyl ons , c a t e r i n g s t a l l s , and f r a g i l e s tand r o o f s , a l l
     provide p r e c a r i o u s vantage p o i n t s f o r t h e more a g i l e s u p p o r t e r s .
     Apart from t h e obvious danger t o t h e s u p p o r t e r s themselves they
     p r e s e n t a g r e a t p o t e n t i a l t h r e a t t o t h e innocent s p e c t a t o r s s i t t i n g
     or s t an di n g unde rn eat h.

     As e x c i t i n g i n c i d e n t s b u i l d up near t o goal mouths and in o t h e r
     p a r t s of t he ground, one can see v a s t numbers of s p e c t a t o r s , p r e s s i n g ^
     forward, and t h i s movement wave runs through t h e whole crowd u n t i l
     i t i s a r r e s t e d by crush b a r r i e r s , or by t h e u l t i m a t e compression of
     t h e s p e c t a t o r s in t he lower s e c t i o n s of t h e t e r r a c e s i n t o a
     dangerous s o l i d mass of humanity. Although i t i s perhaps d i f f i c u l t
     t o imagine t h e South American or Turkish t ype r i o t s happening
     amongst t he phlegmatic B r i t i s h s p e c t a t o r s , I n e v e r t h e l e s s b e l i e v e we
     should not be deluded i n t o t a k i n g refuge in a complacent a t t i t u d e
     t h a t i t could not happen h e r e .

                                                  continued
                                                  - 2 -




     I f , as t h e signs of t he times appear t o i n d i c a t e , t h a t hooliganism
     and rowdyism a r e on t he i n c r e a s e , then i t becomes i n c r e a s i n g l y
     d i f f i c u l t t o f o r e c a s t , indeed who can p r e d i c t t he probable e f f e c t s
     of p an i c, hooliganism and p a r t i s a n s h i p upon t i g h t l y packed crowds of
     s p e c t a t o r s . I t i s not d i f f i c u l t t o imagine a t cup t i e s or local
     d e r b i e s on t he ground of one of t he lower d i v i s i o n clubs r e c e i v i n g a
     crowd p u l l i n g team which r e s u l t s in a c a p a c i t y ground, where in such
     c ircumstances t he level of f a c i l i t i e s and crowd co nt ro l exp er ien ce
     and know how, leave something t o be d e s i r e d . The exci tement and
     atmosphere i n h e r e n t in t h e r i v a l r y of t he game, t h e p a r t i s a n s h i p
     f a c t i o n s in t he crowds, t h e stimulous of a few p i n t s of beer be fore
     t h e game, a re a f i r s t c l a s s p re lu de t o d i s a s t e r , so t h a t a l l t h a t i s
     now r e q u i r e d i s an element of rough p la y , coupled with a few
     c o n t e n t i o u s d e c i s i o n s , and t h e p a t t e r n i s s e t .

2.   Recent Events
     Recent events have only emphasised t he lack of elementary s a f e t y
     p r e c a u t i o n s in f o o t b a l l grounds t o p r o t e c t t h e s p e c t a t o r s and
     prevent t h e spread of f i r e in t he s t a n d s .

     In a S c o t t i s h League match between Dunfermline A t h l e t i c and C e l t i c ,
     one person was k i l l e d and 49 people i n j u r e d . Crash b a r r i e r s
     c o l l a p s e d and hundreds were s e nt tumbling on t o t he f o o t b a l l p i t c h .

     In Covent ry, t he main s tand was s e v e r e l y damaged by f i r e ,
     n e c e s s i t a t i n g i t s demol it io n and r e c o n s t r u c t i o n . The design and
     c o n s t r u c t i o n of t he o l d , s t a n d f a c i l i t a t e d t h e r apid spread of f i r e .

     Two days l a t e r t h e f o o t b a l l stadium a t Swansea was s e v e r e l y damaged
     by f i r e . F o r t u n a t e l y both s t and s were empty of s p e c t a t o r s when t he
     f i r e s o ccu rr ed . The beginning of t h i s y e a r ' s footbal 1 ^season Weis
     marred by t h e f i r e which occurred a t Nottingham F o r e s t s , F o o t b a l l s
     Stadium. This f i r e s t a r t e d w h i l s t t he match was in prog res s and t he
     f i r e spread so r a p i d l y t h a t 4,000 s p e c t a t o r s had t o be h u r r i e d l y
     e vac ua te d. Furthermore, i t i s r e p o r t e d t h a t t h e f i r e f i g h t i n g
     o p e r a t i o n s were h indered by c ar s parked in t h e v i c i n i t y of t he
     ground. From t h e p r e l i m i n a r y r e p o r t s i t appears t h a t a d i s a s t e r was
     once again j u s t narrowly a v e r t e d .

3.   Fire Risks
     I t would probably be t r u e t o say t h a t t h e r i s k s where l a r g e crowd
     s i t u a t i o n s a re p r e s e n t , f a l l i n t o two b a s i c c l a s s i f i c a t i o n s . There
     i s a l i f e and personal s a f e t y r i s k , with an a t t e n d a n t f i r e a n d panic
     r i s k where t h e o l d e r type of combustible t ype st an d s and f i x t u r e s
     a r e s t i l l in u s e.



                                           ..   continued
Probably t h e p r i n c i p l e f i r e r i s k in t he average f o o t b a l l ground is
t h e t r a d i t i o n a l covered s t a n d , b u i l t p r i m a r i l y of timber with the
usual c o r r u ga t e d i ron or a s b e s t o s r o o f . Once a f i r e secures a hold
in t h i s type of s t r u c t u r e i t , of c o u rs e, spreads r a p i d l y , and can
d e s t r o y t h e s tand o f te n b ef or e e f f e c t i v e f i r e f i g h t i n g measures can
be brought i n t o e f f e c t . F i r e f i g h t i n g o p e r a t i o n s can be complicated
by t h e voids and spaces beneath t he s t a n d s , where o f t e n , combustible
rubbish and d is use d and worn out equipment i s s t o r e d , and i t i s
t h e r e f o r e , in t h e s e p l a c es where f i r e can spread u n d e t ec te d .

Where t h e spaces under s ta nd s a r e u t i l i s e d f o r o f f i c e s and d r e s s i n g
rooms, e t c . , t h e s e a r e a s a re oft en f u r t h e r sub di vi de d by timber
studded p a r t i t i o n s covered by combustible hardwood or s o f t b o a r d . In
such s t r u c t u r a l c o n d i t i o n s f i r e can spread r a p i d l y through t h i s type
of accommodation due t o t h e absence of a measure of f i r e r e s i s t i n g
c ompartmentation.

Fire Prevention
All spaces         under s ta nd s should be c l e a r e d of combustible rubbish and
materials,         and a c a r e f u l i n s p e c t i o n made of a l l f l o o r s over voids
f o r c r a ck s   and holes through which c i g a r e t t e ends and l i g h t e d
matches or         smoking m a t e r i a l s could f a l l .

During t h e time s p e c t a t o r s a re occupying s t an ds f r eq u e n t i n s p e c t i o n s
should be made of t h e voids and a f i n a l i n s p e c t i o n made a t l e a s t
t h i r t y minutes a f t e r t h e s p e c t a t o r s have l e f t t h e s t a n d .

All e l e c t r i c a l equipment and wi ri ng should be examined and t e s t e d by
a competent e l e c t r i c a l c o n t r a c t o r a t l e a s t once in every t h r e e
y e a r s . I t should be ensured t h a t adequate a p p r o p r i a t e f i r s t a id
f i r e f i g h t i n g equipment i s s t r a t e g i c a l l y p o s i t i o n e d in t he s t a n d s ,
and i f t h e r e i s any doubt about t h e adequacy or e f f e c t i v e n e s s of t he
a p pa r a t u s t h e Chief F i r e O f f i c e r f o r t h e area should be r e qu es te d t o
a d v i s e on f i r e defence arrangement s.

Spectators' Safety and Comfort on Grounds and Stadia
To e ns ur e r e as on ab le s t a n d a r d s of s a f e t y f o r t he general p u b l i c
a t t e n d i n g l a r g e crowd e v e n t s , i t i s e s s e n t i a l t h a t c e r t a i n reforms
should be c a r r i e d out and t h e fol l owi ng a r e a few s u g ge st io n s in
th is regard:-

a)      Crowds should be e f f e c t i v e l y compartmented by more crush
        b a r r i e r s . These crush b a r r i e r s and r e t a i n i n g w a l l s should be
        c o n s t r u c t e d t o some recogni sed s t a n d a r d of s a f e t y i n s p e c t e d by
        a q u a l i f i e d b u i l d i n g i n s p e c t o r t o ensure t h a t they wi ll
        w i t h s t a n d maximum crowd p r e s s u r e s with generous s a f e t y margin;


                                          continued
b)      Providing s t ew ar ds , (members of Suppor ter s Clubs) who a f t e r
        s u i t a b l e t r a i n i n g could s u p e r v i s e each compartment t o o b v ia t e
        over f i l l i n g and keep access gangways c l e a r of s p e c t a t o r s .
        Such an arrangement would be of c o n s i d e r a b l e a s s i s t a n c e t o t he
        club in t h e p r o v i s i o n of e f f e c t i v e crowd c o nt ro l e f f i c i e n c y ,
        and would help t h e P o l i c e in l o c a t i n g and c o n t r o l l i n g t r o u b l e
        makers when a d i s t u r b a n c e was in t h e o f f i n g . Stewards could
        a l s o be t r a i n e d in t he p r o j e c t i n g of t h e family e n te r t a i n me n t
        image, and t h e r e a f t e r would be t h e s o c i a l c o n t a c t and l i n k man
        in each crowd compartment. The stewards could be t r a i n e d in
        f i r s t a i d t o t h e i n j u r e d , crowd c o nt ro l pyschology, and
        elementary f i r e p r e v e n t i o n . In a comparat ivel y s h o rt p eri od of
        time, because s p e c t a t o r s u s u a l l y f o r e g a t h e r in s i m i l a r pla ces
        week by week, each compartment would become a s o c i a l e n t i t y ,
        common t o t h e personal i d e n t i t i e s of t h e r e g u l a r s u p p o r t e r s ,
        t h e i r f a m i l i e s and a s s o c i a t e s ;

c)      The p r o v i s i o n of adequate primary and secondary l i g h t i n g i s
        p a r t i c u l a r l y important during f l o o d l i g h t games;

d)      The p r ov i s i on of s p ec i al e n cl o s u r e s f o r c h i l d r e n and o t h e r
        s p ec i a l s e c t i o n s of t he p u b li c who cannot p a r t i c i p a t e in t he
        usual s p e c t a t o r f a c i l i t i e s .

Stadium and Fo otba ll Ground Design

I t would appear t h e r e i s ample scope f o r some of our s chools or
f a c u l t i e s of a r c h i t e c t u r e t o c a r r y out a comprehensive r e sea rc h
study i n t o t h e s p e c t a t o r l o g i s t i c s of f o o t b a l l ground and stadium
design t o achi eve t h e s t a n da r d s of s a f e t y and comfort b e f i t t i n g t h i s
C o u n tr y' s approach t o t h e l a t e s i x t i e s and s e v e n t i e s .

Legislation

The le ga l p o s i t i o n r e ga r di ng f o o t b a l l and s p o r t s s t a d i a i s not
c l e a r ; i t would appear t h a t Secti on 59 of t h e P ub li c Health Act 1936
a p p l i e s t o t he b u i l d i n g s w i t h in t h e c u r t i l a g e of t he f o o t b a l l s t a d i a
and, t h e r e f o r e , s a f e i n g r e s s and e g r es s can be secured f o r
s p e c t a t o r s in t he s t a n d s . Where l i c e n s e d bars or l i c e n s e d cl ubs are
provided under t h e s t a n d s , t h e usual p u b l i c e n t e r t a i n m e n t s a f e t y
s t a n d a r d s such as secondary l i g h t i n g , e x i t s i g n s , adequate e x i t s ,
f i r e f i g h t i n g equipment, and t h e flame p ro of i ng of f u r n i s h i n g and
d e c o r a t i o n s , c a n be i n s i s t e d upon under t h e Li ce ns in g Act of 1964.

The le ga l p o s i t i o n of t he t e r r a c e d s e c t i o n s , sometimes r e f e r r e d t o
as "Spion Kops" and o t h e r open a i r s t an d i n g s p ac e s, where t he
s p e c t a t o r s a re t i g h t l y packed, i s obscure because t h e s e pl ac es
cannot be d e fi ne d as s t r u c t u r e s . Safety measure in t h e s e s i t u a t i o n s
a r e t h e r e f o r e l e f t t o t h e i n d i v i d u a l a t t i t u d e s or common sense of
f o o t b a l l managements, which of c ourse v a r i e s according t o t h e
q u a l i t y of t he management, and t o o t h e r p r e v a i l i n g c ircumst ances
which wi ll i n f l u e n c e t h e s t a n d a r d s , not l e a s t of a l l being t h e
p r o s p e r i t y and t h e f i n a n c i a l c a p a b i l i t y of t h e o r g a n i s a t i o n .

                                            continued
                                              -   5 -




I t wi ll be obvious t o anyone who t h i n k s about a s p e c t s of s a f e t y t h a t
c o n d i t i o n s in many f o o t b a l l grounds l eave a l o t t o be d e s i r e d and
f u r t h e r l e g i s l a t i o n i s c l e a r l y needed t o r e g u l a r i s e t h e p o s i t i o n .
I t would be r e f r e s h i n g t o hope t h a t l e g i s l a t i o n t o provide f o r
re a so na bl e s a f e t y s t a n d a r d s f o r t h e p u b l i c in r e s p e c t of t h e use of
open a i r t e r r a c i n g on s p o r t s and f o o t b a l l grounds could be secured
b e f o r e a not he r d i s a s t e r o c cu r s, r a t h e r than foll owi ng t h e usual
p r a c t i c e of l ocking t h e l e g i s l a t i v e door a f t e r t h e horse has al re ad y
bolted.

Past h i s t o r y has i n d i c a t e d t h a t foll owi ng a d i s a s t e r , remedial
l e g i s l a t i o n has s w i f t l y foll owed, but t h e exception t o t h i s r u l e i s
t h e f o o t b a l l i n d u s t r y which appears t o be in t h e realm of the
unto uc ha ble.

The M i n i s t e r of Sport has adopted t he now s t a n da r d d el ay in g t a c t i c
beloved of a l l p o l i t i c i a n s of a p p o i nt i n g a Committee, but a f t e r
s t ud y i ng c o n s t i t u e n t membership and i t s o b j e c t i v e s I cannot envisage
any improvements f o r t h e s a f e t y of s p e c t a t o r s in t h e f o r e s e e a b l e
future.

I t i s obvious t h a t d i s a s t e r s can be caused by f i r e , ; t h e r e i s
a l r e ad y ample evidence t h a t f o o t b a l l st an ds can be s e t on f i r e y e t
t h e r e appears t o be no recognised f i r e e n gi ne er on t he Committee t o
a d v i se on f i r e defence and means of escape a s p e c t s . C ol la psi ng
c rush b a r r i e r s and s t r u c t u r a l a s p e c t s a re a n o t h e r well proven cause
of i n j u r y , but again t h e r e appears no s t r u c t u r a l s a f e t y e ng i ne er on
t h e Committee.

I have some d i f f i c u l t y in r e c o n c i l i n g a Committee so heav il y
weighted by r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of t he s p o r t , o b j e c t i v e l y c o n s i d e r i n g
s a f e t y having regard t o consequent f i n a n c i a l and o r g a n i s a t i o n a l
implications.

I t i s not a p l e a s a n t pastime t o be a prophet of doom, but I
r e i t e r a t e t h a t t h e p o i n t s which I made in my a r t i c l e n e ar l y a y e a r
ago have been f u l l y j u s t i f i e d by subsequent e v e n t s . Those who
a t t e n d f o o t b a l l matches as s p e c t a t o r s must face up t o t he
p o s s i b i l i t y t h a t they may in t h e a p p r o p r i a t e circumstances be d i c i n g
with d i s a s t e r . Far be i t f o r me t o p r e - j u d g e t h e work of t he
Committee but whatever t h e outcome t h e i r e f f o r t s w i l l never be
e f f e c t i v e wit hou t l e g i s l a t i v e backi ng. This i s a pa in ful but
historical fact.
iI/'S?. 1                  ©082761530




               w       r r.                   CFO,   c 0 UTH   iCrRH'IS-

            r ■; , ;     0 / 4'i    / 2 fc>B y 4



                   M r; K I ftObE,            CACfOA

                        <>“ 27     (ilSJU


            •■v e m b er      1989



                                                                    i : .   'i e e t , '

                                                          INQUIRY      ■*       you
              •; m     writing,, l e t t e r              or fax,      is; ” ■? by H-
   H> N o v e m b e r , T h a n k you,
  13:26              @ 082761530                                 AM
                                                             CACFOA




                                                   DRAM      C’OPY



     Mr         CobSA     A MD A S S I S T A N T     CHIEF     MRE     OFFICERS^     AAACClATAfOA

                                H FITS B O R O U G H D I S A S T E R   INQUIRY


it;* ■ i . t i e   fit S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e   F ire     Brigade    Headquarters       . c i M i . o o




                                                       A V Buie,       M F D e nn e t t ,   f w rpi^ei;
                    A K    Seaman       and    K     E Rose,




         GAC.KOA        Submission


         Trie        meeting        considered           the     implications            tb
         recommendation            at    para    5,2      that    the     provisions       oI      o
         G r e e n G u i d e s h o u l d be m a n d a t o r y .   It was ;elt tha" ■ ^ t ^ '
         rh.fficulti.es          were       first,       very     few      fcootbalb.      .r-r-o-'os
         c u r r e n t l y me t all the r e q u i r e m e n t s of the               .
         s e c o n d , 'that r i g i d i t y in d e t a i l e d p r e s c r i p t i o n eo . ■ .ct
         bp a g oo d th ine a n yw ay *              T h e r e s h o u l d be s o me             ! *r
         flexibility.

          In the v i e w of t ho s e p r e s e n t ,
          would         mean    that       the   Green   Guide     would       jiave ^ T o   ae
          rewritten.            The       mandatory   matters     should       be   r.M T e ^or
          I m po r t a n t   principle,        whilst   there    should      re   ^ccr
          r e a c h i n g local a g r e e m e n t on p o i n t s of d e t a i l ,.c * n o   the
          n r e a s of p r i n c i p l e .


           In      relation
                         to p a r a 10,
                      formal
                          prescription            ot      desigoateo        iocha
                                S t a n d a r d s of c o o r d i n a t i o n vat:        ■■■■.,
          • c/.ross the c o u n t r y .      It s h o u l d be c l e a r w h i c h no •: :.p ;aies
                   -, -          ; ' wha . e a c h          Is        -„ ■        <  Mr
          lirovision of a d e q u a t e d i r e c t i o n     signs ), ano w-io • - ....,
                                                       - , _              - . r .                n !:    -'.earn
          meet 1 lifts      and   any   relevant      correspondence        nr   ;rofetin|o
          i n v o l v i n g one o: .■! r          -■ ■ ■ :      ! ■     ■■ ■             1i
          tne o t h er s .      It was n o t e d that In cooe ^ f f i c c - A . -
          at least t h ere had b e e n p r o b l e m s in a-, A 1 ev Io c       yt-otory
          cotirdCi-ition hoi low: or -ibo 1 11 •           M hie c o u p ?
          in J¥»o,.
’89 1. 1 /22 18:26                @ 082761530                               CACFOA




               1 he  rale  of g r o u n d tnanagemen t s h o u l d be                                                       <-:jenrl>                      cettoeo
               it/' Iodine of c o u r s e t hei r r e s p o n s i b i l i t y                                               at the                         t 'i'e at
               the e vent s.

         : t . lise           meetingalso   tho ug ht    it was         important       that        ■ ^ ‘ ety
                                          2                          b a c k e d by s u f f i c i e n t d e t a i l to co
               the         circumstances        which       might         apply      to       tne         way
                                  ■                   at     the     ground       are     to      be       organise-!
               d i f f e r e n t eve nt s ,  In p a r t i c u l a r , if substantial.                ■ ■.
               are to be mad e, eg c l o s i n g a b l o c k of t u r n s t i l e s , _there
               s h o u l d be a r e q u i r e m e n t  to e n s u r e that         the C e r t i f i c a t e
               /Li n a p p l i e d or a v a r i a t i o n to it was n ee d ed ,

               i                                                   a r e q u i r e m e n t to c o n s i d e r the ,v''r?
               novlous                 c o n t i n g e n c i e s , ep the f o r c i n g of an e n t r a n c e g / r » t
               and ?or                 the r e to be p l a n s to d e a l w i t h them.


)              The                meeting
                                        wished           to  emphasise        para      11.1     ot
                                              It is p r o p o s e d that the F ir e S e r m o .           ,..3
               c i e a r l v m a d e r e s p o n s i b l e for c o m m a n d and c o n t r o l ot r e s c u e
               ■operations at            non-fire           tridents.         T his   w as c o u l d    not
               sp-piy at H i l l s b o r o u g h brc e a s e r e s cu e
               b e f o r e the fire c r e ws a r ra y e d , but w o u l d h a r e b een ir roe
               d i c e s ter had b e e n c a u s e d by the c o l l a p s e or a stand.

               In this c o n n e c t i o n ,  r e i e t e r t e was m a d e to the ■ ■ :     r ot
               London Fire B rigade fol lo wi ng t r i e           C l a p h m n rail, crash, sod
               ano ther
               • Joint C o m m i t t e e on O p e r a t i o n s ,


               Coordination                      ot

               T h e r e n e e d to be        -    - -      -
               update                                                                                    i ll y take                       p i           are         u        the
               n x p R r i e n c e of t h ose p r e s e n t at                           this            m eet iris.

                a     plan     for      the     event       i s s ue d      the    day       be tore,     C'/uig
                ■ r t orm a t ion      which        the Fire            Service       n e t d to    enow,       eg
                expected         obstructions              to t r a f f i c   r ou t e s      and    s-
                o ar Ki ng , is e s s e n t i a l .        For        *he p o l i c e ta need           ho rare
                s a n v i o e a c o m p r e h e n s i v e pl/c                -nf thro r -o         a 1 -"-     u
                not p a r t i c u l a r l y h e lp f u l ,

                ram* t             c a m fad      consideration                     ms       supr                 f-o            .-■■■■              *          .            fire
                o f f i tf i i                        to        be     p r e s e n t         st          h u t i ?           :                       -                        and
                o f o o l a r           m f n U ,          !l        mas     i *C l          P, ?        ■             -v                   •                   -        on      a
                              \          has i a l t b o t l p n               ' '           *'.a=           a     , p               -          :.                  - m a r t a i
                > >■■■'.■ n       ",         .              ■                 CO.        b b - : : t e       a l t ;             ?       b..:              '■        t e c     Iti
                   a:'- pi to: yon w i t h            the        p o l ic e*         At       t h ese             tt,tmms ’p- • r re
3 :2?                                                      CACFOA




P'l tcer 3nnu lc be
u,e . r o u n d w h e r e he                   would    have        a
      -V       ■'                                                               fite^ ^
                                                                                 UV t a u i u       w«, •»..■■■■■
,,.-^r ? e r-.   t as'they         made    their way             to the grount,.

tPiotball clubs                    should pay          tor       this     liaison         k ^ i-v a w c    .


 Ferimeter                  Fences

 rhev                 are    unnecessary             for        fire      prevention            ^ d u ... j.

          .       ,         ' 0f     bad         crowd            b e h a v io u i.            «
 spe ci fi ca ti on                for    perim et er           fence     is      requirea.
 •hie          vo u id       have          re le v a n c e        to r     th e     k
 •j* i -1i ■nfn«Ti f.. n e e d e d ,      much m ore            re lia n c e    srto u lcl      ?>e                 ; •;
                                                                                      ana trecoer.v                 r .
                             .nines       leading          to     the    perimeter              ;
      ,       .       ^                  . -     .         rapid        evacuation            ot      eact,
 sav, within                  3 minutes*


 F r e e r , billde
  ,                                w eaknesses          arecovered              above,         *e ;


  it              perimeter tertces,              and                       4     *?***

   in             the G u i d e is not, as c u r r e n t l y                written,           m      •<
                  foni! to be m a d e m a n d a t o r y .
24/11   '88   12:03          @0742       726894        SOUTH YORKS F IR E




                      '   ' ' K/T i OS T k l

                  ; liW h t l HJ\      ID

                  S H K T TI Ml,                  li/24 1 2 : 0 2

                  1 SAGE TIME                       01 ‘01

                                                    2/002
           SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE

A FACSIMILE MESSAGE FROM:                                  COMMAND HEADQUARTERS,
                                                           WELLINGTON STREET,
                                                           SHEFFIELD,
                                                           SI 3FG
                                                           TEL: (0742) 727202
      H E Wright, C P O , South   Yorkshire

                                                           DATE:   24.11.89




TO:              .nr. JC.B .Rpse. .CACFQ4

                 .PAX. No.. .0821 .6.1530 .




THIS MESSAGE CONSISTS OF...2                  PAGES, INCLUDING THIS ONE.


OUR FAX NUMBER IS:         SHEFFIELD (0742) 726894



COMMENTS.




If you have any difficulties please ring (0742) 727202 ext 244
FAX MESSAGE TO MR K E ROSE, CACFOA

DATE: 24.11.89

FROM: H E WRIGHT, CFO, SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


CACFOA SUBMISSION - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY

The following comments are made on the note provided following the meeting
at South Yorkshire Fire Brigade Headquarters on 21.11.89. They correspond
to the paragraph numbers.

1{i)     My major reservation in making the Green Guidemandatory as
          suggested in Paragraph 5.2 is that plans are currently in being
         to abolish the mandatory rules on means of escape in the British
          Building Regulations in favour of a functional requirement.
         Paragraphs 4 to 13 of the Guide outline the general principles of
          crowd safety and indicate that deviations may be made without
          necessarily detracting from overall safety.       They suggest a
          flexible   approachusing   professional      judgement  including
          reduction in spectator capacity in lieu of extensive remedial
         work particularly at less well attended grounds. The Guide does
          not however, indicate any particularly important principles about
         which there is little or no room for relaxation and I feel more
          guidance is needed.

l(iii)   A national model standard safety certificate should be produced
          by the Home Office with recommended wording of safety conditions.
          This model certificate should include all aspects which should be
          covered and should include consideration of the adequacy of
          turnstile provision in relation to capacity.

4.       Green Guide

          i)     Amend to read "perimeter fences and provision of gates, and
    'i 3 B 8                                                                   ITEM
       FEP 89 64        FIRE & EMERGENCY           2.1 a u - y                     14
                        PLANNING COMMITTEE




       TAYLOR INQUIRY INTO HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




       1.   The Association was asked to submit written evidence to the Lord
       Justice Taylor Inquiry into the events at Hillsborough Stadium on 15
       April 1989. The terms of reference are:

            To enquire into events at Sheffield Wednesday Football ground on
            15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs for
            crowd control and safety at sports events.

        2.   Following a special meeting of the Emergency Planning Sub-Committee

•       on 2 June, members and advisers from the AMA's Fire and Emergency
        Planning, Police, Social Services, Planning and Economic Development
        and Arts, Recreation and Tourism Committee met to draw up a draft
        response to the Inquiry. This was then endorsed by officers of the
        Association   "                in order to meet the Inquiry's deadline,
    ... 30 June. A copy of the Association's memorandum is appended herewith.

       3.   Members will note that the memorandum was accompanied by the AMA
       document "Local Authorities and Peacetime Emergency Planning",
       published last November, together with a paper specially prepared by
       Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence Authority and the AMA's Football
       Development Working Party's Paper.

       4.   Equalities considerations                                    - there
       do not appear to be any.

       5.   Memfcxrx are asked to note the Association's evidence to the Inquiry.



       SSB/4/11B
       3 July 1989
                                             APPENDIX                     FEP 89 64




MEMORANDUM TO THE TAYLOR IN Q U IR Y




1.   The Association of Metropolitan Authorities represents the 36

Metropolitan District Councils, 31 London Boroughs, the City of London, the

Inner London Education Authority and the Joint Authorities responsible for

Police, the Fire Service and Public Transport in the Metropolitan Areas.

The Association's role is to promote and protect the interests of its

member authorities and the community they serve, to provide a forum for

member authorities to discuss and act collectively on matters of common

concern and to provide a service to member authorities, including the

dissemination of good practice.        The county of Merseyside includes the

districts of Knowsley, Liverpool, St Helens, Sefton and Wirral where the

majority of the dead, the injured, their families, friends and neighbours

lived.   The county of South Yorkshire includes the districts of Barnsley,

Doncaster, Rotherham and Sheffield.       The district councils appoint the

elected members to the Fire & Civil Defence Authorities and Police

Authorities.




2.   Since March 1983, the Association has maintained a Working Party on

Football, which is now called the Football Development Working Party.          In

1984, the Association published "Football Violence : The Metropolitan

Viewpoint" (copy appended) and the Association also gave evidence before Mr

Justice Popplewell in 1985.     The Association provides joint secretariat

services for Football's Family Forum which will submit evidence separately

to the inquiry.




3.   The Association recognises that it would be possible for the Inquiry

to interpret narrowly its second term of reference "to make recommendations
about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports grounds".     The

Association urges the Inquiry to adopt the broadest approach because



      (a)   "the needs of crowd control and (crowd) safety" go beyond

            issues of movement, density, policing and building materials into

            areas of public policy such as responsibility for organisational

            procedures, co-ordination and liaison in the aftermath of

            disaster and medium to long-term commitments to victim support;

            and



       (b) "at sports grounds" interpreted narrowly would preclude the

            Inquiry from making recommendations on crowd control and safety

            at other large scale events such as pop concerts held elsewhere

            than in sports grounds.



4.   The Association recognises the necessity to balance the maintenance of

public order at large scale events with preserving the personal safety of

individual spectators.     It recognises the difficulties faced by the

police, but it believes that considerations of public order and control can

at times overshadow the issue of spectator safety.     Measures to promote

public order and public safety are not always identical.



The Association also accepts that the operational considerations relating

to any sporting event are unique.     Each football ground is different in

terms of construction and environment, while crowd size and demeanour are

affected by many different factors such as the weather, the importance of

the match and the relationship between the clubs involved.      In these

circumstances local knowledge is as crucial as any set of centrally agreed
guidelines.      Nevertheless, principles relating to the growth of community

involvement in football set out in "Football Violence: The Metropolitan

Viewpoint" remain as valid today as they were in 1984 and the document was

publicly endorsed by the then Minister for Sport, Neil MacFarlane MP within

weeks of publication.      The Association would ask the Inquiry to give due

weight to these principles in any recommendations which it makes about the

general context of the Hillsborough tragedy.



Furthermore the Association has long held, and will continue to take, the

view that any member of the public should have the same expectation of

safety at a public event whether this be an enclosed premises (such as a

theatre) in the open air, (a pop concert for example) or a sporting stadium

(football, cricket or rugby eg).



5.   With specific regard to the circumstances at Hillsborough, the

Association's position is clear and was stated in a previous inquiry to Mr

Justice Popplewell.     At any football match, the playing surface can

constitute a major place of safety for spectators in the event of an

emergency.     Whilst recognising the need to maintain public order, the

Association said that:



     (a)     there should be a choice of alternative means of escape from

             a stand which would provide so far as is reasonably practicable,

             for spectators to turn their back on the source of the fire or

             other problem and travel to a place of safety.   Such means of

             escape would require effective policing/stewarding on the spot;
     (b)   each exit should wherever possible have direct access to open air

           and should be separated from other exits to avoid funnelling

           people into a congested area;



     (c)   many seated stands are constructed so that people have to move

           forwards and downwards in order to get out.     This means that

           they may have to go towards the source of danger before reaching

           safety.     This is contrary to the interests of public safety, and

           the guidance document, (Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds) should

           be updated to limit the forward travel distance where there is no

           alternative means of escape at the rear of the stand;



     (d)   the training and number of stewards at public events requires

           scrutiny.     Most are casually employed.   Measures are necessary

           to ensure that their knowlege of the ground, its safety systems

           and the correct procedures are of the highest order because of

           the public responsibility which they carry;



     (e)   specific measures which should be taken in respect of enclosure

           fences include:    the siting of emergency gates in fences, such

           gates to be secured by suitable quick release mechanisms; such

           gates to be manned by sufficient stewards; stewards to be trained

           (see above); stewards to have independent communication with a

           central control point, and to be trained in the system used.



These points, which arose from the Bradford fire disaster are equally

applicable to the Hillsborough tragedy.
6.   Since Hillsborough, the Association's secretariat has inspected the

anti-panic barrier now installed at the municipal stadium in Nimes, in

operation at a match.      Although the system has only recently been

introduced, it does appear to provide a means of maintaining; public order

and safety at the same time.      The Association would hope that the system

could be given an early trial in England to see if it would be appropriate

here.



7-      At this stage in the acquisition and evolution of experience from the

recent spate of major disasters including Hillsborough, the Association

urges the Inquiry to build into its report and recommendations positive and

forward-looking views on a number of issues:



        (a)   The powers, practices and systems of local authorities' planning

              for major disasters and responses to them.       These are addressed

              in detail in two documents accompanying the covering letter,

              "Local Authorities and Peacetime Emergency Planning: A Review of

              Current Arrangements and Proposals for Improvement" (November

              1988) and an amended version of the Association's final submission

              (June 1988) to the Home Office in an endeavour to influence

              the latter's Review of Peacetime Disasters;
                                                           ►




        (b)   Counselling and support for victims and carers/rescuers:      the

              Association firmly believes governmental initiative and

              commitment are necessary in two major areas.     First, there is

              a need for guidance and training packages to be promulgated to

              local authorities and District Health Authorities (the

              Association is represented on the Department of Health/CRUSE
      Working Party).    S e c o n d l y l o n g term victim and rescuer/carer

      support is expensive.     The Association understands Liverpool

      City Council's additional commitment is.around £2 million; and

      other Merseyside authorities will also have heavy costs in this

      area.   The Association:therefore urges the Inquiry to recommend

      prompt and full reimbursement by government to local authorities

      faced with the consequence of disaster among their people,

      families and conanunities.     The Association is aware that the

      Local Government and Housing Bill, clause 133 at Report Stage,

      enables the Minister to codify the so called "Bellwin Rules" but

      is unconvinced that government has any commitment to meeting in

      full the financial costs of disaster.




(c)   Major disasters generate public appeals.        The law's complexities

      and inequities are well known from the experiences of recent

      disaster funds.    The Association does not consider it necessary

      for every local authority to have a Disaster Appeal discretionary

      trust on the shelf, updated as experience and case law develop.

      However, the danger of buying in the state of the art after the

      next disaster is that irrevocable decisions can be made early on.

      The Association accordingly believes it would be sensible and

      prudent for government to issue guidelines on the establishment,

      administration and termination of disaster appeals.




(d)   The Association is aware that currently some building control

      departments in local authorities are moving by virtue of their

      responsibilities for safe structures and buildings into the area

      of training stewards and assisting the police on crowd movement

      and dynamics.     Because these departments know how crowds behave




                                     -   6-
in tight spaces, before during and after a major event (like a

semi-final or a Michael Jackson concert), the Association

considers this emerging trend should be encouraged by Government

and standards approaches promulgated.      Equally, on-site match

day "spot checks" by appropriate officials from building control

and fire prevention should also be encouraged.      A vital issue

is the need to drastically review the recommendations of the

method of calculating the safe ground capacities for terraced

areas and viewing slopes as outlined in the Home Office guide to

Safety of Sports Grounds.      The term "peak viewing" area should

be further defined and given a maximum size and arrangements made

for a maximum number of persons based on 54 per 10m* to occupy

that part of the faciliites.    All other areas should be

classified as requiring a substantially lower density factor

{possibly 40 per 10m2) yet maintaining the need for 6kn/m tests

to be achieved on all crush barriers.     (This maximum calculation

should be reduced, as in the current guide, depending on the

state of the terrace or viewing slope).




The figure of 54 per 10m2 is used throughout the terrace and

therefore must be an average figure.     This average is exceeded

in peak viewing areas and therefore any safety factors are

reduced proportionately.




It is also important in the light of Hillsborough, not just to

calculate terrace capacities but also to ensure that there is on

the spot monitoring that the capacities are not exceeded or at

least to keep a close eye on the crowd to ensure that they are

not too tightly packed.
           In self-contained terraces it might be possible to monitor

           capacities by means of a turnstile.   Where the terrace is not

           self-contained and there is the possibility of movement by fans

           in and out of the terrace or to other parts of the terrace the

           only control possible would seem to be effective supervision by

           Police or stewards whose task is to ensure proper "packing" of

           terraces.




           Where the playing area is considered to be a safe place for

           evacuation from stands, and there is a standing paddock or

           terrace area between the stands and the playing area, the

           packing density for this terraced area should not exceed the lower

           figure of 26 persons per 10m* to reduce the risk of crushing in

           the event of forward evacuation from the stands towards the

           playing area.




     (e)   The incoming calls at Casualty Bureaux and hospital switchboards

           frequently cause the system to collapse.    This is because the

           public telephone network does not have the capacity to absorb a

           huge and unanticipated increase in calls.   The Association

           recognises that the perfect answer is unobtainable but recommends

           the Inquiry to take evidence on forthcoming proposed improvements

           and assess their likely effectiveness.




8.   In conclusion, the Association believes that public safety and public

order can be exercised to a high degree of compatibility in football

stadiums provided that the principles set out above are applied to the

particular circumstances of each individual ground and each event.

Improved standards of construction and training should assist the control
stadiums provided that the principles set out above are applied to the

particular circumstances of each individual ground and each event.

Improved standards of construction and training should assist the control

of each match, but this will need funding.    The funding required could be

provided by using a small percentage of the duty currently collected by the

Treasury from football pools.   This is a small sum to pay for ensuring

public safety.



The Association will be pleased to present more detailed technical or other

arguments to the Inquiry as appropriate.




                                     -   9-
The Chief And Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association ^


 Our ref:   KER/JMB                      10-11 Pebble Close
                                         Amington
                                         Tamworth
 4 January 1989                          Staffs B77 4RD
                                         Tel 0827 61516




 Mr H E Wright
 Fire Prevention Technical Committee
 South Yorkshire Fire Brigade
 Command HQ
 Wellington Street
 Sheffield SI 3FG




 Dear

 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY

 I enclose a copy of a note prepared following the meeting which
 the CACFOA delegation had with Lord Justice Taylor on 28
 November 1989.




 K E ROSE
 General Manager
     THE CHIEF & ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS * ASSOCIATION

                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER ENQUIRY


Note of a Meeting held at the Home Office on 28 November 1989


Present were Lord Justice Taylor, Mr B Johnson, Chief Constable
of Lancashire, Mr R M Whalley, and a Secretary.     CACFOA were
represented by Messrs M Rogers, R A Graham, A R Jones and K E
Rose.

1.   The Green Guide

     .CACFOA referred to pages 24/25 of the Interim Report which
      indicated  that   the Home   Office had   power  to  issue
      regulations to strengthen the applicability of the Green
      Guide, and said we were in favour of that happening in
      certain respects.    L J Taylor pointed out that the same
      requirements could be met by attaching them as a condition
      of issuing a safety certificate.    It was agreed that the
      principal matters which should be strengthened related to
      crowd density, means of escape, crush barriers and fire
      safety, for the last of which CACFOA indicated we were
      quite happy with the Green Guide provisions.

2.    Perimeter Fences

     L J Taylor    suggested that until recently,     gates  in
     perimeter fences had not been regarded as provision for
     evacuation onto the pitch as a means of escape.     It had
     now become necessary to consider this more carefully.

      While CACFOA indicated there were football grounds which
      had satisfactory means of escape without using the pitch,
      it was felt that these were exceptions and it was better
      to plan for evacuation onto the pitch as a general rule.
      Discussion turned to frequency and size of gaps or gates
      in perimeter fences, and the CACFOA group indicated we
      would prefer to make the criterion that any structured
      enclosure should be capable of being fully evacuated
      within 3 mintues (2% minutes in respect of fire-prone
      structures) as set out in the Green Guide.

3.    Cutting Gear

      CACFOA referred     to the very different construction of
      perimeter fences   at different grounds, and doubted whether
      clubs would have   the skills and resources to maintain and
      use the powered    equipment that would be needed in some
The risks of injury to some spectators while the cutting
equipment was in use was also pointed out.    It was noted
that in this    repsect we were commenting      on interim
recommendation number 10 of the Interim Report.

Terrace/Fence Levels

L J Taylor asked what we though*'about the safety aspects
where terraces dipped to below the level of the pitch
perimeter, making it necessary for spectators to climb
steps to exit through the perimeter fences.     We agreed
with him this could be prejudicial to the satisfactory
evacuation of spectators.

Final Exit Gates

L J Taylor referred to the practice at a few grounds of
stewards in attendance unlocking the exit gates about 10
minutes after    kick off    so  that  if   for  any reason
spectators needed to leave the ground,    the gate coul<Ib e ^       ^-r
opened for them.   We agreed this wascommendable.   ^ ^ A‘CT^ M,two**

Attendance of Fire Officers
                                                    0   Tt^    ^
                                                              at ^

CACFOA referred to regular liaison with the police, and
the provision of adequate information beforehand.       We did
not think the attendance of a fire officer was necessary
as a matter     of routine,     but by agreement     could be
advisable   at   special    events   where   crowds  would  be
particularly large. We were pressed hard on our reasoning
for not advocating attendance of a fire officer at all
matches.   In this respect, we made reference to 'during
performance'   visits    on   a   sample   basis  to  back  up
attendance at special events.       When he attends, the role
of the fire officer for liaison purposes only, located in
the control box, was also emphasised.

The Role of Local Authorities

We indicated our agreement with recommendations 16 and 17
of the Interim Report and added that where any member of
the safety team was involved in any development of, or
change to, agreed procedures, all other members of the
team should be informed as a matter of course.          We
emphasised the need for proper consultation in writing as
well as informally.   L J Taylor was fully aware that for
Local Authorities this was just one of a very large number
of licencing powers which they exercised.
                                   -   3-


    8.    Coordination of Emergency Services

          CACFOA indicated their full       support of recommendation 36
          of the Interim Report.

    9.    Command and Control of Rescue in Non-Fire Incidents

          The CACFOA view on the need for clear identity of the lead
          role in rescue work was explained.     Mr Johnson thought
          that  the current arrangements^ worked well     enough in
          practice, and he expressed scepticism of the need to
          change, although he recognised this rested on the absence
          of   any   statute    to  clearly   indicate   where   any
          responsibilities lay.

    10.   All Seating Stadia

          CACFOA referred to the Interim Report indicating that L J
          Taylor would be commenting on the need for all seating
          stadia.      We  indicated  our  full   support    for  the
          desirability of this being achieved.         He   said that
          virtually all organisations he had spoken to were of a
          similar   mind,   although he   acknowledged    there  were
          considerable problems to be overcome before that position
          could be attained.




*
   INQUIRY INTO THK HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




                    STATEMENT OF




THK SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY




                (-THE FIRE SERVICE")
                                    THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY



    STATEMENT OF:    ALAN KEITH SEAMAN



    OCCUPATION:      ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICER




    My name is Alan Keith Seaman.         I am employed by the South Yorkshire          County

    Fire   Service   in     the   rank   of   Assistant   Chief   Fire Officer.       My major


m   reference is that of Fire Prevention/Safety, which amongst a great deal

    other matters, encompasses Safety at Sports Grounds
                                                                                            of




    I   have   been employed within the Fire Service for 23 years and I have been

    involved with fire safety matters since April, 1973.



    I have held my present post since February, 1987.             Prior   to   that    I   held

    several    specialist    Fire     Safety posts at both Divisional and Headquarters

    levels within the Fire Service.



^1 am a member of the Institution of Fire Engineers.
                              SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975



1.    The involvement of the Fire Service in the implementation of the Safety

      of Sports Ground Act, 1975



1.1   The Safety of Sports Ground Act (SSGA) was passed in 1975 following the

      publication        in    1972 of the Report of the Inquiry into Crowd Safety at

      Sports Grounds which               was      prepared   by   Lord     Wheatley           following      the

      serious     accident          at     Ibrox     Park    Football     Ground        in     1971, when 66

      spectators were killed on a stairway.



      The Home Office issued Guidance to Local Authorities under cover of

      Home Officer Circular 150/1975.                                                                              Ex 1




1.2   The Safety of Sports Ground Act gave the Secretary of                              State       power   to

      require     through       designation orders that safety certificates be issued

      to sports stadia with accommodation for more                        than     10,000        spectators.

      The     intention       was        for the Act to come into force gradually through a

      phased programme of designation orders so as not to place an                                   immediate

      financial burden on the smaller and less well off clubs.



1.3   The     first   order was made in August 1976 and applied to first division

      football clubs and            certain         international       grounds.        The    Home     Office

      issued     guidance       to        local     authorities     under       cover     of     Home Office

      Circular 130/76. Sheffield Wednesday's ground was designated in                                   August     Ex 2

      1978,     although       the club was not in the first division, because of its

      quasi international use.                 Second    division       clubs    were         designated      in

      August     1979.        Third        and fourth division clubs and rugby league clubs

      were designated in August 1985, following the                         Bradford          City    Football

      Club fire.



                                               - 1 -
1.4   In 1976, the Home Office produced a voluntary code called the "Guide to

      Safety at Sports Grounds                (Football)",           commonly         known     as    the    Green       Ex

      Guide.       This       gave    guidance        on    measures for improving the safety of

      spectators at sports grounds and extended the                             recommendations             of   the

      Wheatley        Report.        The     County Council later contacted the Home Office

      regarding the application of the Green Guide and had been informed that

      basically        any     new    work     or construction had to be of a                        standard not

      lower than that set out in the Green Guide but that maximum flexibility

      had to be maintained in the case of existing structures.



1.5   The    former South Yorkshire County Council, as the enforcing authority,

      delegated its powers and duties under the Safety of Sports                                     Ground      Act

      to     the   Fire       Service       Committee.           On 8th January, 1976, the Committee

      decided that        their       functions        should        be    exercised          through       Officer

      Working      Parties       for       the four        borough        council areas, consisting of

      representatives of the                police,        the     Fire    Service        and    the      building

      inspectors of the borough councils, with co-ordination being undertaken

      by David Vaughan who was the responsible officer of the                                   Department        of

      Administration.            He also took the chair and produced the minutes for

      all working party meetings.



1.6 In order to avoid duplication and                       division       of      resources,         a   primary

      authority         was     chosen       for   the       carrying        out    of     inspections,          re­

      inspections, and           making       final        technical       recommendations             using     the

      headings        given     in    the     contents summary of the Green Guide with some

      additions.        The primary authority responsible was required                               to     consult

      the     other authorities concerned before finalising any recommendations.

      It will be seen from the schedule that the Fire Service were designated                                          Ex 4

      the    primary         authority       for   means of escape and fire precautions.                          By

      virtue of their general experience as a                         fire      and      emergency        service,

      they     were     able     to give advice              on this subject.             However, the Fire

                                             - 2 -
      Service did not attend and have not                           attended        football         matches      as     a

      matter of course.



1.7   It was the practice for all disciplines to report to the Administration

      Department and thereafter for a joint meeting of                                    the   Officer        Working

      Party       to    be     held       after       which       the      agreed    recommendations             of all

      disciplines were                  amalgamated         into     a    report     by     the       Administration

      Department             and     sent to the club(s).                Copies of all correspondence and

      the minutes of meetings were sent to each member and                                      all     arrangements

      for meetings were made by the Administration Department.




1.8   It    was        the    practice for the Officer Working Parties to carry out two

      inspections of the ground each year, commonly                                 known       as     "summer"        and

      "winter"          inspections.             It was Fire Service practice to be represented

      by officers             from      both     Divisional          and    Headquarters             levels    at      all

      meetings          and        inspections         whenever          possible.        This enabled a common

      standard to be applied.



1.9   With the abolition of the South Yorkshire County Council                                         on 1st April,

      1986 enforcement in South Yorkshire was to pass                                 to the four

      Metropolitan            District          Councils,         Rotherham,        Barnsley,         Doncaster and

      Sheffield.         The Local Government Act, 1985 amended Section 3 (3) of the

      Safety      of Sports Ground Act so that in future in metropolitan counties

      the local authority,                 in       this    case        Sheffield    Metropolitan             District

      Council      was        required         to     send a copy of any application for a safety

      certificate for a stadium to the chief officer of police and                                         the      fire

      authority         and        to    consult       them        about the terms and conditions to be

      included in the certificate.                         The Officer Working Party was replaced by

      the      Safety          of        Sports        Ground        Advisory         Group           comprising       of

      representatives from                 police,         Fire     Service,        the    building           surveyors

                                                 - 3 -
    division        and   the    Health   & Consumer Services Department of the local

    authority.        The Home Office issued guidance           on     the     new   arrangements

    under cover of Home Office Circular 7/1986.                                                         Ex 5




1.10 On   18th      February,      1986, a memorandum from the Chief Fire Officer was Ex 6

    circulated to all five Fire Service               divisions      detailing       the    changes

    that were to take place under the Local Government Act 1985 and the way

    the administrative arrangements of the Safety                    of   Sports     Grounds     Act

     1975, would be affected.



     It stressed the importance of establishing and maintaining good liaison

     between divisions and District Councils who would                    be    responsible       for

     administering the Act.



1.11 A letter dated 24th February, 1986, was received from Sheffield City                               Ex 7

     Council indicating that as the Council were to take over responsibility

     as the Licensing Authority under the              Safety     of      Sports     Grounds    Act,

     1975,     it    would      be of assistance to the Council and other Authorities

     for an informal meeting to be held to discuss both existing and                           future

     arrangements for administering the Act.



1.12 On the 5th March, 1986 Mr D Vaughan              arranged a joint meeting, for the

     24th    March,       1986 with the officers of the District Councils who would                     Ex 8

     be taking over responsibility for Safety of Sports Grounds Act                         matters

     which    was      attended by officers from the police and Fire Service.                     The

     purpose of the meeting was to hand over the County Council's files                           and

     have    a      general     discussion    on Safety of Sports Grounds matters.                The

     Fire Service said that they hoped the South                Yorkshire          County   Council

     General        Safety    Certificate     would   be   adopted        by    all the districts

     because this would help           them    standardise      on     one     rather   than     four

     different sets of conditions.

                                       - 4 -
1.13 In Sheffield the Administration and Legal Department became the

    responsible       department and Mr David Bownes was the responsible officer

    within the department.             In a letter dated 5th June, 1986, they attached                     Ex 9

     a   copy   of     a report which had been placed before the General Purposes

    panel on 6th May, 1986 together with a copy of the                       panel's    resolution

     in relation to that report.



    With    reference      to the Safety Certificate Conditions, the report noted

     that these were standardised throughout south Yorkshire and both police

     and   Fire      Service     had indicated that they wished this to continue for

     reasons of administrative simplicity.                    It then went on    to     state   that

     the   conditions      gave        some   cause     for    concern as they appeared to be

     inadequate or inappropriate in some areas.



     It was proposed to re-draft the Certificate Conditions after which                           the

     Sheffield       Wednesday     certificate        would     be   replaced.        The Sheffield

     United certificate could then be issued with the new conditions                         before

     the   start      of   the    1986/87      season. In the covering letter, Mr Bownes                Ex 9

     indicated that the re-drafting               ofthe        certificate    conditions        would

     shortly be completed and the comments of the Fire Service would then be

     sought.



     The Panel was asked for authority for the present administrative system

     to be continued for the time being.



1.14 A meeting took place on 10th March, 1987 to deal with the future

     administration        of    the    Council's certification function.               The general     Ex 10

     feeling of the meeting was that              the           roles ofeach     authority      involved

     should be defined perhaps along              the           lines ofthe South YorkshireCounty

     Council system.        This was described in a letter dated,                14th May, 1987,

                                         - 5 -
   from    Hr D Bownes, which enclosed a draft division of responsibilities.

   The letter asked for comments on the proposals                       that,      inter       alia   the

   following       should   be     Fire     Service responsibilities fire precautions,

   fire alarms, means of escape, emergency lighting, stadium capacity.                                 It

  was     also     proposed      there     should       in   future     be      only one inspection

   annually.



15 In a letter dated 7th July, 1987 the Fire Service



   (a)    expressed the         view     that    division     of      responsibilities          between

          authorities         should      remain    along     the       lines    of     the     schedule

          previously adopted and referred to in Para 1.6



   (b)    accepted the proposal of one inspection annually.



16 At     ameeting of the Advisory Group on 16th July, 1987,                          the     definition

   of     roles    was   discussed.         DO     Grimshaw said          that    when determining

  capacity figures each discipline would have                      to    put      forward       figures.

  Those     of     the   Fire     Service       would    only be based on means of escape.

  Following those remarks, it was agreed that:



   (1)    Roles should be broadly defined and responsibilities taken                             on   by

          the     appropriate of the three "lead authorities" i.e. Police, Fire

          and Building Surveyors subject to agreement where overlap occurs.



          All contact with the           grounds     should be          through       the     licensing

          authority.



          Environmental Health would take a "general safety role” and not be

          a "lead” authority.
(2)   The annual inspection was to be a               joint full    inspection        to   be

      carried out near the end of each season.



      D.P.   ("during     performance")      inspections         were    to be done on an

      individual basis.       Prior arrangements were to            be    made with        the

      Police,     but   not   the    Club.        The Licensing Authority were to be

      informed when an inspection had taken place.



(3)   The meeting       was informed that legally the group              was   an    advisory

      authority. Only the council would              be the ultimate decision making

      authority.



(4)   Individual authorities were to correspond with the sports                       grounds

      through     the   licensing authority who would subsequently circulate

      copies of all letters to each "lead" authority.



      Meetings of the      group    would    be        held at     irregular        intervals

      depending    on need and would be called by any member of the group.

      Individual authorities        did not need to attendspecific meetings if

      they had no "interest".



      Agendas were to be issued prior to each meeting.




                              - 7 -
1.17 On     3rd   August,       1987,   a    draft   report     which    had been prepared for

     submission to the general purposes panel of the City Council                       was      sent   ex   in

    to    the     Fire   Service.           In   that report, under the heading of "future

     administration of council certification function', it                   was       recommended

     that     the     "Safety     of    Sports Grounds Advisory Group" would serve as a

     forum for discussion between officers                and    would    form   the     basis     of

     written        detailed     advice to the council.         It was also recommended that

     the roles of the various officers should be                  defined    along      the   lines

     discussed        at the meeting of the 16th July, 1987 and the point was made

     that there were extensive areas of potential overlap.




                                         - 8 -
2.    History: 1978-1986

2.1   The South Yorkshire            County       Council           received        an    application            for     a

      General     Safety       Certificate          in       September,           1978.     The      club engaged

      Eastwood and Partners, a Sheffield based firm of                                   consulting        engineers

      as their consultants.



2.2   In    November      1978, the draft General Safety Certificate which had been

      prepared by the County Council following consultation with the                                         Officer

      Working     Parties      was        submitted          to     the     Fire     Service      Committee for

      approval to be used throughout the county.



2.3   On 2nd January, 1979, the Chief Fire Officer sent a memorandum                                         to    the

      Chief     Executive       of       South    Yorkshire             County      Council suggesting that                  Ex 15

      officers of        the working party               undertake          a     comprehensive        survey           of

      Sheffield       Wednesday          Football        Club          in unison rather than separately.

      The Chief Fire Officer suggested that a copy                                of the     report         of     each

      department         be    provided to             each        otherdepartment involved to enable

      problems to        be discussedso           that        an       acceptable         approach    might            be

      determined       and     consolidated            into        a     single     report    which should be

      forwarded to the club.               The memorandum made several other                         observations

      regarding the standards necessary.



2.4   (i)     On 17th January, 1979              the South Yorkshire County Council received
                                                                                                                             Ex 16
              a report prepared by Eastwood and Partners on ground                                   capacity           of

              Sheffield       Wednesday          Football          Club,     in     connection        with        their

              application          for    a    General        Safety       Certificate.              The         report

              indicated       that       the      Green Guide had been used as the basis for

              their    calculations,although                  as         with     probably     all          existing

              grounds,        it     would             not         be possible to           satisfy         all        the



                                               - 9 -
     recommendations in the guide and reasonable                     compromise        would    be

        needed.



(ii) Paragraph (b) of the report dealt with the west terrace (including

        the lower level at the north west corner but excluding                     the       north

    west         corner     reinforced concrete terrace).            The report considered

        that despite the fact that the full area of the west terrace could

        accommodate about 8,000 spectators, due to the lack of gangways an

        allowance should be made for circulation space in order that                           good

        packing could be achieved.             It further suggested that an allowance

        of 10% be made for this purpose, resulting in a suggested capacity

        for the west terrace of 7,200.



        Crush     barriers were to be designed to match the capacity of 7,200

        spectators and additional barriers and                  appropriate      strengthening

        of existing barriers would be provided for where necessary.



        Reference     is     also     made    to   the    evacuation     time     for the west

        terrace, this being about six minutes based on the                      exits    already

        available     and     also to the fact that some spectators would be 25m

        from an exit although movement along the terrace would be easy and

        quick.      The     existing     exits     were    through      the tunnel and round

        either side of the west stand.




(iii)           A meeting of the Officer           Working      Party   was     held    on     12th

                February,     1979,     the    purpose     of   which    was to discuss the

                report prepared by Eastwood and Partners and to consider                        the

                views which should be put to the club.
          With     regard      to the west terrace, it was considered that due

          to the lack of depth of the terrace, the offer to reduce                              the

          spectator       limit      to     7,200     and with a discharge time of 6.6

          minutes it would have been                 unreasonable        to    insist      on   the

          provision       of     gangways or additional exits.                 There was total

          movement laterally              throughout     the    terrace        and   the      three

          entrance/exits          from      the terrace were well situated.                At the

          time, the worst disaster/emergency contemplated                        was     one     of

          fire.      As   the     west       stand     provided a minimum of fire risk

          (because it was constructed in concrete) it was accepted that

          these routes would be available and adequate in an emergency.

          The existing gates in the perimeter fence were discounted for

         means      of    escape      purposes.        At   that time the gates in the

          perimeter       fence      were      considered      to   be     there        for     the

          convenience       of    the       police     for crowd control purposes and

          suitable as a means of egress for a relatively                         small     number

          of spectators in the event of a localised incident.



          It was noted that, subject to existing crush barriers passing

          the tests, they would require special attention in                            view     of

          the apparent sharp edges and corrosion.




(iv) On 2nd April, 1979, a meeting was held between the Officer Working                               Ex If

    Party and the club to discuss the views                    of   the       Officer    Working

    Party in respect of the report submitted by Eastwood and Partners.



    As   far     as the west terrace was concerned, it was agreed that the

    club's proposal for additional barriers and reductions in capacity

    to   7,200    without      the      need    for    additional         gangways should be

                               - 11 -
      implemented.          The     question     of   the      condition      of   some       of     the

      existing       barriers       and the stepping arrangement on the north west

      corner exit would be the subject of detailed                         discussions     between

      Dr Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.



(v)   A meeting of the Officer Working Party and the Sheffield Wednesday

      Football Club was held on 18th April, 1979 during which                             the       club

      accepted       that     the     stepping arrangement on the north west corner

      exit should be rebuilt.                The matters concerning the crush barriers

      were    to     be     reconsidered        after     it    was seen which of the crush

      barriers failed on testing.



(vi) On 1st May, 1979, the City of Sheffield Building                           Surveyors          wrote

      to     South      Yorkshire        County Council and summarised in the letter,

      their own requirements in relation to matters discussed at                                recent

      meetings.         The       Building     Surveyor indicated that, subject to the

      downward slope of exit steps at the north west corner                            exit        being

      corrected and the capacity being restricted to that agreed between

      the police and the             club,     that     department        considered      the      west

      terrace to be acceptable.



(vii)On 16th May, 1979, the South Yorkshire County Fire Service wrote

      to South Yorkshire City Council, enclosing plans numbered 1610/12,

      1610/11, 1610/9A, 1610/8A, 1610/7A,                      1610/6A,     1610/4A,      1610/2XA,

      1610/1XA and a recommendation of work schedule to be undertaken.



      With    regard to exit routes from the west and north west terraces,

      these were considered to be satisfactory.



      The provision of exit signs was required in the work schedule, the

      siting       of   which      was     indicated      on     the   plans.      There       was no
            requirement for such signs on the west terrace                        exits.        This    was

            because     they were the ones used for normal entrance and exit from

            what was an open terrace.                  Further, none      were    required       for    the

            perimeter       fence    gates.            These were not      normal exit routes.              To

            have   exit      signs        for    these     gates    could       cause     problems      and

            confusion.



            The    schedule also detailed that adequate roads should be provided

            to ensure that speedy and                  direct    access    couldbe       obtained      by

            emergency       vehicles       to all exterior parts of the stadium and that

            it had to be ensured                that    parked     vehicles      would    not    obstruct

            emergency vehicles on these access roads.



      (viii)On the 8th June, 1979, South Yorkshire County Council sent a
                                                                                                                 Ex 23
             memorandum to the Chief Fire officer, enclosing the work schedule

            forwarded to Sheffield Wednesday                    Football      Club      which had      been

            collated      from      the     detailed       comments of the various disciplines

            represented on the Working Party.



      (ix) A meeting of the Officer Working Party and the Sheffield Wednesday

            Football      Club      was     held on 12th November 1979when it                   was noted        Ex 24

            that work detailed in the                  schedule dated 8th June           1979 had      been

            carried out as far as the west terrace was concerned.



2.5   The   General Safety          Certificate           in    respect    of     Sheffield Wednesday

      Football Club with plans attached was issued with                          conditions      on    21st
                                                                                                                 Ex 25
      December,     1979.     The club's attention was drawn, in particular, to the

      following conditions:



      8(1) acceptance of existing first aid facilities on an interim

            basis only

                                           - 13 -
          12(1) arrangements for emergency lighting in the south stand being

                 only acceptable for the duration of the existing battery life.



          14     acceptance of police facilities on an interim basis only.



          30     no spectators being allowed to use the stadium                    in     conditions       of

                 extreme wind and/or snow loadings.



                 The     Fire    Services'       plans   were    sent    to South Yorkshire County

                 Council for duplication and for                attachment      to the      certificate.
#                Copies were returned to the Fire Service on the 4th February 1980.
                                                                                                                Ex 26
                                                                                                                Ex 27




    2.6    (i)   On     the     14th   March,     1980, South Yorkshire County Council sent a                   Ex 28

                 memorandum to the Chief Fire Officer                   stating    that     despite       the

                 fact     that    the    certificate      had    been issued as recently as 21st

                 December, it was felt that the Sheffield District Officer                         Working

                 Party would have to review the situation due to the pending FA Cup

                 semi-final between Arsenal and             Liverpool      on     12th    April,        1980.

                 Comments       were    requested on any outstanding matters for which the

                 Fire Service had primary responsibility.



           (ii) On the 20th March, 1980, Stn.O.                      jsenta       memorandum       to    the
                                                                                                                Ex 29
                 Chief     Fire Officer          detailing areas of concern that were revealed

                 during an inspection of the ground on                  12th   March,      1980.        These

                 included:-



                 (a)     training of stewards

                 (b)     exit    signs not being of the required standard as detailed in

                         schedule II of the certificate.



                                             -   14 -
      (c)     non provision of fire alarm systems as required                    by    Schedule

              II of the certificate



(iii)On the 26th March, 1980, the Chief Fire officer sent a memorandum

      to    South   Yorkshire       County Council detailing what was set out in                    Ex 30

      the memorandum referred to at 2.6(ii) above.



(iv) On the 31st March, 1980, South Yorkshire County Council wrote                             to
                                                                                                    Ex 31
      Sheffield     Wednesday        Football       Club detailing what was set out in

      the memorandum to South Yorkshire County Council                   referred        to    at

      2.6(iii)      above.       Additional        observations   made     by the Building

      Surveyor were also included in this letter.



(v)   On    the   3rd     April,    1980     Sheffield    Wednesday        Football          Club   Ex 32

      acknowledged        receipt     of     the    letter from South Yorkshire County

      Council referred to at 2.6(iv) above.                An explanation         as    to    the

      lack     of training of stewards was given stating that this would be

      undertaken on completion of the fire alarm                  system    which       was    in

      hand.       All    other     matters     in   the letter of the 31st March were

      passed to Dr Eastwood for his professional advice.



(vi) On the 4th and 8th April, 1980, Eastwood & Partners wrote to South
                                                                                                    Ex 33
      Yorkshire         County Council explaining the reasons for non provision

      of exit signs and fire warning system and dealing with all matters

      referred to by the Building Surveyor.



(vii)A meeting of the Officer Working Party and Sheffield Wednesday

      Football Club was held on 10th April, 1980 to discuss the areas of                            Ex 34


      concern recently communicated to the club and in view                       of    the    FA

      Cup Semi-final to be held on 12th April, 1980.                  The points covered

      by the letters from Eastwood and Partners on 4th                     and    8th    April,

                                   - 15 -
           were     discussed       and as far as training of the safety stewards was

           concerned it was agreed that there was little point until the fire

           warning        system    had      been    completely      installed.         It   was noted

           however that the           Fire     Service    had     given       instruction     to      some

              stewards.



2.7   On   the 3rd September, 1980 South Yorkshire County Council wrote to the

      Chief Constable outlining the concern of the                     Chief    Executive        of     the
                                                                                                              Ex 35
      police policy of locking away supporters inside grounds until such time

      as home supporters had cleared the area and suggesting that instead                                of

      being      allowed to approach locked gates at the end of a match, the away

      supporters should be held back in a relatively safe place, such                              as    on

      the terrace.



      Concern     was     also     expressed        at modifications being made at Sheffield

      Wednesday Football Club at the                request     of   the      police,     without       the

      knowledge of the Officer Working Party.



2.8   On   the     16th    January,       1981,     Eastwood     and    Partners        wrote to South

      Yorkshire      County      Fire     Service      confirming      that      the      fire        alarm   Ex 36

      installation        and    modifications        to the public address system had been

      completed during July 1980.



2.9   A meeting of the Officer Working Party and Sheffield Wednesday Football
                                                                                                              Ex 37
      Club was held on 7th April, 1981 the purpose of which was to review the

      ground due to the pending FA cup semi-final to be held on                           11th     April,

      1981. Consultations between South Yorkshire County Fire Service and the

      police had resulted in            the    production       of     an   "Emergency       Evacuation

      Procedure".         The club undertook to circulate copies of the procedure to
                                                                                                              Ex 38
      all stewards who would be on duty for the FA Cup Semi-Final.



                                          - 16 -
       A copy of        the    procedure           is     produced         dated 12th                May, 1981.      The

       procedure        detailed      the         signal        to   be adopted to inform stewards and

       police that an emergency had arisen and the actions to be                                         followed     on

       hearing further announcements over the public address system.



2.10   A meeting of the Officer Working Party and Sheffield Wednesday Football

       Club   was       held    on    8th         June,     1981.          It    was        noted    that following

       experiences        at    the     FA        Cup     Semi-Final            in     April,         the club     were

       considering        revised arrangements on the terracing in                                  front of the west

       stand and that the Officer Working Party would be consulted whenthese

       had substance.



2.11   (i)          On        2nd September, 1981, Eastwood and Partners wrote to South
                                                                                                                           Ex 40
                    Yorkshire County Council detailing                               the      club's     proposal     to

                    instal two radial fences on the west terrace in such a manner

                    that the terrace would be divided                                into     approximately        three

                    equal areas, each served by its own entrance.                                      The aim was to

                    achieve more control over supporters, a                                  visiting      team     with

                    only        a    few supporters being allocated one section, with the

                    other two sections retained by the home supporters.



                    Larger          contingents            of        visiting           supporters         could      be

                    accommodated             in     two     or       all    three           areas as their numbers

                    dictated.         A 1.15 metre gate was proposed at the rear of each

                    fence.



       (ii)         A    meeting       of         the     Officer      Working          Party was held on 11th

                    September, 1981, to consider the proposed erection of                                         radial   Ex 41

                    barriers on the west terrace for crowd control purposes.




                                              -    17 -
