Copy to DD Seaman




Divisional Commander                                                ■
•All* Division                Div. F.P.O


Chief Fire Officer                                           FP19/2/3 SA/LG


Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 t Ldcal                    18.2.1986
Government,Act 1985

The abolition of the Metropolitan County and Greater London Councils on
31st March, 1986, has necessitated some changes to the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA); these have been achieved by Beans of the Local
Government Act 1985 (LGA).

From 1st April, 1986 the role and status of the Fire Authority in South
Yorkshire under the SSGA will be changed, as the Fire Authority will no
longer be the Local Authority,    It is therefore necessary to give the Fire
Authority the status of an "interested party", and thus require the Local
Authorities (District Councils) to consult on matters involving the Act.
The Fire Authority will also be able to authorise entry and inspection of
a sports ground in its own right.

 It will be important to establish and maintain good liaison between Divisions
 and whichever department is made responsible for the Act in each of the
 Local Authorities {District Councils).

 Attached for guidance and retention with the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
 is Home Office Circular No. 7/1986.    It gives full details of the changes
 involved and indicates where the Safety of Sports Grounds Act should be
 amended.

 Also attached for reference, is a copy of the existing demarcation of respons­
 ibilities of each of the members of the Area Officer Working Parties when
 applying the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.



(sgd.) H.E. Wright




 Chief Fire Officer
 City of Sheffield            M etro p olitan D istrict

 Roger Pensam, FCIS. M8IM. Solicitor
                                                                                            Administration and Legal Department
 Head of Department                                                                         Town Hall,
                                                                                            Sheffield S1 2HH


 Our reference      GP/262/DMB
 Your reference

 Date
                                                                                                      r :
                    14th May, 1987
                                                                                             i C.i:.C . I

The Chief Officer,                                                                            W.fl. j
Fire Service H.Q.,
                                                                                              C.A.O, i
Furnival House,
Furnival Gate,
SHEFFIELD 1


For the attention of D. 0. Grimshaw



Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -                         _   ■
Future Administration of the Counci l ’s Certificating Function

Following a meeting on Tuesday 10th March I have given some further thought to
the above subject.

Many points were raised at the meeting but I think that the general feeling was
that the roles of each Authority involved in the system should be defined
perhaps along the lines adopted by the South Yorkshire County Council.

I have no objection in principal to roles being defined in this way but I should
make it clear that if it is agreed that particular Authorities adopt particular
roles then they will be under a duty to consult with other interested parties
where there is an overlap of interest. As I see it the Authority which carries
out a particular role will have the responsibility of advising the Council as
Certificating Authority on all matters falling within that Lead Authority role.

I have drawn up a draft Schedule which attempts to define Lead Authority roles.
I should point out that the draft is intended to be open for discussion an I
would therefore welcome your comments on it. Would you please also let me kr.ow
if there are any other matters which should be included in the Schedule.

Moving onto the question of inspections of stadia, this point was a l s o ^discussed
at the meeting on 10th March. My view is that the existing system of bi annual
limited inspections is no longer appropriate; I feel that one major ^ p e c t i .
per year should be carried out on each stadium which should include all the
areas and installations within the scope of the legislation. _ To bade up this
inspection there should be a number of "during performance inspections by
Officers   I think that there is general agreement in relation to d u r m 0
performance" inspections as they vould highlight the performance of the safety
system at each stadium whilst it is in operation.
  J                                                                                                     Cont. . .

                                                                                            734690 - Mr. Bownes
                            For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring....................................... (STD Code 0742)
                                                          Talex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
                                         -   2-

Perhaps "during performance" inspections could be arranged so that each
Authoritv carries out such inspections independently with a degree of central
co-ordination to prevent two inspections taking place simultaneously. _ As the
first step towards the development of a programme of inspections it might be
        •        ?  fnr me to arrange a joint inspection involving representatives from
a l ^ t h e authorities in order to provide an insight into problems which may be
encountered.

Moving on to the -working party" structure I think it is clear fro. the meeting
of 10th March that some clarification of its status is required. It is
reasonably clear from the County Council’s records that the working party as
        e art-usllv a decision making body presumably acting under delegate
^ r s      lowest    t h f n o ^ a l City Council practice is that the principal powers
    *n rj-i*-h a Committee or Sub-Committee (in this case the General Purposes
remain wit             m ,tters being delegated to a Chief Officer (in this case
myself “ 'i would therefore propose to ask the Panel to accept the working party
as a forum for discussion.

I take a vi e w that the Lead Authority will be able to use the Working Party as
a ^ S f u l forum for discussion prior to drawing up that Authorities formal view
a userux     ^            ro-rMfiratine Authority.  I propose that when an
 TttoriVfeels       that a meeting would be appropriate contact should be made with       .
Authority                f.     M   Bownes  who will then make arrangements for the
my Chief                                      bl prepared and circulated prior to the
 l e e t i S and at the conclusion of the meeting Mr. Bownes will prepare a list
 s h o w i S the subjects iiscussed and the action to be taken by each Lead
 Authority.    This list will be circulated as well.

                         • j          mt"c T have raised and let me have your comments
 would 7 -                     will be necessary f «  me to formulate a report to the
 C e n ^ l Purposes Panel on the administration of the Certification system.


 Yours faithfully,




 Head of Department




 AF
                     Sheffield City Council Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975


                          Division of Responsibilities between Authorities


         The following Schedule shows which Authority is to be responsible for advice to
         the Council in respect., of the areas shown. In each case the responsible
         Authority will in appropriate instances have to consult with other involved
         authorities before arriving at its final advice to the Council.


                                                 Area of Responsibility
         Authority


         tThe Building Surveyor (Department      All matters relating to the structure of
         "of Land and Planning, Sheffield        stadia including crush barriers, walls,
                                                 etc.                                ■
          City Council)
 ft
‘■ f e



                                                 Fire precautions, fire alarms, means of
         Fire Service
                                                 escape, emergency lighting, 'stadium
                                                 capacity.              .        —


                                                  Stadium policing, ground security,
          Police
                                                ? evacuation procedures, access of
                                                  emergency vehicles and eir.erger.cy




          Director of Environmental Health       Miscellaneous safety hazards such as
          and Consumer Services (Sheffield       nosings, trip hazards, floor surface s ,
                                                 defective seating etc; electrical
          City Council)
                                                 sareCv. food s z x e z y ana Hygiene, t _ v . / i . 1 . C < -
                                                 accommodation and other safety matters
                                                 net covered by other Authorities.
                                                                                         fJ - A • '=Jt




          AF
