Chiaf Executive                                                       D V/O P/533


                                                                      F P 1 9 /2
Chief Fira Officer



jafaty of Sports Grounds Act 1975                                     2.1.79




I thank you far your latter dated 22nd Oecamber, 197S, and the copy
letter of the Building Surveyor of the Sheffield metropolitan
District Council.

It would seem essential that the officars of the County Council and
Metropolitan District Council involved in the production of the
general safety certificate reauirad by the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club under the above Act, undertake a comprshansive survey
of the ground.  I fael sura that it uiouia be beneficial to the Club
if, initially, aach department actad in unison in this raspect
rather than separately and I mould make tha necessary arrangements
with my officars for this to be achieved.

A copy of the report of each department should be provided toeach
involved department to enable problems to be discussed so that an
accepted approach might be determined and consolidated into a single
report which should be forwarded to the Club.

This report, together with that of Dr. Eastwood, would form the
basis of a further meeting with officials of the Club as differencas
of opinion, if any, would have been identified.

It is my opinion that the necessary comprehensive surveycould not
be undertaken satisfactorily without plan drawings.  In this raspect
I rafer to paragraph 1.3 of the ’green code':

"The problem of crowd safety at football grounds i3 complex and
cannot be solved simply by ensuring that each component of a ground,
such as stairs, passages or sections of terracing, is satisfactory
in itself. The inter-relation of components i3 essential: they
should be compatible and combine to form a balanced unit”.

Fallowing the receipt of drawings I suggest that Officers meet to
agree on identification procedures.   In order that each department
is able to identify parts of the ground, in a uniform manner, I
would prefer to have stands and terraces clearly identified, exit
routes, passages, gangways, gateways, doors, etc., numbered in a
consecutive manner and stairways lettered.

 Officers of the County Council and Metropolitan District Council
 have visited the ground and I believe that further visits should
 be part of the comprehensive survey. Findings from visits other


                                                    Cont’d. ...
    than the survey referred to will be limited and if we involve
    ourselves in consultation with the Club following the submission
    of Or. Eastwood’3 report with limited information this could
    prove unfortunate in the long term.

    As prsviously mentioned I prefar to await the provision of the
    plan drawings which have already bsen reauestad and if any
    action can be taken to axoeaite thi3 mattar it would be
    apprsciatari.




    ChAse-Flrs Qfficar




\
Written answer of Divisional Officer R Grimshaw to questions arising                     from

the Officer Working Party meeting on 18th April, 1985.




The    police     indicated    that     with   the   system   in   operation     since 1981

involving their officers controlling the terrace and the                club's     stewards

directing       spectators     as   necessary    behind   the west stand,      they had not

experienced any difficulty with over-crowding of the existing                  pens up to

that    date     in   1985    and they could not see there being any difficulty in

controlling the proposed smaller pens, particularly as                there      was to be

segregated       turnstile     access    to    each of the original three areas on the

terrace.




It was made clear by Divisional Officer Grimshaw that                the   gates    at    the

rear    of     the radial fences were required for use in case of any emergency

to allow lateral egress from the terrace and assurance was given that                     the

police had and would continue to man the existing gates and would also man

the proposed gates in the new fences.
       FP19/2/4 : RG/MS                GP/262/DMB                       25.05.1989

                          Divisional Officer R. Grimshaw                     271

City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD
SI 2HH


Dear Sirs,

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975 -
DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

In reply to your letter dated 30th March in connection with the above,         please
find below the observations of this Department.

The final revised Safety Certificate Conditions have been examined and the
four points referred to in your letter have been reconsidered.

With regard to the four points referred to

(a)   It is agreed that the wording of Condition 11 should be satisfactory
      without stipulating an age range but the experience in Barnsley, where
      they have some difficulty recruiting suitable stewards was that fifteen
      year old boys were being appointed and it was felt that at that age they
      may not be able to cope with an emergency situation.

(b)   On the Police knowledge of the whereabouts of a      doctor,   there   are   no
      further observations.

(c)   Should any match be such that large numbers of the press, TV or radio be
      attracted, it would help the Police and club officials if all personnel
      belonging to these organisations were identifiable, particularly where
      they have access to areas beneath stands whilst a match is in progress.

(d)   The attendance of a competent electrician is required within the period
      prior to 3 hours before the commencement of any game in order to test
      the general and emergency lighting and fire warning systems. Should an
      electrical fault occur whilst a match is in progress, it is felt that
      this should be investigated and rectified immediately in order that the
      match can continue with complete crowd safety. This was a condition of
      the County Council Certificate.
Other matters noted are

(a)   In the "Interpretation of the General Safety Certificate" the Definition
      of the Certificate has been modified.    In the previous draft reference
      was made to what the Certificate was comprised of, this has now been
      omitted.    Should the fact that the Certificate comprises the general
      conditions,   schedules, plans and 'Guidance for Safety Certificate
      Holders', be recorded at this stage?

(b)   In Schedule 4, the requirement to test emergency lighting and fire
      warning/public address systems "not more" than three hours prior to a
      specified   activity   taking   place   should   read "not less" than
      three hours prior to a specified activity taking place as in the
      original South Yorkshire County Council conditions. The reason for this
      is to allow the batteries for such systems to become recharged prior to
      the event commencing.     You have extended this requirement to all
      lighting systems (excluding the emergency lighting) and all doors, gates
      and turnstiles etc.,    specifying the three hour time limit in each
      instance. The three hour time limit is only critical in respect of
      emergency lighting and fire warning public address systems for the
      reason specified above, therefore, as regards normal lighting and doors
      etc.,  subject to them being tested on the day of the event, no specific
      time limit is considered to be necessary.       It could certainly be
      considered to be onerous to require all such tests within three hours of
      an event commencing.

(c)   Following my previous comments, Condition 12(a) has been modified to the
      effect that stewards must prevent overcrowding under the direction of
      the Safety Officer or the Chief Steward or an Authorised Officer.
      Whilst this may be satisfactory when considering migration from one
      section to another once spectators are within the ground,   it is felt
      that this matter can be more reliably controlled by strictly limiting
      the numbers admitted to each section at the turnstiles. As each section
      is filled, the turnstiles, which are capable of recording this fact
      should be locked. This may not be considered to be a relevant condition
      for   inclusion   in    the Certificate but certainly needs further
      consideration before any Certificate is issued or amended.

(d)   There is no Schedule 3 setting out the capacities of each section of the
      ground attached to the draft conditions.      It is recognised, however,
      that these need further consideration by the Officer Working Party
      before finalisation since figures will be needed for each part of a
      ground from the Police, Building Control and Fire Service to determine
      the actual limits.

(e)   Schedules 1 and 2detailing numbers of stewards to be on duty at a
      specified activity and the duties to be carried out will need detailed
      consideration and again it is felt that these are matters for discussion
      with the Officer Working Party for final resolution by yourselves.

It is now hoped that you will be able to finalise the adoption of the General
Safety Certificate conditions as quickly as possible in order that the
outstanding amendment to the Certificate issued to Sheffield Wednesday FC anrf
    issue of the Certificate to Sheffield United FC can then be progressed.

This will entail a full       evaluation of all aspects by the Officer Working
Party, i.e. ground capacities,     stewarding arrangements,  firefighting and
emergency evacuation procedures etc. This will require the provision of up to
date plans of all buildings, stands, terraces, etc.
The County Fire Service are willing to give every assistance to   achieve   this
aim.

If you have any further queries on these matters, please do not hesitate to
contact the Officer concerned.

Yours faithfully,




Chief Fire Officer.
