                                                      Foot'bali Ground




                                                                 Poli'ci ii /
                                                                 First' A/d—<r'-
                                                                  Room&



                      Z / / / /;/•/{ iiu/1iiii ui n




SCALE       DRAWN        TRACED           CHECKED
 I; 1250     M.CB.            H,D.                                S it e    Pla n

Sh e f f ie l d Wednesday FC. Hillsborough,
Penistone R oad ,
S h e f f ie l d ,
S o u th Yo r k s h ir e , 5 6 ISW
   SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                    COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                                    C. 2088
•    '.r.r.l\U ±A U



                 HOME OFFICE                                                                  '   M
                 Queen A n u s’s Gate London S W 1H 9A T                             :7

                                                     Dircct Ibc 01-213 - 5562
                                                   Switchboard 01-213 3000


    Mrs D Buckle 3.Sc                                               Your r:fc;;Dc: •
    Clerk to the London Fire and                                    CL/DB
      Civil Defence Authority                                       Our rcfcrcocc
    Room 103                                                        FIR/86 500/24/3
    The County Kail                                                 Date

    LONDON                                                             17 December 1986
    SE1 7PB_____________________


    jW Mfr
    PREMISES LICENCED FOR.PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT: INSPECTIONS BY THE FIRE AUTHORITY

    I am sorry that you have not received an earlier substantive reply to your letter
    of 5 September.

    v/e are content with the Authority's proposed arrangements for the inspection of •
    premises licenced for public entertainment, both in respect of discharging its own
    statutory responsibilities and providing an agency service to the London borough
    councils. Consequent upon this we agree to an amendment of the’establishment scheme
    to provide 21 fire prevention posts to undertake this work.

    However the 21 pests will have to be found from within the existing establishment.
    The approval for their redeployment to fire prevention duties does not convey approval
    for an overall increase to the establishment.

    We note the Authority's comments about inconsistencies in legislation relating to
    entertainments licensing and similar matters. We would expect tnat any ruture
    legislation in this area would be in line with the relevant arrangements in tne
    Ginesas Act 1935.

    VJe would be happy to discuss any of this with the Authority.                         j
                                                                                Si
                                                                                             A D0
                                                                                             DO,
                                                                                             RiV&l/fH                   D a n „ «U"J
                                                               louincj     a m a             Rtrujini| low* I Dur rwj II ~2.
                                                             f o r -fa fa lih & st                           -* '* I ( U tilihi(I Si
                                                                                             M a n s f f r M '_ & . J • I 5 r t ic k if il 'ld c
                                                                                             Sfoek'sbrtJij* - Z F L irndl^ * S
                                                                                             L.01 ii»
                                          In ifial c a p i t a I hy
                                          rac&iving              araa




                                                                                                                                                   Lane.
                                                                     /




                                                                     Foot’ bflll B r o j n d '




                                                                                                                     i-j jr-
                                                                                                                    ,0 & c?
                                                                                      Poliei Si
                                                                                      Frrsh Aid
                                                                                      Rooms
                                                                                                              / * /




                      Pe.n i st" o n e      Road



                                                  \

a                                                  )
                                                  /1
                                                      \




                                                          I 3 fh
                                                          J «n 'aj
                                                  i 1 TJ ,vt
                                                  II 01
                                                  I1 o 1
                                                      > '.** !!
                                                      1 «dj
                                                      1   -
                                                      1 , tr\
                                                             U II
                                                             x:i 1
                                                                11


    SCALE       DRAWN          TRACED       CHECKED
     I; 1250     M .C B .          H.D.
                                                                                       Sit e      P la n

    S h e ffie ld Wednesday       FC, Hillsborough,
    Penistone Road,
    S h e f f ie l d ,
    S o u th Yo r k s h ir e , SS I5W
       SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                               COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                                                                     C.20S8
The Chief And Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

Our ref:    KER/JMB                           10-11 Pebble Close
                                              Amington
                                              Tamworth
16 November 1989                              Staffs B77 4RD
                                              Tel 0827 61516



SENT TO:    Mr   A   V Rule, Chief Fire Officer, Cumbria
            Mr   J   Palmer, Asst.Chief Officer, West Midlands
            Mr   M   Dennett, Asst.Chief Officer, West Yorkshire
            Mr   H   E Wright, Chief Fire Officer, Greater Manchester




Dear

H ILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

I have seen a copy of -Harr-^— Wr i g h t * s letter of 10 November.
Lord   Justice Taylor   has  asked       to   meet   a small  CACFOA
delegation, and Mike Rogers, Bob Graham, Alan Jones and myself
will be going.

I asked Mr Whalley to put in writing what Lord Justice Taylor
would be expecting from us, and I enclose a copy of his letter
which may be helpful for your meeting.    The timing works out
very well and will allow feedback from your own meeting before
the delegation meets Lord Justice Taylor.

Yours   sincerely




K E ROSE
General Manager
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                T he Rt H on L ord Ju stic e Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                             50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate
                                             London SW1H 9AT
                                             01-2^3 2577/3602/2370
K E Rose Esq
General Manager
CACFOA
10/11 Pebble Close
Amington
Tamworth
Staffordshire
B77 4RD                                        14 November 1989
                                             Date




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


We spoke today about the meeting we are arranging at which Lord
Justice Taylor could meet officers of CACFOA to talk about crowd
control and safety at sports grounds. We have agreed 12 noon on
Tuesday 28 November at the Home Office here. We will let you
know which room later on. Lord Justice Taylor will be
accompanied by one of his Assessors, Mr Brian Johnson, Chief
Constable of Lancashire.

We shall have before us the submission which you put forward in
June 1989.  If there are any particular points in there which you
would like to draw to Lord Justice Taylor's attention, the
meeting will give you an opportunity.

That apart, Lord Justice Taylor would like to discuss the
following points

     i.    perimeter fences and evacuation onto the pitch (interim
           recommendations 6 to 10);

     ii.   co-ordination of emergency services (interim
           recommendations 35 to 38, including the question of the
           location of fire service representatives within the
           stadium);

     iii. the Green Guide (any particular areas of weakness or
          difficulty).

I have grouped the   points we discussed in to three main headings
for the purpose of   discussion.  But you and your colleagues
should regard this   as an informal discussion, and there will be
an opportunity for   you to raise any other points you might like.
You agreed to let me know if there was any change in your
representation. This currently consists of Mr Martin Rogers,
past President of CACFOA, Mr Bob Graham, Chief Fire Officer for
Greater Manchester, a representative from the London Fire
Brigade, and yourself.


                                       t

                                        R M Viitin..!m u x
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
          GREATER MANCHESTER                                      I '1 a A. J . Parry M.I.Flre E,
          COUNTY FIRE SERVICE.                                       fy w ] County Fire Officer & Chief Executive

                                                                            YourReference


                                                                            Our Reference          /SMT/FP


Mr H E Wright QFSM MIFireE FBIM                                                                 Mr R A Graham MBE
Chief Fire Officer
South Yorkshire County Fire Service
Command HQ                                                                                      15 November 1989
Wellington Street
Sheffield
South Yorkshire
SI 3FG




Dear

CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION
LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT - HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD

Further to your letter of 10th November 1989 re the above I regret to
inform you that I shall not be able to attend the meeting on 21st November
1989 due to having prior commitments.

Yours sincerely




R a ~g r ^h £m *
Assistant Chief Officer




          Headquarters: 146 Bolton Road, Swinton, ManchesterM27 2US. Telephone: 061-736 5866 Telex: 668105 Fax: 743 1777
INCIDENT - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND
SATURDAY, 15TH APRIL, 1989
TRANSCRIPT OF        INITIAL   CALL   FROM   POLICE   TO    FIRE    SERVICE
CONTROL
Time:     15.13.45
Police:     Can we have cutting equipment please to
             Hillsborough straight away.

Fire:       Just a minute love.       Right, what's the address?

Police:     Cutting equipment at Hillsborough Football Ground
             straight away duck.

Fire:       Right, what ... Hillsborough Football Ground?

Police:     Yes, Hillsborough Football Ground.

Fire:       What road is that on, do you know?

Police:     There's been a major accident              love.       All   the
             ambulances are up there.

Fire:       Yes, what road is it on love?

Police:     Er, I've no idea - Hillsborough Football Ground.

Fire:       Well, what road is it on love - do you know?

Police:     (To someone in background) Hillsborough Football
             Ground - what road is it on do you know?

Fire:       Penistone    Road?

Police:     Penistone    Road.

Fire:       Penistone    Road.

Police:     OK?

Fire:       Just a minute love,       and    what's   exactly      involved
             there?

Police:     It's a football - the big match - Liverpool v Notts
            Forest.

Fire:       Yes, but why do you want us love?          Is   it     ...   you
             said it was an RTA.

Police:     No, no,      no    -   a major incident inside the ground
            love.
Fire:      A major incident inside?       Do you know exactly   what
           it is?

Police     No love, I don't.       They want all the cutting gear.

Fire:      For what?

Police     Hang on a sec.

Fire:      What are they cutting - do you know?

Police     (To someone     in   background) Fire Brigade says for
           what?

Time:    15.14.40
Police      (New voice)   Hello?

Fire:      Hello love. Now you want some cutting        gear,   what
           exactly is it for?

Police     There's been a major accident at Hillsborough
           Football Ground where the semi-final is.     The
           crowds have forced their way in - they've broken
           fences and the gates down. I don't know exactly
           what it is but there are people trapped.

Fire:      Right love.    OK love leave it with us.

Police     OK duck.

Fire:      Thank you love, bye.

Time:    15.14.58
        HEW/JMT                                                    10.8.89
                          Chief Fire Officer                           201


To:   Each Member of the South Yorkshire
      Fire & Civil Defence Authority

Copy to:   Clerk & Financial Officer


Dear Member,

HILLSBOROUGH:     INTERIM REPORT

I understand that the Clerk & Financial Officer to the Authority has   provided
you with certain extracts from the above.

I would advise you that the Home Office delivered certain extracts of the
Report to me on 4th August, 1989, and a copy is enclosed for your information.

 mrs sincerely.




Chief Fire Officer.
               CHAPTER 21 - FIRST AID AND EMERGENCY SERVICES


No Fault bv the Emergency Services


296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism
can be made of the response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by
SYMAS or by the fire brigade on 15 April.                           Indeed, no represented
party ventured any criticism of them.                            The only attack on SYMAS
came from two Liverpool doctors.                 One claimed that ambulances did
not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there
was a lack of triage.             He was proved to be wrong in all three
respects.       Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on television on
15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff
and equipment had arrived earlier.                     Apart from being proved wrong
in fact as to the times of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in
                                                  t

evidence that it was not possible to say whether lives could have
been saved.         His comments on television were irresponsible.                                The
other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators.                                        I am
satisfied      on    overwhelming       evidence            that    to     attempt       to    use   a
defibrillator on the pitch with people milling about would have
been    highly      dangerous     owing     to        the    risk    of     injury       from     the
electric charge.


297. I find that all three of the emergency services named above
responded      promptly when alerted,                 that       they brought appropriate
equipment and that their personnel operated efficiently.


298. It would be unreasonable to expect,                           at any sports stadium,
medical facilities capable of dealing with a major disaster such
as     occurred.        To     have    in   advance           at     the       ground,        oxygen,
resuscitators,         stretchers,       other        equipment          and     medical        staff
sufficient to deal with over 100 casualties is not practicable.


299. What      is required is a basic                 level of provision for first
aid,     for    professional          medical         attention          and     for     ambulance
attendance,         together    with    a   system          of     co-ordination with             the
                                            110
emergency services which will bring them to the scene swiftly in
whatever        numbers     are   required.          What      will    amount     to   an
appropriate basic provision for the future e.g. the equipment in
a first aid room, requires expert evaluation and advice.


300. On    the    day,    there was       no clear understanding between the
Club and Dr Purcell as to his role.                 He believed he was primarily
there to attend to the players.                The Club regarded him also as
the   "physician        available    to    attend    at    the   first    aid   room    if
required", as laid down in the Safety Certificate.


301. There       was     insufficiently      close       co-operation     between      the
police and the emergency services.                   It is clear that SYMAS and
the fire brigade should have been.called earlier than they were.
However,    in view of the nature and extent of the crushing,                          the
time when police rescue began and the pathetically short period
for which those unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable
                                              I
that quicker recourse to the emergency services would have saved
more lives.


302. Finally, there was evidence that an advertising board had to
be knocked down at the north-east corner of the ground to allow
an ambulance       onto    the pitch and          that    at   the    top of    the ramp
leading to the pitch the access for ambulances was inadequate.
There     was    also     evidence    that    the    pre-match        arrangement      for
ambulances to use the two gates from Penistone Road at the north­
east end of the ground as in and out routes was frustrated by the
presence of vehicles just inside the ground.                     In the event, none
of these matters affected operations.                     The hoarding was quickly
knocked down.           The difficult access to the ramp was negotiated
and ambulances          used one entrance satisfactorily by backing out
when loaded.
does not justify a finding that an empty cylinder was brought to
the scene.


Calling the Fire Service


18.     P.C. Bichard's call to police Headquarters at 3.13 p.m. for
the   fire    service   to bring hydraulic           cutting equipment            to cut
metal    fences   (see   paragraph        101    supra)    was     heard     by    Chief
Inspector Edmundson.       He went into the adjacent operations room
to give      instructions for the message to be passed to the fire
service.      There, a temporary control room assistant was already
speaking to the fire service about a house fire.                        Mr Edmundson
interrupted the call and asked the assistant to tell the fire
service that cutting equipment was wanted at Hillsborough.                         There
followed a conversation between the assistant and Miss Davies at
the fire service in the following terms


        Police           Can   we    have' cutting        gear    for   Hillsborough
                         please straight away.


        Fire Control     Just a minute, right what's the address?


        Police           Cutting equipment           for Hillsborough         football
                         ground straight away.


        Fire Control     Hillsborough football ground?


        Police           Yes, Hillsborough football ground.


        Fire Control     What road is that on, do you know?


        Police           There      has   been   a   major       accident,    all    the
                         ambulances are up there.


        Fire Control     What road is it on?


        Police           I have no idea, Hillsborough football ground.
     Fire Control    What road is it on, do you know?


     Police          "Hillsborough football ground,          what road is
                     it on?"     (this was said to someone in Police
                     Force Control)        - "Penistone Road"     (to Fire
                     Control).


     Fire Control    Penistone Road.


     Police          Penistone Road O.K.


     Fire Control    Penistone     Road,     just    a   minute     what's
                     exactly involved?


     Police          It's football, a big match, Liverpool v Notts
                     Forest.


     Fire Control    Yes, but why1do you want us, you said it was
                     an RTA (Road Traffic Accident).


     Police          No, no, no, major incident inside the ground,


     Fire Control    Major    incident     inside,   do you know exactly
                     what it is?


     Police          No I don't, they want all the cutting gear.


     Fire Control    For what, do you know?


     Police          Hang on a sec.


At that point Chief Inspector Edmundson intervened and spoke for
the police.   The conversation concluded


     Police          (Male voice) - Hello


     Fire Control    Hello,    now you want some cutting gear, what
                     exactly is it for?
                                   8
      Police                There   has  been    a major   accident at
                            Hillsborough football ground where the semi­
                            final      is,    the crowds have forced their way
                            in, they have broken fences and gates down, I
                            don't know exactly what it is but there are
                            people trapped.


       Fire Control         Right, O.K. leave it with us.


That conversation took 1 minute 13 seconds.                           It was published in
a    number    of    newspapers        with     strong      critical          comment    mostly
against the fire service.  The thrust of the criticism was that
valuable time was wasted by the fire service asking unnecessary
questions as to where and why cutting equipment was required.                                        V


19.    There was a meeting of the emergency services in August 1988
to    discuss       procedure     in    the     event       of   a    major      disaster      at
Sheffield Wednesday's             ground.       It was pointed out and minuted
that "It was imperative that the Police Control give the exact
location of any fire or incident and as much detail as possible.
No senior fire officer is on duty at the match. ...                              Fire service
will attend via Penistone Road or Leppings Lane as directed by
the police".

20.    The message        from P.C.          Bichard contained all the necessary
information - Leppings Lane end, hydraulic cutting equipment, to
cut    metal     fences.          Regrettably,         it     was     not      passed    on    by
Headquarters         in   those     terms.          Miss    Davies       had    rightly       been
trained       to require      a precise         location and needed to know the
problem which would face the fire service so that the appropriate
response       could be made.            In fact,       there are several               football
grounds in the Hillsborough district although clearly Sheffield
Wednesday's ground is the principal one.                         In the result, although
Chief Inspector Edmundson clarified, to an extent, the nature of
the    problem,       the    locus      which       emerged      in     the    course    of    the
conversation         (Penistone        Road)    was     not      that    contained       in    the
original message            from ground control             (ie "Leppings Lane end .)
                                                9
Whilst on the face of the conversation the fire service may seem
to have been slow in the uptake or perhaps pedantic, in my view
the   police      ought    to    have    been    more    specific.     They had      the
necessary information to be so.

21.   I am satisfied however that the delay of 1 minute 13 seconds
over the call, and even the delay occasioned by the cutting
equipment going to Penistone Road rather than Leppings Lane, did
not affect the outcome.                 Even had those with cutting equipment
gone directly after a briefer                   'phone call they would not have
arrived at a stage early enough to make cutting the fencing a
helpful exercise.


Mr Kennv Dalglish

22.       When   the    Liverpool      manager    went    to   the control room and
agreed to make the announcement broadcast at 3.56 p.m., he says
in    a    statement      that    he    could, not       get   the   Tannoy    to   work.
Spectators could see him trying to address them and indicated to
him manually           that nothing could be heard.              An officer pressed
buttons on the machine and Mr Dalglish says he tried again with
similar lack of success.                He was then taken under the police box
to the room used by the disc jockey to broadcast pre-match music.
There, the microphone worked and he broadcast his message.


23.       Mr Dalglish was not called.               There was no other evidence
about this incident.             I accept it occurred as he described.                Why
the Tannoy could not at that time be successfully operated from
the police box is however strange and unexplained.                            Unlike the
radio,      it had operated satisfactorily from the police box at the
critical times save that its messages may not always have been
heard above the prevailing noise.                    It had worked at about 3.30
p.m. when it called for medical staff.                     I can see no grounds for
 criticising the police in regard to this incident and certain it
 is that the brief delay in relaying Mr Dalglish's message can
 have had no significant effect.
  SCfUTH
' YORKSHIRE
  JOINT
  SECRETARIAT




                With the Compliments of
            THE CLERK TO THE SECRETARIAT


 This matter is being dealt w ith by;
 P.O. Box 37
 Regent Street
 Barnsiey
 South Yorkshire                        Telephone No. Barnsley 733222
 S70 2PG                                               Ext.
              SOUTH YORKSHIRE
      FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston B.A., I.P.F.A.                                                        P.O. Box 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                       Regent Street
                                                                                       Barnsley
                                                                       South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
                                                               Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222

Our Ref:                                Your Ref:                    Date:
                 WJW/MR                                                      7 August 1989
This matter is being dealt with by                                   Telephone ext:
                                     Mr W J Wilkinson                                 262




            Dear Member

            HILLSBOROUGH : INTERIM INQUIRY REPORT
           As you will know, the interim report was published last Friday.
           I enclose a copy of the recommendations; numbers 35-38 cover the
           co-ordination of emergency services.

           I also enclose an extract from Appendix 6, which details the
           conversation between the Police at Hillsborough and the Fire Service
           Control. Although there is a somewhat critical comment in paragraph
           20, Lord Justice Taylor's conclusion in paragraph 21 would seem
           t° provide an answer to the newspaper criticisms.   It should also
           assist              libel action against "The Sun" newspaper.
           Yours sincerely




           R C Johnston
           Clerk and Financial Officer


           Enc




     r                                                  1
           To: Members of the Fire and Civil
           Defence Authority


                                                        J
[lv^hu4-        JL*J-               'hjh&kiei             d£ £ ^ h e u j <4 M L              )

                           12. fe     jgfj     Ht'sAted)



$ajL       £<2)4-          2<+ ii*Jkdi$e-3. ( C i r itSj/j- f t h


faa#-*      k       S&   43 -£3 0 / frcfe> - 2*3, <5^                      iL a ’ bO iiJUA.(vft~>.
                          Cut. 6t<i'7 /                    .                          (I®        ,


                /tfr ^     ( J iJ s tr ffa .         ’2(i ' / *2^0 /fee/ z 3 -kuuaiijL)
                               {OS’S >/-hvu^Ui^j
         ~7 -h ^^J n J l^,          s^nrv«4    " if e -   - f c i a t e r i . (|Q ,   1ffb
          -vfsr* ^ o i        /i+ (+ 3 j 4wvwM-^->           )
   Sw^-     3                        '^(£*i' /4 4wx/&ta&?.
                    uL 8 ^ /
The Chief A n d Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association
         /




27 July 1989
                                         10-11 Pebble Close
                                         Amlngton
                                         Tamworth
                                         Staffs B77 4RD



To All Chief Fire Officers/Firemasters




Dear Colleague

I enclose for your information a copy of the Associations'
submission to the Inquiry following the Hillsborough Disaster.
I should be glad if you would draw the attention of other
CACFOA Members in your Brigade to the receipt of this document.

Yours sincerely


  I               I                                               •




K E ROSE
General Manager
The Chief And Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

                                                        10-11 Pebble Close
                                                        Amington
                                                        Tamworth
                                                        Staffs B77 4RD


Copy for Chief Fire O’fficer/Firemaster




             INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER



SUBMISSION OF THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION




                           Ju n e 1989
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

SUBMISSION OF THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS* ASSOCIATION




1.    Introduction

1.1   The Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers’ Association (CACFOA) is
       the professional organisation representing all Principal Fire Brigade
      Officers in Local Authority Fire Brigades in Great Britain.        The
      Association is non political and is not a trade union. The objectives
      of the Association include arrangements for members to act as advisers
       to the Home Secretary's Central Fire Brigades’ Advisory Council, to
      Fire Authorities    and many technical organisations,    including the
      British Standards Institution.

1.2   With regard to matters associated with the Safety at Sports Grounds
      Act, 1975, and its related provisions, many of our members represent
       their respective Fire Authorities.  The position of the Fire Authority
       is that of an ’interested party’ which has the right to appeal against
       anything in, or the omission of anything from, the Safety Certificate,
      or against refusal of a local authority to amend or replace a Safety
      Certificate.    In practice, fire officers are closely involved in the
      drafting of Fire Certificates for sports grounds and generally there is
       an excellent liaison with the Police, the Building Authority and other
       persons involved in this process.

1.3   Fire Service Officers are suitably qualified, trained and experienced
       in the command and management of fire and rescue incidents.        Such
       duties have entailed considerable involvement and expertise in the
       procedures and practical application of emergency evacuation of varying
       numbers of persons from buildings and other areas affected by fire or
       suspected fire.  In these circumstances, we suggest that our views will
       be relevant to your Inquiry.

1.4   it is relevant to point out that in the past Principal Fire Service
       Officers have given forewarning of the likelihood of various disasters,
       including those involving football stadia.    It is unfortunate that a
       disaster or series of small catastrophes have been necessary before
       safety legislation has been enacted.     The information contained in
       Appendix 'A' to-this submission gives a startlingly clear, prophetic
       picture of a view given by a Chief Fire Officer over 20 years ago
       concerning potential disasters at football grounds.       The concerns
       expressed by this officer formed the basis of the report which was
       subsequently submitted by Chief Fire Officers to the Wheatley Committee
       following the serious accidents at Ibrox Park Football Ground in 1971.
       That same report was appended to our submission to Justice popplewell
       following the tragic fire at Bradford City Football Club;    we make no
       apologies for including the original paper yet again, as many of the
       points it contains are current and valid when looking at Safety at
       Sports Grounds.
                                       3


1.5   In this submission we have addressed our views and recommendations
      mainly to the rescue role of the Fire Service and the legislative
       aspects pertinent to safety at sports grounds.    We have not dwelt on
      the fire related measures.    This is intentional as our views on fire
       safety were expressed to Justice Popplewell in relation to the Inquiry
      held after the Bradford stadium fire disaster.   In these circumstances,
      the following submission relates to relevant measures for crowd safety
      and the means of escape provisions contained in the legislation
      governing Safety Certificates for Sports Grounds and Stadia.

2.    Definition of Sports Grounds and Stadia

2.1   We regard a sports ground as any place where sport or similar
      competitive activities take place in the open air and where the
      accommodation is covered or open with seating or standing facilities
       for   spectators.  A   sports  stadium   is  a sports  ground where
       accommodation for spectators wholly or partially surrounds the area
      used for the activities taking place therein.

2.2   For the purpose of this submission, any reference to sports      ground,
       sports stadium or stadia should be considered to be the same.

3.    The Wheatlev Report

3.1   We have taken into consideration that in Hay 1972 the Rt. Hon. Lor<*
      Wheatley submitted to the Secretary of State for the Home Department
       and the Secretary of State for Scotland the report of his Inquiry into
       Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds.   It was from his report that the Safety
       at Sports Ground Act 1975 evolved.

3.2   Lord Wheatley in his report concentrated on the stadia of foot|>a^
       rugby clubs patronised by paying members of the public who attend
       large numbers to watch sporting events.   Under the heading "The Nature
       of the Problem” , on pages 2 and 3, paragraphs 8 to 11 of the report,
       Lord Wheatley identified the problem areas common to most stadia.

3 3   Following Lord Wheatley's report, and subsequently that of Justic
       Popplewell,  major steps have   been taken   to  improve the   safety
       provisions and relative legislation applicable to sports grounds and
      stadia.

4.    The Popplewell Report

4.1   We consider that many people lose sight of the              that ^“ ftice
       popplewell was not only looking at the tragic fire which engulfed the
       stand at Bradford City with the loss of 56 lives, he was ^Iso taking
       into consideration the trouble which occurred on that same fateful d y
       in May 1985 at Birmingham City Football Club where crowd disturbances
       r . » r considerable d.„.6e .t the 8ro»nd which resulted in the collapse
       of a wall, killing one young man and injuring seventeen other p p ,
       hence the title of the Inquiry being "Committee of Inquiry into
       Safety and Control at Sports Grounds".
                                          4

4 2   Justice Popplewell made a number     of specific recommendations  m  his
      Report.   In this connection, it would be useful to ascertain the extent
       to which these recommendations     have been applied in respect of
       training, the provision of stewards and the manning of exit gates, etc.
       at various premises.   It is for this reason that we would advise that
      Justice Popplewell's recommendations are reviewed and those which have
      not been implemented as statutory requirements be made so, especially
      where they are relevant to crowd control and behaviour.

5.    Safety at Sports Grounds and Stadia

5 1   Whether premises used for sportsare called sports stadia or        sports
       grounds is immaterial;      whether the competition is concerned with
       football, cricket, rugby, athletics or even horse racing, is equally of
       only passing interest.   The real problems which need addressing are the
       numbers  of   spectators   likely  to  attend,  whether  the  facilities
       available are suitable and whether members of the public and other
       people entering those premises for any purpose can escape safely and
       without injury if the need arises for whatever reason.

5 2   The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, revised in 1 9 8 6     and commonly
       referred to as the 'Green Guide* is, in our view, a helpful document.
       However, the status of the Green Guide should be strengthened from its
       present voluntary standard, with no legal force, to a man.iatory
       standard similar to the mandatory rules in Part B of the
       Building Regulations.   This means that the safety requirements for
       sports grounds could only be achieved by complying with the contents of
       the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.   Where local circumstances are
       such that it is excessive to require the standards in the Green Guide
       as a matter of course, either because of the very lim; teJ. atte.nhdpan? ® ° i
       the low risk presented by the layout of the ground, then the local
       authority should be able to relax them subject to the agreement of the
       other interested parties.

5 3   The Green Guide is aimed primarily at advising on safety and, as such,
5,3   ft   takes  account of the constraints and                           “ J
       present.   The general principles of the Guide make the point that the
       inter-relation of .11 the exponents in the safety fornul. ,s essent.al
       and that none of them should be considered m isolation.    We feel t
       the principle which must over-ride all others in the safety sys
       that it should fail to safety.      This principle is well used by Fire
       Officers in assessing fire safety requirements of Publlc b" lldl"®8
       places of work and historically has proven to be successful.
        should not be placed upon anything other than         e occupa   . fch
       unaided efforts to enable them to proceed to a place of safety
        event of a fire or any other emergency.

       We believe that casualties may not have occurred at all if the
5.4
       contained in the Green Guide had been followed both before and^ dur1^
       the incident which is the subject of this I n q u i r y T h e r e f , o r e , we
       believe the full emphasis ought not to be on the investigation and t
       adequacy of the standards in the Guide, but upon their implementation
       and practice by the relevant authorities/organisations.
                                         5

5.5     We consider there is a tendency for time to dim awareness of the
         importance of some safety provisions and the need to rehearse them,
         together  with  the  assessment   of  priorities   between   commercial,
         financial and safety matters.    The question of safety can all too
         easily recede to the back of the mind, rather than stay in the
         forefront as it properly should.   The responsibilities for safety can
        be misunderstood due to the involvement of many interested parties.
        There is a particular need for the provisions of the Green Guide to be
        mandatory with respect to the responsibilities of management.

5.6     Having regard to the- problem of crowd control in the event of any
         emergency, it is our view that the over-riding factor in the selection
         of sports grounds for major national and international events should be
         the fulfilment of all the "requirements" of the Green Guide as a
         condition of that selection.

5.7     It is not our intention to restate our views on aspects of construction
        relating to stands, their fire safety and structural integrity;    this
        we have already done at some length to Justice popplewell.

5.8     In other respects, we recommend that the following aspects in Sections
        6 to 11 of this submission be taken into account and implemented as
        appropriate by relevant authorities, developers and operators of stadia.

6.      Restraints of Existing Design and Sites

6.1     Having regard to the difficulties in adapting existing sites and
        designs to current safety needs, it appears essential for relevant
        guidance to be strengthened.    We recognise there can be serious
        problems arising external to sports grounds as well as within their
        curtilage.

6.2     Externally

6.2.1   Many grounds are situated in densely populated suburban areas, the
        access to the ground being by way of streets through domestic areas.
        It follows that access will be naturally restricted due to the widths
        of roads, lack of car parking and the ground being short of external
        space.  These factors are confirmed if one looks at the site plan o
        Hillsborough Football Ground and are contributory to large numbers of
        fans congregating at turnstile areas, as was witnessed there.

6.2.2   These restrictions would have the same limiting effects if the ground
        were to be evacuated in an emergency.   It is well known that people
        having achieved a position of personal safety slow down or stop to
        observe what is happening around them.

6.2.3   Turnstiles should be clearly marked and identifiable as to which part
        of the ground they give access and, on occasions when specific tickets
        have  been   issued, turnstiles  should  be  specially designated   to
        co-ordinate tickets allowing access to that section of the ground
        specified.
                                        6

6.2.4   We are satisfied with paragraph 189, chapter 11, of the Green Guide
        referring to "Access for Emergency Vehicles". However, we would stress
        that the need for regular liaison between the Emergency Services with
        regard to this and other such matters common to their involvement.
        (See 11.7, Special Risk Plans.)

6.2.5   The Green Guide at Chapter 6, Paragraph 5, covers signposting and we
        doubt whether this recommendation is being favoured; we would advocate
        that signposting, as detailed in this paragraph, is made mandatory to
        form part of the certificate of the sports ground.

6.2.6   Further consideration should be given to Chapter 5, Paragraph 46, of
        the Green Guide, with regard to contingency plans for situations where
        available entrances at a ground have proved insufficient to stop unduly
        large crowds from gathering outside.

6.2.7   We cannot accede to the option of opening additional entrances without
        adequate crowd control and limitation of numbers.

6.2.8   We have total sympathy with the predicament of the police in such
        situations,  but would rather debate now a tangible solution to
        preventing such a situation arising than accept it as part and parcel
        of spectator activity, which seems more prevalent and problematic to
        football than any other sport attracting large crowds.

6.3     Internal

6.3.1   With regard to internal safety provisions, we appreciate that much
        consideration has been given to these features.        Indeed, we have
        assisted the   considerations of means of escape and fire safety.    In
        this respect, we are glad that many of our recommendations have been
        implemented.   However, we would ask that further attention be given to
        matters in the paragraphs which follow.

6.3.2   Perimeter fences appear to be needed to discourage pitch invasions and
        their use is widespread particularly at football grounds.   There does
        not seem to be a common standard type of fence, the design of which
        varies from club to club.

6.3.3   We would recommend that where it is considered essential to provide
        perimeter fencing, this fencing has sufficient gates to permit crowd
        evacuation on to the pitch in a controlled condition.

6.3.4   The design and size of gates   in perimeter fences   should be subject to
        further investigation.

6.3.5   Control of gates should be vested with the police or suitably trained
        stewards under their command.

6.3.6   One of the strongest recommendations we would make     in this submission
        is for the provision of all-seater stands.
                                         7

6.3.7   Whilst accepting that this     recommendation will be unacceptable to
        sports   ground managements,    we  feel   that it would  prevent  the
        overcrowding from occurring,   i.e. when all the seats are full - the
        ground is full!

6.3.8   Justice Popplewell addressed this point and Chapter 6, Paragraph 6.16
        refers.   However, it is still the case that serious incidents arise
        from crowd misbehaviour, and it is our view that further attention
        should be given to the reference made by Justice Popplewell to the
        idiosyncrasies of football fans.

6.3.9   If a view is taken that all-seater grounds are not yet feasible, we
        would advocate that grounds are separated into ’spectator pens’ with
        sufficient means of escape provision to accommodate the numbers in each
        pen.

6.3.10 The density of the occupation of pens should be strictly in accordance
       with the Green Guide.    However, emergency lateral movement should be
       provided and sufficient stewards or Police should be available to
       monitor and control access to each pen.

6.3.11 Public address systems should be capable of being used in separate
       areas of the ground, both inside and outside.    They should be audible
       and of distinct clarity to overcome the noise generated by the crowd.

6.3.12 Crowd 'reservoir'   areas to the rear of the turnstiles should be
       sufficiently large to accommodate the numbers being admitted to that
       specific area, with sufficient pass door facilities available to permit
       exit from the ground in an emergency.     Cognizance should be given to
       the fact that spectators tend to congregate in areas directly behind
       turnstiles waiting for friends to gain admission.

6.3.13 These areas should be strictly controlled by stewards or Police to
       ensure free flow in either direction, should the need arise. The Green
       Guide, Chapter 6, Paragraph 66, relating to the exit gates should be
       strictly followed.

6.3.14 Ideally, turnstiles should only permit access to specific areas of the
       ground and numbers entering the area should be monitored by the sports
       ground management.

7.      Ground Capacities

7.1     As Lord Wheatley recognised, it is important to maintain flexibility in
        any system of control so as to take          account of the differing
        circumstances at individual grounds.   Characteristics such as age, size
        and mode of construction vary widely from ground to ground.

7.2     Under normal circumstances, most spectator sports attracting a regular
        attendance do not suffer problems caused by g r o u n d overcrowding/ It
        may be that a proportion wish to view from one particular part of the
        ground and, with regard to football, this is very often behind the two
        goal areas.  In general, this does not affect the overall capacity of
        the grounds.
                                       8

7.3   It is worth considering making more extensive use of the existing
       certification process to limit levels of spectator attendance; taking
       account of any specified works which ought to be carried out.

7.4   All of the above would be easily rectified if our recommendation for
       all-seater stands was accepted and ground capacities calculated in
       accordance with the Green Guide.

7.5   We must not lose sight of the special nature of the event taking place
       at Hillsborough     and we would recommend that those sports grounds
       designated as being' suitable to accommodate such events are limited in
       number and geographically sited to suit all needs.

8.    Stewards

8.1   Justice Popplewell was quite specific in his views on the training, use
       and provision of stewards at sports grounds.      We consider that his
       views, plus the recommendations contained in the Green Guide at Annexe
       ’B* - stewarding, and also Chapter 2 - Management Responsibility in
       relation to stewards, are not being properly carried out.

8.2   We strongly recommend that a mandatory provision be made to the Act
       with regard to      the responsibility of sports ground managements to
       provide and train, etc. suitable numbers of stewards to be responsible
       for all apsects of the ground whilst spectators are in attendance.

8.3   The number of stewards required at   a sports ground to be determined by
       the Chief Constable and the Local Authority’s inspection team.

8.4   Stewards are often only employed on a casual basis      and at times they
      may not even turn up.       A responsibility should be placed on the
      management of the sports ground to ensure that the pre-determined
       number required are on duty.    Failure to provide sufficient stewards
       should be reflected in a reduced number of people being allowed in and
       a substantial fine being levied against the sports ground management.

8.5   Even with the recommendations previously made in the Green Guide, it is
       known that stewards are often ill-trained in the nature of          the
      responsibilities    that go with the job.  It is essential that they are
       fully conversant with all emergency procedures and possess a special
       knowledge of the area for which they are responsible.

8.6   A way to improve the   standard ofstewards   would be   for sports ground
      managements to provide a list of points which stewards must know and do
       (as Annexe ’B' Green Guide) and then for them to be tested to ensure
       that they are competent, preferably by the Police.    The management of
       the sports ground would then issue a certificate of competence which
       should be renewed annually.   This is an area where Fire Brigades could
      make a positive contribution in respect of fire safety training.
A specified number of stewards should be under control of chief
stewards.   Chief stewards should be similarly tested but t o •a higher
standard to reflect their greater level of responsibility and their
co-ordinating role.

All stewards should come under    the   jurisdiction   and   control   of   the
Senior Police Officer present.

Evacuation Control

We are not satisfied that the Police and stewards,      at their current
numbers, would be sure of being able to evacuate quickly all or a major
part of many sports grounds.   This is a matter which must be addressed
and, preferably, by our colleagues in the Association of Chief Police
Officers (ACPO).

From our own experience in evacuation for fire purposes, we would
suggest that the starting point is to decide on the evacuation
procedure to be deployed and the part ground staff, principally
stewards, have to play.    The ideal situation would be to make use of
the public address system to relay a coded message that will alert
stewards and other staff to the nature and vicinity of the problem.

No alarm system should be provided that gives an audible alarm in
public areas.    As with other areas of public entertainment,    public
areas situated below a stand should be provided with buzzers and lights
to give staff an indication of a problem.

Effective means of verbal communication should be provided adjacent to
stewards' positions so that they can contact the control rooms to pass
on information or raise the alarm in the event of an emergency.

Once it is determined that there is a situation which warrants either a
partial   or  total  evacuation   and  stewards  are   in position,    an
announcement should be made on the public address system          asking
spectators to leave in an orderly fashion as directed by the stewards.

Any decision to evacuate large numbers of spectators   should be relayed
to all emergency service control rooms for information purposes.

Should any assistance be required, as much information relating to the
occurrence  must   be passed   to  ensure  the  correct  resources  and
assistance are mobilised;  this is of course a matter for local liaison
but needs to be stressed.

Maintenance of Standards

A major concern must be that of ensuring that high standards of safety
are maintained once provided to the satisfaction of the Local Authori y
inspection team.  The following points should assist that objective.

Any certificate   orrecommendation should explain fully all the measures
which should be   in force and should state the reasons.
                                       10


10.3   'During Performance' inspections in the form of spot checks should be
       made to monitor safety standards and the aspects conditional to the
       certificate by designated members of the Local Authority inspection
        team or Officers acting on their behalf.

10.4   Regular liaison and discussion should take place between management of
       sports grounds and representatives of the Local Authority inspection
       team.

10.5   Instruction and training must be given on a regular basis to all
       employees,  both full and part-time.    This must be a management
       responsibility  which  should be  reinforced as  necessary by  the
       professional assistance of the Police, Fire Officers and First Aid
       Instructors.

10.6   The attitude of clubs and management has, on occasion, been unhelpful.
       We would suggest that this is an appropriate time to introduce tougher
       penalties against management who fail to discharge their duties in
        ensuring standards of public safety and who do not conform to the
        recommendations given to them by official bodies, i.e. Police or Fire
       Service, or disregard the conditions laid down in their certificate or
       the provisions of the Green Guide.    This principle of tougher measures
        should be directed towards the directors and senior management of clubs
        and sports grounds.

10.7   In addition to the conditions imposed, it would be advantageous to
        issue management of sports grounds with a list of 'rules of management
       which explicitly details their responsibilities with regard to public
       safety.

11•    Fire Service Resources

11.1   As indicated at the beginning of this submission, the involvement of
        the Fire Service with regard to the Safety at Sports Grounds Act
        revolves principally around the fire safety and means of escape
        provision.   However, with regard to operational emergency incidents,
        the relevant local authority Fire Brigade is rightly responsible in law    A
        for all firefighting and associated operations.   In addition, the Fire
        Brigade normally undertakes the command and rescue needs and other
        categories of emergency incident, but existing law is unclear in
        respect of the responsibilities of command and control at non-fire
        incidents.  Therefore, we consider that the local situation should be
        clarified to confirm the vital role of local authority Fire Brigades.

11.2   As this Inquiry is looking specifically at the disaster which occurred
        at Hillsborough, our operational expertise at such an incident would e
        concerned with the rescue role.

11.3   Many Fire Brigades have now adopted the title 'Fire^ and Rescue Service
        and for good reason, as a large proportion of the incidents attended by
        Brigades  are   non-fire  situations,  involving  danger   to life   and
        requiring a rescue capability.
                                            11


11.4     The Fire Service is the only emergency service which has the personnel,
         resources, training, experience and capability to deal with most rescue
         s ituations.

         The practical involvement of the Fire Service at incidents such as
11.5
         Hillsborough is limited and mainly revolves around physically removing
         casualties  from a dangerous    environment, making the scene    sate,
         carrying out resuscitation and first aid until the casualties cap be
         handed over to the ambulance service.

         It is recognised that at emergency incidents the Police are ^ a l l y
11.6
         heavily involved in maintaining law and order, organising crowd control
         and dealing with the situation in hand.

         There is a need for the emergency services to liaise, together with the
11.7
         management of the sports ground, to formulat,e •SpeCial                 J^t
         which should take account of every conceivable type o f i n c i d e n t tha
         could occur and the resources which would be required to deal with it.

         The    Fire
                   Service have special appliances dedicated to accident and
11.8
         r S L u e    e a r n i n g specialist cutting and rescue equipment,
                     w o r k

         resuscitation apparatus, backed up by d i s c i p l i n e d personnel, trained m
         the use of this equipment and qualified to administer firs a

         At an incident such as Hillsborough, it is essential that effective,
11.9
         on-scene liaison takes place between the Senior Officers of all
         emergency services so that maximum utilisation is made of personnel and
         resources available.

11.10    One qualification we would stress is that Fire Service
         equipment must not be used for crowd control purposes where a c.v.
         disturbance has   occurred.  The Fire Serv.ce would of course    re.p°nd
         nnd deal with fires and rescue of casualties trapped m buildings
         fires, in debris or wreckage under such conditions as deemed necessary.

         It is essential that all the emergency services are aware^ of^each
11.11
         others' resources, skills and capabilities, as    ime
                lifp  is  at  stake.   A   sensible  option would be ^ to hoia
         Tnter-service exercises at designated sports grounds lnvolv«i8 staff
         with a scenario recommended by the Local Authority inspec 10




 5045h
                                                     APPENDIX ‘A 1


                    A Chief Officer's View in 1965

                Safety in Football and Sports Stadia



Occasion for Disaster
Cinemas and theatres are already strictly controlled by legislation,
and this has been based primarily upon experience gained from
disasters which have occurred both in this Country and in other
parts of the world. There have, of course, been disasters in
football grounds, but so far there appears little evidence that
anything has been done to profit from p r e v i o u s d i s a s t e r s by way of
improving the safety standards for spectators in football grounds.
In 1946 at Bolton, 33 people were killed and over 500 injured when
thousands of people forced their way into the football ground,
crushing other spectators against barriers, and when these collapsed
the spectators, including women, were suffocated and trampled upon.

In 1964 over 80 people were injured in somewhat similar
circumstances at Sunderland Football Ground.
In Lima, Peru, 300 people were killed and over 1,000 injured whilst
trying to escape from a football ground where a riot was in progress
and where the Police were using tear gas.
And then only recently 34 people were killed and many injured at a
football match in Turkey.
All the ingredients for a disaster can still be present particularly
amongst the emotionally charged, and often tightly packed spectators
on the spion kops of football grounds. When large and ground
capacity crowds are attending cup ties, and local derbies, one can
often observe access gangways blocked solidly with spectators, who,
once inside the ground, are usually locked securely in until about
15 m i nutes before the game ends.
Lighting pylons, catering stalls, and fragile stand roofs, all
provide precarious vantage points for the more agile supporters.
Apart from the obvious danger to the supporters themselves they ^
present a great potential threat to the innocent spectators sitting
or standing underneath.
As exciting incidents build up near to goal mouths and in other
parts of the ground, one can see vast numbers of sp e c t a t o r s , p r e s s i n g ^
forward, and this movement wave runs through the whole crowd until
it is arrested by crush barriers, or by the ultimate compression of
the spectators in the lower sections of the terraces into a
dangerous solid mass of humanity. Although it is perhaps difficult
to imagine the South American or T u rkish type riots happening
amongst the phlegmatic British spectators, I nevertheless believe we
should not be deluded into taking refuge in a complacent attitude
that it could not happen here.
                                  continued
                                    -   2   -




     If, as the signs of the times appear to indicate, that hooliganism
     and rowdyism are on the increase, then it becomes increasingly
     difficult to forecast, indeed who can predict the probable effects
     of panic, hooliganism and partisanship upon tightly packed crowds of
     spectators. It is not difficult to imagine at cup ties or local
     derbies on the ground of one of the lower division clubs receiving a
     crowd pulling team which results in a capacity ground, where in such
     circumstances the level of facilities and crowd control experience
     and know how, leave something to be desired. The excitement and
     atmosphere inherent in the rivalry of the game, the partisanship
     factions in the crowds, the stimulous of a few pints of beer before
     the game, are a first class prelude to disaster, so that all that is
     now required is an element of rough play, coupled with a few
     contentious decisions, and the pattern is set.

2.   Recent Events
     Recent events have only emphasised the lack of elementary safety
     precautions in football grounds to protect the spectators and
     prevent the spread of fire in the stands.
     In a Scottish L eague match between D unfermline Athletic and Celtic,
     one person was killed and 49 people injured. Crash barriers
     collapsed and hundreds were sent tumbling on to the .football pitch.

     In Coventry, the main stand was severely damaged by fire,^
     necessitating its demolition and reconstruction. The design and
     construction of the old,stand facilitated the rapid spread of fire.

     Two days later the football stadium at Swansea was severely damaged
     by fire. Fortunately both stands were empty of spectators when the
     fires occurred. The beginning of this year's football season was
     marred by the fire which occurred at N ottingham Forest s, Footballs
     Stadium. This fire started whilst the match was in progress and the
     fire spread so rapidly that 4,000 spectators had to b e h u r r i e d l y
     evacuated. Furthermore, it is reported that t h e f i r e f i g h t i n g
     operations were hindered by cars parked in the vicinity of the
     ground. From the preliminary reports it appears that a disaster was
     once again just narrowly averted.

3.   Fire Risks
     It would probably be true to say that the risks where large crowd
     situations are present, fall into two basic classifications. There
     is a life and personal safety risk, with an attendant f i re and panic
     risk where the older type of combustible type stands and fixtures
     are still in use.


                                  c on ti nued
                                    - 3 -




     Probably the principle fire risk in the average football ground is
     the traditional covered stand, built primarily of timber with the
     usual corrugated iron or asbestos_ roof. Once a fire secures a hold
     in this type of structure it, of course, spreads rapidly, and can
     destroy the stand often before effective firefighting measures can
     be brought into effect. Firefighting operations can be complicated
     by the voids and spaces beneath the stands, where often, combustible
     rubbish and disused and worn out equipment is stored, and it is
     therefore, in these places where fire can spread undetected.
     Where the spaces under stands are utilised for offices and dressing
     rooms, etc., these areas are often further sub divided by timber
     studded partitions covered by combustible hardwood or softboard. In
     such structural conditions fire can spread rapidly through this type
     of accommodation due to the absence of a measure of fire resisting
     compa rtmentat i o n .

4.   Fire Prevention
     All spaces   under stands should be cleared of combustible rubbish and
     materials,   and a careful inspection made of all floors over voids
     for cracks   and holes through which cigarette ends and lighted
     matches or   smoking materials could fall.
     During the time spectators are occupying stands frequent inspections
     should be made of the voids and a final inspection made at least
     thirty minutes after the spectators have left the stand.
     All electrical equipment and wiring should be examined and tested by
     a competent electrical contractor at least once in every three
     years. It should be ensured that adequate appropriate first aid
     firefighting equipment is strategically positioned in the stands,
     and if there is any doubt about the adequacy or effectiveness of the
     apparatus the Chief Fire Officer for the area should be requested to
     advise on fire defence arrangements.
5.   Spectators' Safety and Comfort on Grounds and Stadia
     To ensure reasonable standards of safety for the general public
     attending large crowd events, it is essential that certain reforms
     should be carried out and the following are a few suggestions in
     this regard
     a)   Crowds should be effectively compartmented by more crush
          barriers. These crush barriers and retaining walls should be
          c onstructed to some recognised standard of safety inspected by
          a qualified building inspector to ensure that they will
          withs t a n d m a ximum crowd pressures with generous safety margin;


                                  cont i nued
                                  - 4 -




     b)   Providing stewards, (members of Supporters Clubs) who after
          suitable training could supervise each compartment to obviate
          over filling and keep access gangways clear of spectators.
          Such an arrangement would be of considerable assistance to the
          club in the provision of effective crowd control efficiency,
          and would help the Police in locating and controlling trouble
          makers when a d i sturbance was in the offing. Stewards could
          also be trained in the projecting of the family entertainment
          image, and t hereafter would be the social contact and link man
          in each crowd compartment. The stewards could be trained in
          first aid to the injured, crowd control pyschology, and
          elementary fire prevention. In a comparatively short period of
          time, because spectators usually foregather in similar places
          week by week, each compartment would become a social entity,
          common to the personal identities of the regular supporters,
          their families and associates;
     c)   The provision of adequate primary and secondary lighting is
          particularly important during floodlight games;
     d)   The provision of special enclosures for children and other
          special sections of the public who cannot participate in the
          usual spectator facilities.

6.   Stadium and Football Ground Design
     It would appear there is ample scope for some of our schools or
     faculties of architecture to carry out a comprehensive research
     study into the spectator logistics of football ground and stadium
     design to achieve the standards of safety and comfort befitting this
     Country's approach to the late sixties and seventies.

7.   Legislation
     The legal position regarding football and sports stadia is not
     clear; it w ould appear that Section 59 of the Public Health Act 1936
     applies to the buildings within the curtilage of the football stadia
     and, therefore, safe ingress and egress can be secured for
     spectators in the stands. Where licensed bars or licensed clubs are
     provided under the stands, the usual public entertainment safety
     standards such as secondary lighting, exit signs, adequate exits,
     firefighting equipment, and the flame proofing of furnishing and
     decorations,c an be insisted upon under the Licensing Act of 1964.

     The legal position of the terraced sections, sometimes referred to
     as "Spion Kops" and other open air standing spaces, where the
     spectators are tightly packed, is obscure because these places
     cannot be defined as structures. Safety measure in these situations
     are there f o r e left to the individual attitudes or common sense of
     football managements, which of course varies according to the
     quality of the management, and to other prevailing circumstances
     which will influence the standards, not least of all being the
     prosperity and the financial capability of the organisation.

                                 continued
It will be obvious to anyone who thinks about aspects of safety that
conditions in many football grounds leave a lot to be desired and
further legislation is clearly needed to regularise the position.
It would be refreshing to hope that legislation to provide for
reasonable safety standards for the public in respect of the use of
open air terracing on sports and football grounds could be secured
before another disaster occurs, rather than following the usual
practice of locking the legislative door after the horse has already
bolted.
Past history has indicated that following a disaster, remedial
legislation has swiftly followed, but the exception to this rule is
the football industry which appears to be in the realm of the
untouchable.
The M i n ister of Sport has adopted the now standard delaying tactic
beloved of all politicians of appointing a Committee, but after^
studying constituent m embership and its objectives I cannot envisage
any improvements for the safety of spectators in the foreseeable
future.
It is obvious that disasters can be caused by fire,; there is
already ample evidence that football stands can be set on fire yet
there appears to be no recognised fire engineer on the Committee to
advise on fire defence and means of escape aspects. Collapsing
crush barriers and structural aspects are another well proven cause
of injury, but again there appears no structural safety engineer on
the Committee.
I have some difficulty in reconciling a Committee so heavily
weighted by representatives of the sport, objectively considering
safety having regard to consequent financial and organisational
impli cati o n s .
It is not a pleasant pastime to be a prophet of doom, but I
reiterate that the points which I made in my article nearly a year
ago have been fully justified by subsequent events. Those who
attend football matches as spectators must face up to the
possibility that they may in the appropriate circumstances be dicing
with disaster. Far be it for me to pre-judge the work of the
Committee but w h a t e v e r the outcome their efforts will never be
ef f e ctive without legislative backing. This is a painful but
historical fact.
The Chief And Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

15th June 1989                                                    M Eastwood MIFireE
                                                                  Assistant Secretary
HE Wright Esq MIFireE FBIM                                        Fire Service Headquarters
Chief Fire Officer                                                Keynsham Road
South Yorkshire County Fire Brigade                               CHELTENHAM
Command HQ                                                        Glos   GL55 7PY
Wellington Street
Sheffield                                                         Tel: (0242) 512041
S1 3FG
                                                                  Our Ref:   ME/jh

Dear

Hillsborough Inquiry - CACFOA Submission

Please find enclosed the report I compiled in respect of the Hillsborough Inquiry, whether
i t will be submitted in i ts current format or have the axe taken to i t and edited I wait
to see myself.

I do know I couldn't possibly have written such a document without your help and advice
which is appreciated.

I am sorry I didn't get a draft to you before you went on leave but my diary andcertain
in service problems at local and national levels precluded me from getting to grips with i t
until the weekend. I came into the office and spent a l l of Saturday and Sunday t i l l quite
late bashing away at i t . I surprised myself just how much could be written on i t , I hope
i t i s n ' t drivel and that I haven't missed any important points out.

I am afraid you get so involved in something that your vision becomes blurred.
scanned i t for me and my Staff Officer and Secretary really pulled out the stops by going
through i t fully with as c r i t i c a l an eye as possible with the time constraints laid down,
amending i t as we went along.

Please feel free to c r i t i c i s e a l l of any part of the report as I would value your opinion
and any constructive comments will help me for the future should I be called upon to write
similar reports. I am fai rly thick skinned and don't take offence easily.


Kind regards

Yours sincerely




M EASTWOOD
Assistant Secretary
The Chief And Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

                  SUBMISSION TO COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO THE
                HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989


1.   Introduction
     The Chief and Assistant Chief Fire O f f i c e r s 1 Association (CACFOA) has
     over two hundred members covering every Brigade in the United Kingdom
     and Northern Ireland, all of whom are senior Fire Brigade Officers.

     They all have extensive practical experience in fire and rescue
     incidents and are ultimately responsible for all operational Fire
     Service activity and attend and take charge of the the more serious
     and large scale emergency incidents.
     1.1    The great majority of disasters have been foretold and in many
            instances it is unfortunate that a disaster or series of small
            catastrophes has been necessary before appropriate legislation
            has been enacted. Indeed A p p e n d i x ‘A 1 to this submission gives
            a startlingly clear, prophetic picture of a view a Chief Fire
            Officer had of potential disasters at football grounds over
            twenty years ago and we reproduce it unedited. The views
            expressed by that one man formed the basis of the report which
            went subsequently from Chief Fire Officers to the Wheatley
            Committee following the serious accident at Ibrox Park Football
            Ground in 1971. That same report was appended to our
            submission to Justice Popplewell following the tragic fire at
            Bradford City Football Club; we m a k e no apologies for including
            it yet again as many of the points it contains are current and
            valid when looking at Safety at Sports Grounds.
     1.2    In this submission we have addressed our views and
             recommendations mainly to the rescue role of the Fire Service
            and the legislative aspects pertinent to Safety at Sports
            Grounds. We have not dwelt on the fire related measures with
            which we are more closely associated within our profession.
            This is intentional as our views were expressed to the inquiry
            held by Justice Popplewell which was more relative to fire
            safety. The exception we make is a reference to crowd safety
            and the Means of Escape provisions built into the Safety
            Certificates for Sports Grounds and Stadia coming under the
            Act.

2.   Definition of Sports Grounds and Stadiums
     2.1    With regards to this submission we regard a Sports Ground as,
            broadly speaking any place sport or other competitive
            activities take place in the open air and where accommodation
            either covered or open with seating or standing facilities has
            been provided for spectators. A Sports Stadium is a sports
            ground where accommodation for spectators wholly or
            subsequently surrounds the area used for the activities taking
            place therein.

                                     continued
2.2    For the purpose of this document any reference to sports
       ground, sports stadium, stadia should be considered to be the
       same.

The Wheatley Report
3.1   In May 1972 the Rt Hon Lord Wheatley submitted to the Secretary
       of State for the Home Department and the Secretary of State for
       Scotland the report of his inquiry into Crowd Safety at Sports
       Grounds. It was from his report that the Safety at Sports
       Grounds Act 1975 evolved.

3.2   Lord Wheatley in his report concentrated on the stadia of
       football and rugby clubs patronised by paying members of the
       public w h o attend in large numbers to watch sporting events.
       Under the heading "The Nature of the Problem", on pages 2 and
       3, paragraphs 8 to 11 of the report Lord Wheatley identified
       the problem area's common to most stadia.

3.3   Following Lord Wheatley's report and subsequently that of
       Justice Popplewell major steps have been taken to improve the
       safety provisions and relative legislation applicable to sports
       grounds and stadiums.

3.4   It is our view that a number of recommendations incorporated in
       the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds revised in 1986 need to
       be more clearly defined and in some cases brought within the
       scope of the Act.

The Popplewell Report
4.1   Many people lose sight of the fact that Justice Popplewell was
       not only looking at the tragic fire which engulfed the stand at
       Bradford City with the loss of 56 lives. He was also taking
       into consideration the trouble which occurred on that same
       fateful day in May 1985 at Birmingham City Football Club where
       rioting fans caused major damage at the ground which resulted
       in the collapse of a wall killing one y o u n g man and injuring
       seventeen other people; hence the title of the inquiry being
       'Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports
       G r o u n d s 1.
       The incident at Birmingham, which in itself was sufficiently
       serious to warrant an inquiry was totally overshadowed by the
       disaster at Bradford.
4.2   Justice Popplewell made a number of specific recommendations in
       his report, it would be interesting to see how much notice
       management at many sports grounds took with regards to training
       and provision of stewards and the manning of exit gates etc.,
       may be a m atter for y o u r enquiry.
        It is for this reason that we would advise that Justice
        Popplewell's recommendations are reviewed and those which have
        not been implemented as statutory requirements be made so,
        especially w h e r e they are relevant to crowd control and
        behaviour.

Safety at Sports Grounds and Stadia
5.1     Whether premises used for sport are called sports stadia or
        sports grounds is immaterial; w h ether the competition is
        concerned with football, cricket, rugby, athletics or even
        horse racing is equally of only passing interest; the real
        problems which need addressing are how many spectators are
        likely to attend, w h ether the facilities available are suitable
        and whether members of the public and other people entering
        those premises for any purpose can escape safely and without
        injury if the need arises for w h a tever reason.

5.2     The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, revised in 1986 and
        commonly referred to as the 'Green Guide' is in our view a good
        document, there are however a number of matters which would
        benefit from strengthened guidance and we would therefore wish
        to put forward our views on certain issues which to us could be
        essential in preventing a similar disaster to that of
        Hillsborough from occurring again.

5.3     It is not our intention to restate our views on aspects of
         construction relating to stands, their fire safety and
         structural integrity, this we have already done at some length
         to Justice Popplewell. We would however put forward views on
         aspects which some may say are outside our jurisdiction as
         professional fire officers. We w ould state that we in the Fire
         Brigade have had great experience in dealing with similar
         problems in many and varied arena's, all relevant to the
         situation before you and would ask that our comments be noted
         seri o u s l y .
Ground Design
6.1     Given a green field site situation, ground design would be
         fairly easy to prescribe, unfortunately the majority of sports
         grounds already exist and there is little if no chance of
         grounds being totally rebuilt. In our view problems are not
         only associated with matters inside the curtilage of the ground
         but are also very prevalent externally.

6.1.1   Externally - many grounds are situated in densely populated
        suburban areas, the access to the ground being by way of
        streets through domestic area's. It follows that access will
        be naturally restricted due to the widths of roads, lack of car
        parking and the ground being short of external space. These

                               c ont i nued
                                - 4 -




        factors are confirmed if one looks at the site plan of
        Hillsborough football ground and contributory to large numbers
        of fans congregating at turnstile areas as was witnessed at
        Hi 1 1 sborough.

6.1.2    These restrictions mentioned would have the same limiting
        effects if the ground were to be evacuated in an emergency, it
        is well known that people having achieved a position of
        personal safety slow down or stop to observe what is happening
        around them.

6.1.3    The ideal would be to have adequate numbers of turnstiles to
        permit a steady throughput of fans, the approach to the
        turnstiles being in line with the turnstile openings and not at
        oblique angles. The approach to the turnstiles at the Leppings
        Lane entrance to Hillsborough necessitated fans funnelling into
        a fairly limited quadrant to gain access to their designated
        part of the ground. It would appear that at Hillsborough, at
        some expense, the turnstile siting could be substantially
        improved to overcome the crowding that occurred. We realise
        that each ground would have to be considered separately and
        w ould recommend that Local Authority Inspection Teams are
        instructed to give this point serious consideration.

6.1.4 turnstiles should be clearly marked and identifiable as to
      which part of the ground they give access and on occasions when
       specific tickets have been issued turnstiles should be
       specially designated to co-ordinated tickets allowing access to
      that section of the ground specified.

6.1.5   With regard to turnstiles, we agree with chapter 6 paragraph 67
        of the Green Guide but would recommend that all turnstiles are
        made reversible to enable people to leave the ground at any
        time. We w ould stress the point made in paragraph 67 however
        that reversible turnstiles are not acceptable as a means of
        escape from a ground and should not form any part of the normal
        or emergency exit system of the ground.
6.1.6 We would highlight the need to keep routes adjacent to the
       turnstile and entrances to the ground clear and free of
       obstructions paragraph 58 of the Green Guide covers this point
      with regards to 'Exit Routes', we consider the above to be just
       as important as routes into the ground are also routes out at
       the end of the event.
6.1.7   Chapter 5 paragraph 45 of the Green Guide highlights the
        problems of overcrowding and states, "To avoid this danger such
        walls, fences and gates should be of appropriate height and
        strength and hand or foot holds which might assist climbing
        should be avoided". Weekly, evidence is seen on television

                              continued
        prior to many football league games of fans gaining access
        illegally to grounds one wonders if this recommendation has
        been noted. We would advocate that Local Authority Inspection
        Teams review this aspect immediately.

6.1.8   A problem was caused at Hillsborough when one such fan caught
        gaining illegal access was evicted through the pass/exit gate
        as a large number of fans took advantage of the gate being
        opened and forced their way in adding to the numbers already in
        the West Stand lower pens.

6.1.9   Ground management should make more use of closed circuit
        television both inside and outside grounds, such a facility,
        sited out of reach of the hooligan element would enable
        officials and police to monitor crowds and their behaviour. As
        stated in the Green Guide chapter 12 paragraph 194 v i , "such an
        installation would be of significant value in assisting
        emergency evacuation", especially if it covers the streets and
        approaches to the ground.

6.1.10 We would recommend that public address systems should be
       extended to enable messages and instructions to be given to
       spectators queuing to gain access to the ground. Such a
       facility could also be used to pass coded messages to police
       officers in that area with regards to problems etc. See also
       6.2.15 Public Address Systems.
6.1.11 We are satisfied with paragraph 189 chapter 11 of the Green
       Guide referring to ‘Access for Emergency Vehicles' we would
       however stress that the need for regular liaison between the
       Emergency Services with regards to this and other such matters
       common to their involvement. See 12.7 Special Risk Plans.
6.1.12 Paragraph 57 chapter 6, covers Signposting, we doubt however if
       this recommendation is being adhered to; we would advocate that
       signposting as detailed in this paragraph is made mandatory to
       form part of the certificate of the Sports Ground.
6.1.13 Without prejudging any aspect of the disaster at Hillsborough,
       we ask that further consideration be given to paragraph 46,
       chapter 5 of the Green Guide with regards to contingency plans
       for situations where available entrances at a ground have
       proved insufficient to stop unduly large crowds from gathering
       outsi de.
6.1.14 We cannot accede to the option of opening additional entrances
       without some form of crowd control and limitation of numbers to
       the ground in general or any p articular part thereof.


                               c ont i nued
6.1.15 We have total sympathy with the predicament of the police in
       such situations, but would rather debate now a tangible
       solution to preventing such a situation arising than accept it
       as part and parcel of spectator activity, which seems more
       prevalent and problematic to football than any other sport
       attracting large crowds.
6.2     Internally - m a j o r consideration has already gone into the
        design and construction of stadia. As professional fire
        officers we have ourselves had input into recommendations and
        requirements in respect of means of escape and fire safety in
        particular and we are satisfied that the majority of our views
        have been acted upon.

6.2.1   Perimeter Fences - these appear desirable to discourage pitch
        invasions and their use is widesp r e a d particularly at football
        grounds. There does not seem to be a common standard type of
        fence, the design of which varies from club to club.

6.2.2   It is against all our professional training as fire officers to
        accept restrictions such as perimeter fencing and we would ask
        that a better solution be found; we do of course accept the
        plight of the police and club management faced with dealing and
        controlling the unruly element which frequent football matches.
6.2.3   We would recommend that where it is considered essential to
        provide perimeter fencing the fencing has sufficient gates to
        permit crowd evacuation forward onto the pitch in a controlled
        conditi on.
6.2.4   Such gates as provided should be at least 1.1 metre wide and
        have easy access to the playing area once opened.

6.2.5   Control of the gates should be vested with the police or
        suitable stewards under their command.
6.2.6   Perimeter fence gates should be easily openable from the
        outside, it may be desirable to have a design which are
        electronically controlled with a failsafe device and capable of
        being overridden manually by police or stewards.
6.2.7   Gates in perimeter fences should only be opened in case of
        emergency or to allow police access to facilitate crowd
        control.

6.2.8   The use of perimeter fences in conjunction with timber stands
        is totally undesirable from a fire safety point of view.
6.2.9   Seating - one of the strongest recommendations we would make in
        this submission is for the provision of all seater stands.


                               continued
6.2.10 Whilst accepting this recommendation will be unacceptable to
       sports ground management we feel that it would prevent
       overcrowding from occurring i.e. when all the seats are full
       the ground is f u l 1 !

6.2.11 Justice Popplewell went some way to addressing this point in
       his inquiry, chapter 6 paragraph 6.16 refers, unfortunately it
       would seem that people never learn and police and ground
       management are continuously faced with unacceptable situations
       involving crowd behaviour. In our view it is now time to get
       to grips with what Justice Popplewell describes as the
       'idiosyncrasies' of footballs fans by w h a tever method deemed
       necessary.

6.2.12 Spectator Pens - should our views on all seater grounds be
       rejected we would advocate that grounds are separated into
       'pens' with sufficient means of escape provision to accommodate
       the numbers in each pen.

6.2.13 The maximum number per pen should be 1,000, at a density
       strictly in accordance with that recommended in the Green Guide
       chapter 16. Sufficient stewards or police should be available
       to monitor and control access to each pen.
6.2.14 The number of pens permitted at each football ground should be
       restricted to the amount that can be accommodated behind each
       goal mouth in line with the playing area perimeter.

6.2.15 Public Address System - better use should be made of the public
       address system for communicating information to both crowds and
       stewards.

6.2.16 Public address systems should be capable of being used in
       separate area's of the ground, both inside and out. They
       should be audible and of distinct clarity to overcome the noise
       generated by the crowd.

6.2.17 Crowd 'Reservoir' Area - area's to the rear of the turnstiles
       should be sufficiently large to accommodate the numbers being
       admitted to that specific area, with sufficient pass door
       facilities available to permit exit from the ground in an
       emergency. Cognizance should be given to the fact that
       spectators tend to congregate in area's directly behind
       turnstiles w a iting for friends to gain admission.
6.2.18 These area's should be strictly controlled by stewards or
       police to ensure free flow in either direction should the need
       arise. Paragraph 66, chapter 6 of the Green Guide relating to
       exit gates must be adhered to.

6.2.19 Ideally turnstiles should only permit access to specific area's
       of the ground and numbers entering the area should be monitored
       by the sports ground management.

                             cont i nued
                                    - 8 -




7.   Ground Capacities
     7.1   As Lord Wheatley recognised it is important to maintain
            flexibility in any system of control so as to take account of
            the differing circumstances at individual grounds, factors such
            as age, size and mode of construction differ widely from ground
           to ground.

     7.2   Under normal circumstances most spectator sports attracting a
            regular attendance do not suffer problems caused by ground
           overcrowding. It may be that a proportion wish to view from
            one particular part of the ground, with regards to football
           this is usually behind the goal mouths, in general this does
            not affect the overall capacity of the ground.

     7.3   It is worth considering limiting the permitted numbers to an
            a ggregate of the actual level of attendance, say over the
            1988/89 season. For special events i.e. a local derby between
            two teams, special licence provisions should be sought and
            agreed with the Local Authority Inspection Team prior to the
            event taking place.

     7.4   All of the above would be easily rectified if our
            recommendation for all seater stands was accepted and
            calculated in accordance with the Green Guide.

     7.5   We must not lose sight of the special nature of the event
            taking place at Hillsborough and we would recommend that those
            sports grounds designated as being suitable to accommodate such
            events are limited in number and geographically sited to suit
            all needs. The control of these stadia for such events to be
            of a very high level and under the jurisdiction of the Chief
            Constable whose force area the ground is located.

8.   Entry Conditions
     8.1   In conjunction with 6.2.9 of this submission regarding all
            seater stands we would recommend that for sports grounds
            attracting regular spectators or numbers in excess of say
            10,000 the entry to the ground should be by ticket only.

     8.2   We would also support a membership scheme which includes a
            tamper proof identity card as previously advocated by numerous
            bodies to past inquiries.
     8.3   We consider that there is benefit in encouraging all spectators
            to be in position 15 minutes before the event is due to start.
            This would give the police opportunity to control the crowd and
            hopefully preclude the trend for groups of fans swamping the
            turnstiles at the last minute with a view to forcing the police
            to open gates because of the surge. It might be that entry
            fees could be marginally reduced before, or substantially
            increased after that time.

                                  conti nued
                                    - 9 -




9.   Stewards
     9.1   Justice Popplewell was quite specific in his views on the
           training, use and provision of stewards at Sports Grounds. We
           consider that his views, plus the recommendations contained in
           the Green Guide at Annex B, stewarding and also chapter 2,
           M anagement Responsibilit y pertinent to stewards are not being
           properly carried out.

     9.2   We strongly recommend that a mandatory provision be made to the
            Act with regards to the responsibilities of sports grounds
            management to provide and train etc. suitable numbers of
            stewards to be responsible for all aspects of the ground whilst
            spectators are in attendance.

     9.3   The number of stewards required at a sports ground to be
            determined by the Chief Constable and the Local Authorities
            Inspection Team.

     9.4    Stewards are often only employed on a casual basis. At times
            they may not even turn up. A responsibility should be placed
            on the management of the sports ground to ensure the pre
            determined number required are on duty. Failure to provide
            sufficient stewards should be reflected in a reduced number of
            people being allowed in and a substantial fine being levied
            against the sports ground management.

     9.5   Even with the recommendations previously made in the Green
            Guide it is known that stewards are often ill trained in the
            nature of the responsibilities that go with the job. It is
            essential that they are fully conversant with all emergency
            procedures and possess a special knowledge of the area they are
            responsible for.
     9.6   A way to improve the standard of stewards w ould be for sports
            ground management to provide a list of points that stewards
            must know and do (as per Annex B Green Guide) and then for them
            to be tested to ensure they are competent, preferably by the
            police. The management of the sports ground would then issue a
            certificate of competence which should be renewed annually.
            This is an area where Fire Brigades could make a positive
            contribution in respect of training in fire safety provisions.
     9.7   A specified number of stewards should be under the control of
            chief stewards. Chief stewards should be similarly tested but
            to a higher standard to reflect their greater level of
            responsibility and their co-ordinating role.
     9.8   All stewards should come under the jurisdiction and control of
            the Senior Police Officer present.
                                  continued
                                   -   10   -




10. Evacuation Control
    10.1   We are not satisfied that sufficient manpo w e r is available by
           way of police or current levels of stewards t o quickly evacuate
           a section of, or all the sports ground. This is a matter which
           must be addressed and preferably by our colleagues in the
           Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) w h o have great
           experience in this field.

    10.2   From our own experience in evacuation for fire purposes, which
           is not greatly different from general evacuation, we would
           suggest that the starting point is to decide on the evacuation
           procedure to be deployed and the part ground staff, principally
           stewards, have to play. The ideal situation would be to make
           use of the public address system to relay a coded message that
           will alert stewards and other staff to the nature and vicinity
           of the problem.

    10.3   Exit gates should be easily opened from inside and stewards
           should take up pre determined positions to assist in
           evacuation; the emphasis must be on control and avoidance of
           panic.

    10.4   No alarm system should be provided that gives an audible alarm
            in     public area's. As with other area's of public
           e ntertainment ,public area's situated below a stand should be
           provided with buzzers and lights to give staff an indication of
            a problem.

    10.5   Telephones should be provided adjacent to stewards positions so
           they can ring the control rooms on a dedicated number to pass
            on information or raise the alarm in the event of an emergency.

    10.6   Once it is determined that there is a situation which warrants
            either a partial or total evacuation and stewards are in
            position an announcement should be made on the public address
            system asking spectators to leave in an orderly fashion as
           directed by the stewards.

    10.7   Any decision to evacuate large numbers of spectators should be
            relayed to all emergency service control rooms for information
            purposes.
    10.8   Should any assistance be required as much information relating
            to the occurrence must be passed to ensure the correct
            resources and assistance are mobilised, this is of course a
            matter for local liaison but needs to be stressed.

11. Maintenance of Standards
    11.1   A major concern must be that of ensuring that high standards of
            safety are maintained once provided to the satisfaction of the
            Local Authority Inspection Team. The following points should
            assist that objective.
                                 co nti nued
                                   -   11   -




   11.2    Any certificate or recommendation should explain fully all the
           measures which should be in force and why.

   11.3    'During Performance' inspections in the form of spot checks
           should be made to monitor safety standards and the aspects
           conditional to the certificate by designated members of the
           Local Authority Inspection Team or Officers acting on their
           behalf.
   11.4    Regular liaison and discussion should take place between the
           m anagement of sports grounds and representatives of the Local
           Authority Inspection Team.

   11.5    Instruction and training must be given on a regular basis to
           all employees both full and part-time. This must be a
           management responsibility which should be reinforced as
           necessary by the professional assistance of the police, fire
           officers and first aid instructors.

   11.6    The attitude of clubs and management has on occasion been
           c avalier and unhelpful. We would suggest that this is an
           appropriate time to introduce tougher penalties against
           management who fail to discharge their duties in ensuring
           standards of public safety and w h o do not conform to the
            recommendations given to them by official bodies i.e. police or
           fire service, or disregard the conditions laid down in their
           certificate or to guidance given in the Green Guide. This
           principle of tougher measures should also apply to the
           directors and senior management of clubs and sports grounds.

   11.7    In addition to the conditions imposed it would be advantageous
           to issue management of sports grounds with a list of 'rules of
           management' which explicitly details their responsibilities
           with regards to public safety.
   11.8    Provision should be made for authorised officers of the Local
           Authority to have power to issue a prohibition notice under the
           Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and where necessary revoke
           the certificate in force.
12. Fire Service Resources
    12.1   As indicated at the beginning of this submission our
            responsibility with regards to the Safety at Sports Grounds Act
            revolves principally around the Fire Safety and Means of Escape
            provisions. The Fire Service does form part of the Local
           Authority Inspection T e a m and take their duties in this respect
            very seriously.

    12.2   As this inquiry is looking specifically at the disaster which
            occurred at Hillsborough w e can only put forward our
            operational expertise at such an incident with the emphasis
            being on the rescue role.

                                  continued
                                -   12   -




12.3    Many Fire Brigades have now adopted the title 'Fire and Rescue
        Service' and for good reason, as a large proportion of the
        incidents attended by Brigades are non fire situations
        involving danger to life requiring a rescue capability.
12.4    The Fire Service is the only emergency service which has the
        personnel, resources, training and capability to deal with most
        rescue situations. The Fire Service is also immediately
        available and can have large numbers of personnel and resources
        on scene at an incident in a very short space of time.

12.5    The practical involvement of the Fire Service at incidents like
        Hillsborough is limited and mainly revolves around physically
        removing casualties from a dangerous environment, m a k i n g the
        scene safe, carrying out resuscitation and first aid until the
        casualties can be handed over to the ambulance service w h o have
        a far greater problem when called upon to handle large numbers
        of casualties due to limited resource and personnel
        availability.
12.6    At incidents like Hillsborough the police have their work cut
        out m a intaining law and order, organising crowd control and
        dealing with the situation in hand and are generally grateful
        for any professional assistance afforded to them.

12.7    Special Risk Plans - there is a need for the emergency services
        to liaise together with the management of the sports ground to
        formulate 'Special Risk Plans' which should take account of
        every conceivable type of incident that could occur and the
        resources which would be required to deal with it.

12.8    The Fire Service have special appliances dedicated to accident
        and rescue work carrying specialist cutting and rescue
        equipment, including resuscitation apparatus, backed up by
        disciplined personnel, trained in the use of this equipment and
        qualified to administer first aid.

12.9    At an incident such as Hillsborough it is essential that
        effective on scene liaison takes place between the Senior
        Officers of the emergency services so that maximum utilisation
        is made of personnel and resources available.

12.10   One qualification we would stress is that Fire Service
        personnel and equipment must not be used for crowd control
        purposes where a civil disturbance has occurred. The Fire
        Service would, of course, respond and deal with fires and
        rescue of casualties trapped in buildings or fires, in debris
        or wreckage under such conditions as deemed necessary.

12.11   It is essential that all the emergency services are aware of
        each others resources, skills and capabilities as time is of
        the essence when life is at stake. A sensible option would be
        to hold inter service exercises at designated sports grounds
        involving staff with a scenario recommended by the Local
        Authorities Inspection Team.

                              co nti nued
                                    - 13 -




    12.12   We in senior positions in the Fire Service have no desire to
            take on the role or responsibility of either the police or
            ambulance service but our usefulness at incidents involving
            large numbers of casualties should not be overlooked or under
            estimated.

13. Concluding Statement

    13.1    We recognise that many of the recommendations and suggestions
            we have made in this submission have a cost implication
            especially for the management of sports grounds. We feel
            strongly that financial considerations are secondary to
            spectator safety and safety improvements must not be
            disregarded on the grounds of cost or profitability w here the
            sports ground is a business enterprise.

    13.2    Certain elements in society never seem to learn, even after the
            horrific events at Hillsborough, whilst the tragedy was still
            front page news and fresh in everyones minds, supposed football
            fans ran riot at the game between Birmingham City and Crystal
            Palace on the 13th May 1989.

    13.3    We know we can legislate for provisions to make buildings and
            stadia safe, unfortunately it would seem to be those who
            frequent them w h o put themselves and others at risk.
    13.4    More control must be exercised over people attending sports
            grounds and the police given increased statutory powers to
            overcome these factions who are ruining the ethos of sport.




                                                                              •
M EASTWOOD
Assistant Secretary
Chief & Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association
14.6.89



DCF0313
                                           APPENDIX 'A'


                A Chief Officer's View in 1965

             Safety in Football and Sports Stadia


Occasion for Disaster
Cinemas and theatres are already strictly controlled by legislation,
and this has been based primarily upon experience gained from
disasters which have occurred both in this Country and in other
parts of the world. There have, of course, been disasters in
football grounds, but so far there appears little evidence that
anything has been done to profit from previous disasters by way of
improving the safety standards for spectators in football grounds.

In 1946 at Bolton, 33 people were killed and over 500 injured when
thousands of people forced their way into the football ground,
crushing other spectators against barriers, and when these collapsed
the spectators, including women, were suffocated and trampled upon.

In 1964 over 80 people were injured in somewhat similar
circumstances at Sunderland Football Ground.

In Lima, Peru, 300 people were killed and over 1,000 injured whilst
trying to escape from a football ground where a riot was in progress
and where the Police were using tear gas.

And then only recently 34 people were killed and many injured at a
football match in Turkey.

All the ingredients for a disaster can still be present particularly
amongst the emotionally charged, and often tightly packed spectators
on the spion kops of football grounds. When large and ground
capacity crowds are attending cup ties, and local derbies, one can
often observe access gangways blocked solidly with spectators, who,
once inside the ground, are usually locked securely in until about
15 minutes before the game ends.

Lighting pylons, catering stalls, and fragile stand roofs, all
provide precarious vantage points for the more agile supporters.
Apart from the obvious danger to the supporters themselves they
present a great potential threat to the innocent spectators sitting
or standing underneath.
As exciting incidents build up near to goal mouths and in other
parts of the ground, one can see vast numbers of spectators.pressing
forward, and this movement wave runs through the whole crowd until
it is arrested by crush barriers, or by the ultimate compression of
the spectators in the lower sections of the terraces into a
dangerous solid mass of humanity. Although it is perhaps difficult
to imagine the South American or Turkish type riots happening
amongst the phlegmatic British spectators, I nevertheless believe we
should not be deluded into taking refuge in a complacent attitude
that it could not happen here.

                           c onti nued
If, as the signs of the times appear to indicate, that hooliganism
and rowdyism are on the increase, then it becomes increasingly
difficult to forecast, indeed who can predict the probable effects
of panic, hooliganism and partisanship upon tightly packed crowds of
spectators. It is not difficult to imagine at cup ties or local
derbies on the ground of one of the lower division clubs receiving a
crowd pulling team which results in a capacity ground, where in such
circumstances the level of facilities and crowd control experience
and know how, leave something to be desired. The excitement and
a tmosphere inherent in the rivalry of the game, the partisanship
factions in the crowds, the stimulous of a few pints of beer before
the game, are a first class prelude to disaster, so that all that is
now required is an element of rough play, coupled with a few
contentious decisions, and the pattern is set.

Recent Events
Recent events have only emphasised the lack of elementary safety
precautions in football grounds to protect the spectators and
prevent the spread of fire in the stands.
In a Scottish League match between D u nfermline Athletic and Celtic,
one person was killed and 49 people injured. Crash barriers
collapsed and hundreds were sent tumbling on to the football pitch.

In Coventry, the main stand was severely damaged by fire,
n ecessitating its demolition and reconstruction. The design and
construction of the old stand facilitated the rapid spread of fire.

Two days later the football stadium at Swansea was severely damaged
by fire. Fortunately both stands were empty of spectators when the
fires occurred. The beginning of this year's football season was
marred by the fire which occurred at Nottin g h a m Forest's, Footballs
Stadium. This fire started whilst the match was in progress and the
fire spread so rapidly that 4,000 spectators had to be hurriedly
evacuated. Furthermore, it is reported that the firefighting
operations were hindered by cars parked in the vicinity of the
ground. From the preliminary reports it appears that a disaster was
once again just narrowly averted.

Fire Risks
It would probably be true to say that the risks where large crowd
situations are present, fall into two basic classifications. There
is a life and personal safety risk, with an attendant fire and panic
risk where the older type of combustible type stands and fixtures
are still in use.


                         . . continued . .
Probably the principle fire risk in the average football ground is
the traditional covered stand, built primarily of timber with the
usual corrugated iron or asbestos roof. Once a fire secures a hold
in this type of structure it, of course, spreads rapidly, and can
destroy the stand often before effective firefighting measures can
be brought into effect. Firefighting operations can be complicated
by the voids and spaces beneath the stands, where often, combustible
rubbish and disused and worn out equipment is stored, and it is
therefore, in these places where fire can spread undetected.

Where the spaces under stands are utilised for offices and dressing
rooms, etc., these areas are often further sub divided by timber
studded partitions covered by combustible hardwood or softboard. In
such structural conditions fire can spread rapidly through this type
of accommodation due to the absence of a m e a sure of fire resisting
compartmentation.

Fire Prevention
All spaces   under stands should be cleared of combustible rubbish and
materials,   and a careful inspection made of all floors over voids
for cracks   and holes through which cigarette ends and lighted
matches or   smoking materials could fall.

During the time spectators are occupying stands frequent inspections
should be made of the voids and a final inspection made at least
thirty minutes after the spectators have left the stand.
All electrical equipment and wiring should be examined and tested by
a competent electrical contractor at least once in every three
years. It should be ensured that adequate appropriate first aid
firefighting equipment is strategically positioned in the stands,
and if there is any doubt about the adequacy or effectiveness of the
apparatus the Chief Fire Officer for the area should be requested to
advise on fire defence arrangements.

Spectators' Safety and Comfort on Grounds and Stadia
To ensure reasonable standards of safety for the general public
attending large crowd events, it is essential that certain reforms
should be carried out and the following are a few suggestions in
this regard
a)   Crowds should be effectively compartmented by more crush
     barriers. These crush barriers and retaining walls should be
     constructed to some recognised standard of safety inspected by
     a qualified building inspector to ensure that they will
     withstand maximum crowd pressures with generous safety margin;

                          . . continued . .
b)   Providing stewards, (members of Supporters Clubs) w h o after
     suitable training could supervise each compartment to obviate
     over filling and keep access gangways clear of spectators.
     Such an arrangement would be of considerable assistance to the
     club in the provision of effective crowd control efficiency,
     and would help the Police in locating and controlling trouble
     makers when a disturbance was in the offing. Stewards could
     also be trained in the projecting of the family entertainment
     image, and thereafter would be the social contact and link man
     in each crowd compartment. The stewards could be trained in
     first aid to the injured, crowd control pyschology, and
     elementary fire prevention. In a comparatively short period of
     time, because spectators usually foregather in similar places
     week by week, each compartment would become a social entity,
     common to the personal identities of the regular supporters,
     their families and associates;
c)   The provision of adequate primary and secondary lighting is
     particularly important during floodlight games;
d)   The provision of special enclosures for children and other
     special sections of the public w h o cannot participate in the
     usual spectator facilities.

Stadium and Football Ground Design

It would appear there is ample scope for some of our schools or
faculties of architecture to carry out a comprehensive research
study into the spectator logistics of football ground and stadium
design to achieve the standards of safety and comfort befitting this
Country's approach to the late sixties and seventies.

Legislation

The legal position regarding football and sports stadia is not
clear; it would appear that Section 59 of the Public Health Act 1936
applies to the buildings within the curtilage of the football stadia
and, therefore, safe ingress and egress can be secured for
spectators in the stands. Where licensed bars or licensed clubs are
provided under the stands, the usual public entertainment safety
standards such as secondary lighting, exit signs, adequate exits,
firefighting equipment, and the flame proofing of furnishing and
d e c o r a t i o n s ,can be insisted upon under the Licensing Act of 1964.

The legal position of the terraced sections, sometimes referred to
as "Spion Kops" and other open air standing spaces, where the
spectators are tightly packed, is obscure because these places
cannot be defined as structures. Safety m e asure in these situations
are therefore left to the individual attitudes or common sense of
football managements, which of course varies according to the
quality of the management, and to other prevailing circumstances
which will influence the standards, not least of all being the
prosperity and the financial capability of the organisation.

                              continued . .
It will be obvious to anyone who thinks about aspects of safety that
conditions in many football grounds leave a lot to be desired and
further legislation is clearly needed to regularise the position.
It would be refreshing to hope that legislation to provide for
reasonable safety standards for the public in respect of the use of
open air terracing on sports and football grounds could be secured
before another disaster occurs, rather than following the usual
practice of locking the legislative door after the horse has already
bolted.

Past history has indicated that following a disaster, remedial
legislation has swiftly followed, but the exception to this rule is
the football industry which appears to be in the realm of the
untouchable.

The Minister of Sport has adopted the now standard delaying tactic
beloved of all politicians of appointing a Committee, but after
studying constituent membership and its objectives I cannot envisage
any improvements for the safety of spectators in the foreseeable
future.

It is obvious that disasters can be caused by fire,; there is
already ample evidence that football stands can be set on fire yet
there appears to be no recognised fire engineer on the Committee to
advise on fire defence and means of escape aspects. Collapsing
crush barriers and structural aspects are another well proven cause
of injury, but again there appears no structural safety engineer on
the Committee.

I have some difficulty in reconciling a Committee so heavily
weighted by representatives of the sport, objectively considering
safety having regard to consequent financial and organisational
implications.

It is not a pleasant pastime to be a prophet of doom, but I
reiterate that the points which I made in my article nearly a y e a r
ago have been fully justified by subsequent events. Those w h o
attend football matches as spectators must face up to the
possibility that they may in the appropriate circumstances be dicing
with disaster. Far be it for me to pre-judge the work of the
Committee but w h a t e v e r the outcome their efforts will never be
effective without legislative backing. This is a painful but
historical fact.
728894   SOUTH'YORKS FIRE
02ii^35Bv3*h..

         GA
06 3 0   15:33


  0   5 Cl4

  5 00 5
CACFOA SUBMISSION

INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

Having read the draft submission attached to the letter from the President
dated 23rd June, 1989, I make the following observations

 1.   Introduction - Generally agreed but do we really need to include the
       "I told you so" paragraph 1.4. I suggest that this paragraph and
      Appendix "A" be removed from the report.

      Paragraph 1.5 refers in line 2 to "... recommendations mainly to the
      rescue role of the Fire Service ...” which is not accurate as I only
      find specific reference to this in Section 12 and on which I shall
      make comment later. I believe its deletion will not remove any
      specific meaning from the submission.

 2.   Definition of Sports Grounds and Stadiums.

 3.   The Wheatley Report.

 4.   The Popplewell Report.

      I question whether the above are relevant to the matters relating to
      the Hillsborough disaster. In general the contents of these provide
      nothing   constructive   to   aid   Lord   Justice   Taylor in his
      deliberations.

 5.   Safety of Sports Grounds and Stadia

      In 5.2, line 4, I suggest deletion of "... would   wish   to   ..."   as
      this is what is hopefully being done.

      In paragraph 5.3 I'm not sure what "... that it should fail to
      safety" means. Perhaps a better or fuller explanation is required.
      Reference to "... the occupants own unaided efforts ..." is
      generally applied but gates in perimeter fences should not normally
      come into this category as regards their opening and I would refer
      you to paragraph 6.3.6 of the draft submission and the Green Guide
      on this matter.

      I   think that the introduction to paragraph 5.4 is somewhat
      presumptive and the whole content a matter really for Lord Justice
      Taylor who has been provided with specific references for the
      inquiry. I suggest that this paragraph be deleted.

      Whilst generally agreeing with the content of paragraph 5.6 the
      reference used (Building Regulations) refers to physical provisions
      whereas management responsibilities, or the non-satisfaction of
      these, played a major part in what happened at Hillsborough in my
      opinion. Is reference to Building Regulations pointing the inquiry
      in the wrong direction? should we not just suggest that the Green
      Guide be given "deemed to satisfy" status.

      Should you still wish to retain paragraph 5.8 then Appendix "B" will
      need to become "A" if my previous comments are acted upon.
Restraints of Existing Design and Sites

Paragraph 6.2.3 - check spelling in line 8.

The reasoning behind the recommendation in paragraph 6.2.5 evades me
and would have been of no assistance at Hillsborough. The provision
of a pass door, however, would have been beneficial and perhaps
support of paragraph 67 of the Green Guide in this respect would be
more useful.    Clearly the opening of a larger gate to remove an
unauthorised individual had a very undesirable effect.

I cannot see the link between Hillsborough and the content of
paragraph 6.2.6 as no such problem existed to my knowledge. I
wonder why it is included.

In accepting the content of paragraph 6.2.9 I must state    that   this
was provided at Hillsborough.

Whether or not the Police used the information correctly or, indeed,
were trained or sufficiently experienced so to do, is another matter
which I am not able to advise on.

In paragraph 6.3.1 it would seem advisable to suggest that a
suitably qualified body research the design of perimeter fences to
provide the equivalent of a "British Standard". I feel sure that
this could be done and perhaps work has already been undertaken in
this respect.

I believe that paragraph 6.3.2 comments that "... a better solution
be found" will not be considered too helpful by Lord Justice Taylor.
He wants ideas. One idea put forward by the Police at the inquiry
was for a system similar to a moat.

e.g




                                    1m o t   To   SeAkS ,



Whilst it may have its attractions and could be applied at the
Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough, I'm sure that it would present
many problems if applied as a standard for all grounds.

I don't believe that 6.3.3 adds anything to the existing Green Guide
and wonder what a "controlled condition" is.

Paragraph 6.3.11, line 3 - delete "concerning".

The recommendation in paragraph 6.3.13 will be extremely difficult
to satisfy at all grounds especially when applying paragraph 206 of
the Green Guide. For example, at the other end to Leppings Lane at
Hillsborough is a Kop with an occupancy figure of over 16,000. That
would be 16 pens each served by their own entrance/exits, etc., and
this would just not be possible.     The reference to control of
numbers entering each pen is extremely relevant and should be
highlighted.
Ground Capacities

Paragraph 7.3, line 3 - "1988/89".

Entry Conditions

The content of paragraph 8.2 is not relevant to the Hillsborough
disaster where the match was all ticket. Where "supporters" are
hell bent on getting in or creating situations which will enable
them to force an entry into the ground at such games the need for a
plastic card will only be another means of "gumming up" the works
equal to that of "no ticket but here's £10". The inability of that
individual then turning round to leave the turnstile under the crush
situation created at the Leppings Lane entrance only effectively
blocked a turnstile and put it out of use until it could be cleared,
thus worsening an already difficult situation.

Whilst the principle in 8.3 is good, reference to flexible entry
fees after reading 8.1 and 8.2 becomes a little nonsensical to me
and somewhat unworkable.     At major events could we suggest that
earlier attendance be made more attractive        by   having    some
entertainment, or similar, provided. There will always regrettably
be individuals who will wish to have a good drink before attending
and leave it to the last minute. Perhaps an alternative for matches
where maximum capacity is expected would be an 11 a.m. kick off.

Stewards

I think that we must agree that a condition in a safety certificate
becomes a mandatory provision.      If that is so the content of
paragraph 9.2 is already catered for in my opinion.

The content of 9.3 is already catered for and certainly applied in
South Yorkshire although it is difficult to believe this I know from
what happened - even to me!

Having referred in 8.2 to ID membership and in 8.3 to all ticket
games it is difficult to see how paragraph 9.4 could be applied
without extreme problems arising. I don't know the answer to this
but I was not aware of a problem.

Evacuation Control

Look at the number alongside "Evacuation Control".

In reading 10.1 I must advise you that in excess of 700 policemen
were available and used at the Hillsborough Stadium on that fateful
day.   Whilst sympathising with the comment I believe that the
wording must be changed as it was their use that might be of greater
relevance and that relates to pre-planning and training.

I'm not sure of the purpose of paragraph 10.4 as it has no relevance
to the situation that arose at Hillsborough and is indeed satisfied
where it is applicable, i.e. below stands, in South Yorkshire at
least.
      The provision of verbal communication means for stewards referred to
      in paragraph 10.5 I do not oppose but "adjacent to stewards
      positions" seems to ignore the availability this will present to the
      idiot group of supporters.      I must inform you that the almost
      uncontrolled use of hand held radios at Hillsborough created a
      situation which made useful communication to and fro extremely
                  C
      difficult. btj Rs<jCot-'')

11.   Maintenance of Standards

       The "regular basis" referred to in paragraph 11.5 should, I feel, be
       strengthened and I suggest that it be received at least once during
       a season and whenever commencing such employment.

      With regard to the power to issue a   prohibition order as against the
      use of Section 10 of the 1975 Act     as mentioned in paragraph 11.8 I
      would ask that this be checked as I   feel sure that this opportunity
      is already available to officers of   the local authority.

12.    Fire Service Resources

       I cannot honestly see the purpose of paragraphs          12.1 to 12.6
       inclusive in a submission to the Hillsborough Inquiry.

I hope that the above is useful but if you feel that further discussion is
necessary please do not hesitate to contact me.




H.E. Wright,
Chief Fire Officer.



To:   1.   Ken Rose, General Secretary, CACFOA.
      2.   Mike Rogers, QFSM,MIFireE, President, CACFOA.
      3.   Malcolm Eastwood, DCFO, Gloucestershire Fire & Rescue Service.
                                                   6vSVa   O fc
 The Chief And Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

                QFSM   MIFireE            County Fire Officer
  President                               West Sussex Fire Brigade
                                          Headquarters
              (0243) 786211               Northgate CHICHESTER
              (0243) 780416               West Sussex P019 1BD
  MR.LS

  PERSONAL & CONFIDENTIAL                 23rd June 1989




  Dear Colleague,

  INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBCMXJGH STADIUM DISASTER

  You are aware that the Association received an invitation at very short
  notice to submit views to the above-mentioned Inquiry, which is ongoing at
  the present time. Having regard to the important and urgent nature of this
  matter, I approved an arrangement for a draft submission to be prepared by
  Bob Graham and Malcolm Eastwood, in liaison with Harry Wright.
  Unfortunately, Bob was unable to attend the subsequent meeting in South
  Yorkshire. Therefore, it was necessary for the matter to be progressed by
  Malcolm in conjunction with Harry.

  It is relevant to note that Malcolm has spent considerable time and effort in
  producing a draft which has since been perused by Bob and myself. In this
  connection, Bob has indicated that he believes a short submission would
  suffice, although he does not feel too strongly on this point. However, it
  is my view that a fairly comprehensive submission should be made and I have
  prepared the enclosed second draft, which is about 95% of Malcolm's work,
  incorporating some amendments which I have made.

  As a matter of urgency, would you please peruse the enclosed draft and inform
  Ken Rose of your approval or rejection of it as it stands now, bearing in
  mind that Ken must finalise this on Monday, 26th June at the latest.
  Incidentally, it will be apparent to you that the main thrust of our
  submission is contained in Sections 1 to 5 inclusive, albeit these sections
  are more comprehensive than the needs identified by Bob Graham. Therefore,
  if there is a general view that the draft is to lengthy and contains matters
  which are not entirely appropriate to our professional expertise, sections 6
  to 12 may be omitted.

  Yours sincerely,




n m. Kogers,
 - President.

  (Dictated by Mr. Rogers and signed in his absence.)

  TO ALL MEMBERS OF MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE: CFO WRIGHT. SOUTH YORKSHIRE;
  CFO CURRIE, GLOUCESTERSHIRE; ACFO R. GRAHAM. GREATER MANCHESTER;
  MR. K. ROSE, GENERAL MANAGER.
           THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF
             FIRE OFFICERS’ ASSOCIATION




              INQUIRY Im o W E HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




                                      »
SUBMISSION OF THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION




                                              June 1989




                                 General Manager: K. E. Rose, IPFA, FRVA
       Registered Officer Fire Service Headquarters, Lancaster Circus Queensway, Birmingham B4 7DE
INQUIRY INTO TOE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

SUBMISSION OF THE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION



1.      Introduction

1.1    The Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association
       (CACFOA) is the professional organisation representing all
       Principal Fire Service Officers in Local Authority Fire
       Brigades in Great Britain. The Association is non political
       and is not a trade union. The objectives of the Association
       include arrangements for members to act as advisors on various
       matters to the Central Fire Brigades' Advisory Council and many
       other technical and employer organisations.

1.2    Our members represent their respective Fire Authorities on
       matters associated with the Safety at Sports Grounds Act, 1975,
       and its related provisions. The position of the Fire Authority
       is that of an 'interested party' which has the right to appeal
       against anything in, or the omission of anything from, the
       Safety Certificate, or against refusal of a local authority to
       amend or replace a Safety Certificate. In practice fire
       officers are closely involved in the drafting of Fire
       Certificates for sports grounds and generally there is an
       excellent liaison with the Police, the Building Authority and
       other persons involved in this process.
                              ‘K
1.3    Fire Service Officers are suitably qualified, trained and
       experienced in the command and management of fire and rescue
       incidents. Such duties have entailed considerable involvement
       and expertise in the procedures and practical application of
       emergency evacuation of varying numbers of persons from
       buildings and other areas affected by fire or suspected fire.
       In these circumstances, we suggest that our views will be
       relevant to your Inquiry.

       It is relevant to point out that in the past Principal Fire
       Service Officers have given forewarning of the likelihood of
       various disasters, including those involving football stadia.
       It is unfortunate that a disaster or series of small
       catastrophes have been necessary before safety legislation has
       been enacted. The information contained in Appendix 'A' to this
       submission gives a startlingly clear, prophetic picture of a
       view given by a Chief Fire Officer over 20 years ago concerning
       potential disasters at football grounds. The views expressed
       by this officer formed the basis of the report which was
       subsequently submitted by Chief Fire Officers to the Wheatley
       Committee following the serious accidents at Ibrox Park
Football Ground in 1971. That same report was appended to our
submission to Justice Popplewell following the tragic fire at
Bradford City Football Club; we make no apologies for including
the views yet again, as many of the points it contains are
current and valid when looking at Safety at Sports Grounds.

In this submission we have addressed our views and
recommendations mainly to the rescue role of the Fire Service
and the legislative aspects pertinent to safety at sports
grounds. We have not dwelt on the fire related measures. This
is intentional as our views on fire safety were expressed to
Justice Popplewell in relation to the Inquiry held after the
Bradford stadium fire disaster. In these circumstances, the
following submission relates to relevant measures for crowd
safety and the means of escape provisions contained in the
legislation governing Safety Certificates for Sports Grounds
and Stadia.

Definition of Sports Grounds and Stadiums
We regard a sports ground as any place where sport or similar
competitive activities take place in the open air and where the
accommodation is covered or open With seating or standing
facilities for spectators. A sports stadium is a sports ground
where accommodation for spectators wholly or partially
surrounds the area used for the activities taking place
therein.

For the purpose of this submission any reference to sports
ground, sports stadium or stadia should be considered to be the
same.

The Wheatley Report

We have taken into consideration that in May 1972 the Rt. Hon.
Lord Wheatley submitted to the Secretary of State for the Home
Department and the Secretary of State for Scotland the report
of his Inquiry into Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds. It was
from his report that the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975
evolved.

Lord Wheatley in his report concentrated on the stadia of
football and rugby clubs patronised by paying members of the
public who attend in large numbers to watch sporting events.
Under the heading "The Nature of the Problem", on pages 2 and
3, paragraphs 8 to 11 of the report. Lord Wheatley identified
the problem areas common to most stadia.

Following Lord Wheatley's report, and subsequently that of
Justice Popplewell, major steps have been taken to improve the
safety provisions and relative legislation applicable to sports
grounds and stadiums.
It is our view that a number of recommendations incorporated in
the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds revised in 1986 need to
be more clearly defined and, in sane cases, brought within the
scope of the Act.

The Popplewell Report

We consider that many people lose sight of the fact that
Justice Popplewell was not only looking at the tragic fire
which engulfed the stand at Bradford City with the loss of 56
lives, he was also taking into consideration the trouble which
occurred on that same fateful day in May 1985 at Birmingham
City Football Club where crowd disturbances caused considerable
damage at the ground which resulted in the collapse of a wall,
killing one young man and injuring seventeen other people;
hence, the title of the Inquiry being "Committee of Inquiry
into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds".

Justice Popplewell made a number of specific recommendations in
his Report. In this connection, it would be useful to
ascertain the extent to which these recommendations have been
applied in respect of training, the provision of stewards and
the manning of exit gates, etc., at various premises. It is
for this reason that we would advise that Justice Popplewell's
recommendations are reviewed and those which have not been
implemented as statutory requirements be made so, especially
where they are relevant to crowd control and behaviour.

Safety at Sports Grounds and Stadia

Whether premises used for sports are called sports stadia or
sports grounds is immaterial; whether the competition is
concerned with football, cricket, rugby, athletics or even
horse racing, is equally of only passing interest. The real
problems which need addressing are the numbers of spectators
likely to attend, whether the facilities available are
suitable, and whether members of the public and other people
entering those premises for any purpose can escape safely and
without injury if the need arises for whatever reason.

The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, revised in 1986 and
commonly referred to as the 'Green Guide' is, in our view, a
helpful document. However, there are a number of matters which
would benefit from being strengthened and we fwould wish to j put
forward our views on certain issues which appear essential in
preventing a similar disaster to that of Hillsborough.

The Green Guide is aimed primarily at advising on safety and,
as such, it takes account of the constraints and difficulties
which are present. The general principles of the Guide made
the point that the inter-relation of all the components in the
safety formula are essential and that none of them should be
safety formula are essential and that none of them should be
considered in isolation.    We feel that one principle which
must over-ride all others in the safety system is that it _
should fail to safety. This principle is well used by Fire
Officers in assessing fire safety requirements of public
buildings and places of work and historically has proven t;o be
successful. Reliance should not be placed upon anything other
than J:he occupants own unaided efforts to enable them to
proceed to a place of safety in the event of a fire or any
other emergency.

We have cause to believe that, if the guidance contained in the
Green Guide had been followed both before and during the          _
incident, the casualties may not have occurred at all. ...-- —     4
Therefore, the full emphasis ought not to be on the
investigation and the adequacy of the standards in the Guide,
but upon their implementation and practice by the relevant
authorities/organisations.

We consider there is a tendency for time to dim awareness of
the importance of some safety provisions and the need to
rehearse them, together with the assessment of priorities
between commercial, financial and safety matters. The latter
tends to take its place at the back of the mind, rather than in
the forefront where it should be. This is particularly so when
the responsibilities for safety are misunderstood due to the
involvement of a number of interested parties. In view of
this, we recommend that any doubts should be removed as to who
is responsible for safety at Sports Grounds and this primary
responsibility must be clearly identified and emphasis made
that it cannot be delegated or devolved to other
persons/bodies.

We recommend that the status of the Green Guide be strengthened       ,
from its present voluntary standard, with no legal force, to a    ^
mandatory standard similar to the mandatory rules under Part B
of the English Building Regulations, i.e. that the safety
requirements for sports grounds may be achieved only by
complying with the contents of the Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds. If these standards are seen to be particularly
demanding, the local authority may be asked to relax them,
subject to the agreement of the other interested parties.

Having regard to the problem of crowd control in the event of
any emergency, it is our view that the over-riding factor in
the selection of sports grounds for major national and
international events should be the fulfilment of all the
"requirements" of the Green Guide as a condition of that
selection.
It is not our intention to restate our views on aspects of
construction relating to stands, their fire safety and
structural integrity, this we have already done at some length
to Justice Popplewell. A copy of our submission to the
Popplewell Inquiry is enclosed at Appendix 'B '. v.________ —

In other respects, we recommend that the following aspects in
Sections 6 to 12 of this submission be taken into account and
implemented as appropriate by relevant authorities, developers
and operators of stadia.

Restraints of Existing Design and Sites

Having regard to the difficulties in adapting existing sites
and designs to current safety needs, it appears essential for
relevant guidance to be strengthened.

In our view, problems are not only associated with matters
inside the curtilage of the ground, tut are also prevalent
externally, as follows:

Many grounds are situated in densely populated surburban areas,
the access to the ground being by way of streets through
domestic areas. It follows that access will be naturally
restricted due to the widths of roads, lack of car parking and
the ground being short of external space. These factors are
confirmed if one looks at the site plan of Hillsborough
Football Ground and are contributory to large numbers of fans
congregating at turnstile areas, as was witnessed there.

These restrictions would have the same limiting effects if the
ground were to be evacuated in an emergency. It is well known
that people having achieved a position of personal safety slow
down or stop to observe what is happening around them.

          would be to have adequate numbers of .turnstiles to
permit a steady throughput of fans; the approach to the
turnstiles being in line with the turnstile openings and not at
oblique angles.   The approach to the turnstiles at the
Leppings Lane entrance to Hillsborough necessitate fans
funnelling into a fairly limited quadrant to gain access to
their designated part of the ground. It would appear that at
Hillsborough, at some expense, the turnstil, stiinq could be   XT
substantially improved to overcome the crowding that occurred.
We realise that each ground would have to be considered
separately and would recommend that Local Authority Inspection
Teams are instructed to give this point serious consideration.

Turnstiles should be clearly marked and identifiable as to
which part of the ground they give access and, on occasions
when specific tickets have been issued, turnstiles should be
specially designated to co-ordinate tickets allowing access to
          that section of the ground specified.

          With regard to the turnstiles, we agree with chapter 6
          paragraph 67 of the Green Guide, but would recommend that all
          turnstiles are made reversible/turnstiles are not acceptable as ...
          a meaHs~0f escape rrom a ground and should not form any part of
          €Fie normal or emergency exit system of the ground.

6 . 2.6   We would highlight the need to keep routes adjacent to the            c
          turnstiles and entrances to the ground clear and free of
          obstructions. Paragraph 5 of the Green Guide covers this point
          with regard to "Exit Routes".

6.2.7     Chapter 5 paragraph 45 of the Green Guide highlights the
          problems of overcrowding and states, "To avoid this danger such
          walls, fances and gates should be of appropriate height and
          strength and hand or foot holds which might assist climbing
          should be avoided". Evidence is freguently seen on television
          prior to many football league games of fans gaining access
          illegally to grounds and it appears that this recommendation
          has not been noted. We would advocate that Local Authority
          Inspection Teams review this aspect immediately.

6 .2.8    A problem was caused at Hillsborough when one such fan caught
          gaining illegal access, was evicted through the pass/exit gate
          as a large numbe of fans took advantage of the gate being
          opened and forced their way in, adding to the numbers already
          in the West Stand lower pens.

6.2.9     Ground management should make more use of closed circuit                  *   .
          television, both inside and outside grounds. Such a facility,
          sited out of reach of the hooligan element, would enable
          officials and police to monitor crowds and their behaviour. As
          stated in the Green Guide, chapter 12 paragraph 194, "such an
          installation would be of significant value in assisting
          emergency evacuation", especially if it covers the streets and
          approaches to the ground.

6 .2.10   We would recommend that the audibility of public address
          systems should be extended to enable messages and isntructions
          to be given to spectators gueuing to gain access to the ground.
          Such a facility could also be used to pass coded messages to
          police officers in that area with regard to problems, etc. See
          also 6.3.15, Public Address Systems.

6 .2.11   We are satisfied with paragraph 189, chapter 11, of the Green
          Guide referring to "Access for Emergency Vehicles". However,
          we would stress that the need for regular liaison between the
          Emergency Services with regard to this and other such matters
          common to their involvement. See 12.7 Special Risk Plans.
6 .2.12   Paragraph 57, Chapter 6, in the Green Guide covers Signposting
          and we doubt whether this recommendation is being adhered to;
          we would advocate that signposting, as detailed in this
          paragraph, is made mandatory to form part of the certificate of
          the Sports Ground.

6.2.13    Further consideration should be given to paragraph 46,
          chapter 5 of the Green Guide, with regard to contingency plans
          for situations where available entrances at a ground have
          proved insufficient to stop unduly large crowds from gathering
          outside.
                                                                       I
6.2.14    We cannot accede to the option of opening additional entrances
          without some form of crowd control and limitation of numbers to
          the ground in general or any particular part thereof.

6.2.15    We have total sympathy with the predicament of the police in
          such situations, but would rather debate now a tangible
          solution to preventing such a situation arising than accept it
          as part and parcel of spectator activity, which seems more
          prevalent and problematic to football than any other sport
          attracting large crowds.

6.3       With regard to internal safety provisions, we appreciate that
          much consideration has been given to these features. Indeed,
          we have provided input to the considerations for means of
          escape and fire safety. In this respect, we understand that
          many of our recommendations have been implemented. However, we
          would ask that further attention be given to the following:

6.3.1     Perimeter Fences - these appear desirable to discourage pitch
          invasions and their use is widespread particularly at football
          grounds. There does not seem to be a common standard type of
          fence, the design of which varies from club to club.

6.3.2     It is against all our professional training as fire officers to
          accept restrictions such as perimeter fencing and we would ask         a
          that a better solution be found. We do, of course, accept the
          plight of the Police and club managements in dealing with and
          controlling the unruly element which frequent football matches.
                                                                                     ffc*
6.3.3     We would recommend that where it is considered essential to       jr
          provide perimeter fencing this fencing has sufficient gates to
          permit crowd evacuationJ^onto the pitch in a controlled
          condition.

          The design and size of gates in perimeter fences should be
          subject to further consideration.

6.3.5     Control of gates should be vested with the police or suitably
          trained stewards under their command.
                                !




' 6.3.6   Perimeter fence gates should be easily openable from the
          outside. It may be desirable to have a design which is         ^
          electronically controlled with a failsafe device and capable of
          being over-ridden manually by police or stewards.

 6.3.7    Gates in perimeter fences should only be opened in case of      '
          emergency or to allow police access to facilitate crowd
          control.

 6.3.8    The use of perimeter fences in conjunction with timber stands
          is totally undesirable from a fire safety point of view.

 6.3.9    Seating - one of the strongest recommendations we would make in
          this submission is for the provision of all-seater stands.

 6.3.10   Whilst accepting that this recommendation will be unacceptable
          to sports ground managements, we feel that it would prevent
          overcrowding from occurring, i.e. when all the seats are full -
          the ground is fullI                                                     ^

 6.3.11   Justice Popplewell addressed this point and Chapter 6,
          paragraph 6.16 refers. However, the fact remains that
          managements continue to be faced withCconcerning^incidents
          arising from crowd behaviour. In this connection, it is our
          view that further attention should be given to the reference
          made by Justice Popplewell to the idiosyncrasies of football
          fans.

 6.3.12   Spectator Pens - should our views on all-seater grounds be
          rejected, we would advocate that grounds are separated into
          ’pens’ with sufficient means of escape provision to accommodate
          the numbers in each pen.

 6.3.13   The maximum number per pen should be 1,000, at a density  ^.
          strictly in accordance with that recommended in the Green
          Guide, chapter 16. Sufficient stewards o^Police should be           o
          available to monitor and control access to each pen.

 6.3.14   The number of pens permitted at each football ground should be
          restricted to the amount that can be accommodated behind each
          goal mouth in line with the playing area perimeter.

 6.3.15   Public Address System - better use should be made of the public
          address system for communicating information to both crowds and
          stewards.

 6.3.16   Public address sytems should be capable of being used in
          separate areas of the ground, both inside and outside. They
          should be audible and of distinct clarity to overcome the noise
          generated by the crowd.
                                                                            I




6.3.17   Crowd 'Reservoir' Area - areas to the rear of the turnstiles
         should be sufficiently large to accommodate the numbers being
         admitted to that specific area, with sufficient pass door
         facilities available to permit exit from the ground in an
         emergency. Cognizance should be given to the fact that ,
         spectators tend to congregate in areas directly behind     i
         turnstiles waiting for friends to gain admission.

6.3.18   These areas should be strictly controlled by stewards or Police
         to ensure free flow in either direction, should the need arise.
         Paragraph 66, chapter 5 of the Green Guide relating to the exit
         gates must be adhered to.

6.3.19   Ideally, turnstiles should only permit access to specific areas
         of the ground and numbers entering the area should be monitored
         by the sports ground management.

7.       Ground Capacities

7.1      As Lord Wheatley recognised, it is important to maintain
          flexibility in any system of control so as to take account of
          the differing circumstances at individual grounds, factors such
          as age, size and mode of construction vary widely from ground
          to ground.

7.2      Under normal circumstances, most spectator sports attracting a
         regular attendance do not suffer problems caused by ground
         overcrowding. It may be that a proportion wish to view from
         one particular part of the ground and, with regard to football,
          this is usually behind the goal mouths. In general, this does
         not affect the overall capacity of the ground.

7.3      It is worth considering limiting the permitted numbers to an
          aggregate of the actual level of attendance, say over the
          1988^89 season. For special events, i.e. a local derby,
          special licence provisions should be sought and agreed with the
          Local Authority Inspection Team prior to the event taking
          place.

7.4      All of the above would be easily rectified if our
         recommendation for all-seater stands was accepted and
         calculated in accordance with the Green Guide.

7.5      We must not lose sight of the special nature of the event
          taking place at Hillsborough and we would recommend that those
          sports grounds designated as being suitable to accommodate such
         events are limited in number and geographically sited to suit
          all needs.
                          .!

Entry Conditions           I

In conjunction with 6.3.9 of this submission , regarding
all-seater stands we would recommend that for sports grounds
attracting regular spectators or numbers in excess of, say,
10,000, the entry to the ground should be by ticket only.

We would also support a membership scheme which includes a
tamperproof identity card, as previously advocated by numerous u-             '
bodies at past Inquiries.                                     ^

We consider that there is benefit in encouraging all spectators
to be in position 15 minutes before the event is due to start.
This would give the police an opportunity to control the crowd
and, hopefully, preclude the trend for groups of fans swamping
the turnstiles at the last minute with a view to forcing the            <g4       *^7
police to open gates because of the surge. It might be that                        *
entry fees could be marginally reduced .before, or substantially
Tncreasedafter ~that timel

Stewards

Justice Popplewell was quite specific in his views on the
training, use and provision of stewards at Sports Grounds. We
consider that his views, plus the recommendations contained in
the Green Guide at Annexe 'B'- stewarding, and also chapter 2 -
Management Responsibility pertinent to stewards, are not being
properly carried out.

We strongly recommend that a mandatory provision be made to the
Act with regard to the responsibility of sports ground
managements to provide and train, etc., suitable numbers of
stewards to be responsible for all aspects of the ground whilst
spectators are in attendance.

The number of stewards required at a sports ground to be
determined by the Chief Constable and the Local Authority's
Inspection team.                         '

Stewards are often only employed on a casual basis and at
times, they may not even turn up. A responsibility should be              ,
placed on the management of the sports ground to ensure that       m
the pre-determined number required are on duty. Failure to         ft
provide sufficient stewards should be reflected in.a reduced
number of people being allowed in and a substantial fine being
le^ed^agSHst~the sports ground management.

Even with   the recommendations previously made in the Green
Guide, it   is known that stewards are often ill-trained in the
nature of   the responsibilities that go with the job. It is
essential   that they are fully conversant with all emergency
                                       I




       procedures and possess a special knowledge of the area they are
       responsible for.

       A way to improve the standard of stewards would be for sports
       ground managements to provide a list of points which stewards
       must know and do (as Annexe 'B' Green Guide) and for them to be
       must know and action (as per Annexe *B* Green Guide) and then
       for them to be tested to ensure that they are competent,
       preferably by the Police. The management of the sports ground
       would then issue a certificate of competence which should be
       renewed annually. This is an area where Fire Brigades could
       make a positive contribution in respect of training fire safety
       provisions.

9.7    A specified number of stewards should be under control of chief
       stewards. Chief stewards should be similarly tested but to a
       higher standard to reflect their greater level of
       responsibility and their co-ordinating role.

9.8    All stewards should come under the jurisdiction and control of
       the Senior Police Officer present.

20.    Evacuation Control
                                                                                  U.C*
10.1   We are not satisfied that sufficient manpower is available by
       wav of Police or current levels of stewards to quickly evacuate        7
       a section of, or all, the sports ground. This is a matter
       which must be addressed and, preferably, by our colleagues in
       the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO).

10.2   From our own experience in evacuation for fire purposes, we
       would suggest that the starting point is to decide on the
       evacuation procedure to be deployed and the part ground staff,
       principally stewards, have to play. The ideal situation would
       be to make use of the public address system to relay a coded
       message that will alert stewards and other staff to the nature
       and vicinity of the problem.

10.3   Exit gates should be easily opened from inside and stewards
       should take up pre-determined positions to assist in
       evacuation; the emphasis must be on control and avoidance of
       panic.

10.4   No alarm system should be provided that gives an audible alarm
       in public areas. As with other areas of public entertainment,     ‘7
       public areas situated below a stand should be provided with       ^
       buzzers and lights to give staff an indication of a problem.

10.5   Effective means of verbal communication should be provided                   o
       adjacent to stewards' positions so that they can contact the
       control rooms to pass on information or raise the alarm in the
                I




       event of an emergency.

10.6   Once it is determined that there is a situation which warrants
       either a partial or total evacuation and stewards are in
       position, an announcement should be made on the public address
       system asking spectators to leave in an orderly fashion as
       directed by the stewards.

10.7   Any decision to evacuate large numbers of spectators should be
       relayed to all emergency service control rooms for information
       purposes.

10.8   Should any assistance be required, as much information relating
       to the occurrence must be passed to ensure the correct
       resources and assistance are mobilised, this is of course a
       matter for local liaison but needs to be stressed.

11.    Maintenance of Standards

11.1   A major concern must be that of ensuring that high standards of
        safety are maintained once provided to the satisfaction of the
        Local Authority Inspection Team. The following points should
        assist that objective.

11.2   Any certificate or recommendation should explain fully all the
       measures which should be in force and why.

11.3   'During Performance' inspections in the form of spot checks
        should be made to monitor safety standards and the aspects
       conditional to the certificate by designated members of the
        Local Authority Inspection Team or Officers acting on their
       behalf.

11.4   Regular liaison and discussion should take place between
       management of sports grounds and representatives of the Local
       Authority Inspection Team.
                                                                         V
11.5   Instruction and training must be given on a regular basis to
       all employees, both full and part-time. This must be a
       management responsibility which should be reinforced as
       necessary by the professional assistance of the Police, Fire
       Officers and First Aid Instructors.

11.6   The attitude of clubs and management has, on occasion, been
       unhelpful. We would suggest that this is an appropriate time
       to introduce tougher penalties against management who fail to
       discharge their duties in ensuring standards of public safety
       and who do not conform to the recommendations given to them by
       official bodies, i.e. Police or Fire Service, or disregard the
       conditions laid down in their certificate or the guidance given
       in the Green Guide. This principle of tougher measures should
                                                                                       I




       also apply to the directors and senior management of clubs and
       sports grounds.

11.7   In addition to the conditions imposed, it would be advantageous
       to issue management of sports grounds with a list of 'rules of
       management' which explicitly details their responsibilities
       with regard to public safety.

11.8   Provision should be made for authorised officers of the Local
       Authority to have power to issue a prohibition notice under the
       Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, and, where necessary,                  to
       revoke the certificate in force.

       Fire Service Resources

12.1   As indicated at the beginning of this submission, our
       responsibility with regard to the Safety at Sports Grounds Act
       revolves principally around the Fire Safety and Means of Escape
       provisions. The Fire Service does form part of the Local
       Authority Inspection Team and take their duties in this respect
       very seriously.

12.2   As this Inquiry is looking specifically at the disaster which
       occurred at Hillsborough, we can only put forward our
       operational expertise at such an incident with the emphasis
       being on the rescue role.

12.3   Many Fire Brigades have now adopted the title 'Fire and Rescue
       Service' and for good reason as a large proportion of the             "7
       incidents attended by Brigades are non fire situations,
       involving danger to life and requiring a rescue capability.

12.4   The Fire Service is the only emergency service which has the      "   7.

       personnel, resources, training, experience and capability to
       deal with most rescue situations.

12.5   The practical involvement of the Fire Service at incidents like
       Hillsborough is limited and mainly revolves around physically
       removing casualties from a dangerous environment, making the
       scene safe, carrying out resuscitation and first aid until the
       casualties can be handed over to the ambulance service, who
       have a far greater problem when called upon to handle large
       numbers of casualties due to limited resources and personnel
       available.

12.6   At incidents like Hillsborough, the police are heavily involved
       in maintaining law and order, organising crowd control and
       dealing with the situation in hand. They are generally
       grateful for any professional assistance afforded to them.
12.7    Special Risk Plans - there is a need for the emergency services
        to liaise, together with the management of the sports ground,
        to formulate 'Special Risk Plans' which should take account of
        every conceivable type of incident that could occur and the
        resources which would be required to deal with it.

12.8    The Fire Service have special appliances dedicated to accident
        and rescue work carrying specialist cutting and rescue
        equipment, including resuscitation apparatus, backed up by
        disciplined personnel, trained in the use of this equipment and
        qualified to administer first aid.

12.9    At an incident such as Hillsborough it is essential that
        effective, on-scene liaison takes place between the Senior
        Officers of all emergency services to that maximum utilisation
        is made of personnel and resources available.

12.10   One qualification we would stress is that Fire Service
        personnel and equipment must not be used for crowd control
        purposes where a civil disturbance has occurred. The Fire
        Service would, of course, respond and deal with fires and
        rescue of casualties trapped in buildings or fires, in debris
        or wreckage under such conditions as deemed necessary.

12.11   It is essential that all the emergency services are aware of
        each others' resources, skills and capabilities, as time is of
        the essence when life is at stake. A sensible option would be
        to hold inter-service exercises at designated sports grounds
        involving staff with a scenario recommended by the Local
        Authority Inspection Team.
                                                        APPENDIX ‘A


                       A C h i e f Officer's Vi ew in 1965

                   Safety 1n Football and Sports Stadia


  Occasion for Disaster

 Cinemas and theatres are already strictly controlled by legislation,
 ana this has been based primarily upon experience gained from
 disasters which have occurred both in this Coun tr y and 1n other
 parts of the world. T here have, of course, been disasters In
 football grounds, but so far there appears little evidence that
 anything has been done to profit from previous disasters by way of
 Improving the safety standards for spectators in football grounds.

 In 1946 at Bolton, 33 people were killed and over 500 Injured when
 thousands of people forced their way into the football ground,
 crushing other spectators against barriers, and when these co ll ao sed
 -ne spectators, including women, were suffocated and tram ple d upon.
 In 1964 over 80 people were Injured 1n somewhat similar
 circumstances at Sunderland Football Ground,

 In Lima, Peru, 300 people were killed and over 1,000 injured w hilst
 trying    to escape
 An/T ii!HAi4A
                     from____
                  RaI.1
                           a football
                                .I
                                      ground where a riot was in *progress
                                                                     3


 And then only recently 34 people were killed and many injured at a
 football match in Turkey,

All the Ingredients for a disaster can stll] be present p art ic u l a r l y
amongst the emotional ly charged, and often tightly packed spectators
on the spion kops of football grounds. Mien large and ground
ca pac it y crowds are at te nding cup ties, and local derbies, one can
often observe access gangways blocked solidly with spectators, who,
o n c e J n s i d e the ground, are usually locked securely 1n until about
15 minutes before the game ends,

Lighting pylons, catering stalls, and fragile stand roofs, all
provide precarious vantage points for the more agile supporters.
Apart from the obvious danger to the supporters themselves they
present a great potential threat to the Innocent spectators slttinq
or standing underneath.

As exciting incidents (wild up near to goal mouths and in.other
parts of the ground, one can see vast numbers of s p e c t a t o r s , p r e s s i n g
forward, and this m ovement wav e runs through the whole crowd until
It    arrested by crush barriers, or by the ultimate co mpression of
the spectators in the lower sections of the terraces Into a
dangerous solid mass of humanity. Alth ou gh It is perhaps di fficult
to imagine the South Am erican or Tur ki sh tvoe riots hannenina
        u,c H „ ie 3m a L ,t o r m s n spectators, i nevertheless b e l i e v e w e
should not be deluded into taking refuge in a complacent atti tud e
that it could not Happen here.

                              . . continued . .
If, as the slyns of the times appear to indicate, that H oo li gan is m
and rowdyism are on the increase, then 1t becomes increasingly
difficult to forecast, Indeed w h o can predict the probable effects
of panic, hooli ga nis m and partisanship upon tightly packed crowds of
spectators. It 1s not difficult to Imagine at cup ties or local
derbies on the ground of one of the lower division clubs receiving a
crowd pull ing team which results 1n a capacity ground, where in such
circumstances the level of facilities and crowd control e xperience
and know how, leave something to be desired. The excitement and
atmosphere Inherent in the rivalry of the game, the partisanship
factions in the crowds, the stlmulous of a few pints of beer before
the game, are a first class prelude to disaster, so that all that is
now required is an element of rough play, coupled with a few
contentious decisions, and the pattern 1s set.

decent Cvcnts
Recent events Have unly emphasised the lack Of elementary safety
precautions 1n football grounds to protect the spectators and
prevent the spread of fire in the stands.

In a Scottish League match between Du nfe r m l i n e Athletic and Cel tic,
one person was killed and 49 people injured. Crash barriers
collapsed and hundreds were sent tu mbling on to the football pitch.

In Coventry, the main stand was severely damaged by fire,
ne ce ss itating Its demolition and reconstruction. The design and
construction of the old stand facilitated the rapid spread of fire.

Two days later the football stadium at Swansea was severely damaged
by fire. Fortunately both stands were empty of spectators when the
fires occurred. The beginning of this year's football season was
marred by the fire which occurred at Nottingham Forest's, Footballs
Stadium. This fire started whilst the match was in progress and the
fire spread so rapidly that 4,000 spectators had to be hurriedly
evacuated. Furthermore, it is reported that the firefighting
operations were hindered by cars parked 1n the vicinity of the
ground. From the preliminary reports it appears that a disaster was
once again just narrowly averted,
H r e Risks

It would probably be true to s ay that the risks w h e r e large crowd
situations are present, fall Into two basic classifications. There
is a life and personal safety risk, with an attendant fire and panic
risk where the older type of combustible type stands and fixtures
are still in use.



                          «• c o n t i n u e d « ,
P robably the principle fire risk fn the average football ground 1s
the traditional cover ed stand, built primarily of timber with the
usual corrugated iron or asbestos roof. Once a f1re secures a hold
1n this type of structure ft, of course, spreads rapidly, and can
destroy the stand often before e ff ective firefighting me asures can
be brought Into effect. Firefighting operations can be c o mpl ic at ed
by the voids and spaces beneath the stands, w he re often, combus ti bl e
rubbish and disused and worn out eq uipment 1s stored, end 1t 1s
therefore, 1n these places where fire can spread undetected,
                                                                      i
Where the spaces under stands are u tilised for offices and dr essing
rooms, etc., these areas are often further sub divided by t i mb er
studded partitions covered by co mbustible hardwood or softboard. In
such structural conditions fire can spread rapidly through this type
of accommodation due to the absence of a measure of fire resisting
compartmentatlon.

Fire Prevention

All spaces     under stands should be cleared of combustible rubbish and
materials,     and a careful Inspection mad e of all floors over voids
for cracks     and holes through w hich cigarette ends and lighted
mat ch es or   smoking materials could fall.

Du ri ng the time spectators are oc cupying stands frequent Inspections
should be made of the voids and a final Inspection made at least
thirt y minutes after the spectators have left the stand.

All electrical equipment and w iring should be examined and t e st ed by
a competent electrical contractor at least once in every three
years . It should be ensured that ade qua te appropriate first aid
firefighting equipment 1s strategically positioned In the stands,
and 1f there 1s any doubt about the a dequacy or effectiveness of the
apparatus the Chief F1re Office r for the area should be requested to
ad vi se on fire defence arrangements.

Spectators* Safety and Comfort on Grounds and Stadia
To ensure reasonable standards of safety for the general public
attending large crowd events, 1t 1s essential that certain reforms
sh ould be carried out and the following are a few suggestions in
this regard:-

a)   Crowds should be effectively compartmented by more crush
     barriers. These crush barriers and retaining walls should be
     constructed to some recognised standard of safety Inspected by
     a qualified b uilding Inspector to ensure that they will
     wi thstand maximum crowd pressures wi th generous safety margin;


                           . . continued . ,
fa)   Providing stewards, (members of supporters Clubs) who after
      suitable training could supervise each compartment to obviate
      over filling and keep access gangways clear of spectators.
      Such an arrangement would be of considerable assistance to the
      club in the provision of effective crowd control efficiency,
      and would help the Police 1n locating and controlling trouble
      makers when a disturbance was 1n the offing. Stewards could
      also be trained 1n the projecting of the family entertainment
      Image, and thereafter would be the social contact and link man
      in each crowd compartment. The stewards could be trained in
      first aid to the injured, crowd control pyschology, and
      elementary fire prevention. In a comparatively short period of
      time, because spectators usually foregather in similar places
      week by week, each compartment would become a social entity,
      common to the personal Identities of the regular supporters,
      their families and associates;
c)    The provision of adequate primary and secondary lighting 1s
      particularly Important during floodlight games;
d)    The provision of special enclosures for children and other
      special sections of the public who cannot participate in the
      usual spectator facilities.
Stadium and Football Ground Design

It would appear there 1s ample scope for some of our schools or
faculties of architecture to carry out a comprehensive research
study into the spectator logistics of football ground and stadium
design to achieve the standards of safety and comfort befitting this
Country's approach to the late sixties and seventies.
Legislation
The legal position regarding football and sports stadia 1s not
clear; 1t would appear that Section 59 of the Public Health Act 1936
applies to the buildings within the curtilage of the football stadia
and, therefore, safe ingress and egress can be secured for
spectators 1n the stands. Where licensed bars or licensed clubs are
provided under the stands, the usual public entertainment safety
standards such as secondary lighting, exit signs, adequate exits,
firefighting equipment, and the flame proofing of furnishing and
decorat Ions,can be insisted upon under the Licensing Act of 1964.
The legal position of the terraced sections, sometimes referred to
as "Splon Kops" and other open air standing spaces, where the
spectators are tightly packed, 1s obscure because these places
cannot be defined as structures. Safety measure 1n these situations
are therefore left to the Individual attitudes or common sense of
football managements, which of course varies according to the
quality of the management, and to other prevailing circumstances
which will Influence the standards, not least of all being the
prosperity and the financial capability of the organisation.
                        .. continued
                                - 5 -




  It will be obvious to anyone who thinks about aspects of safety that
 conditions In many football grounds leave a lot to be desired and
 further legislation 1s clearly needed to regularise the position.
 It would be refreshing to hope that legislation to provide for
 reasonable safety standards for the public in respect of the use of
 open air terracing on sports and football grounds could be secured
 before another disaster occurs, rather than following the usual
 b o U e d 06 1ocl<in9 the legislative door after the horse has already

 Past history has i n d i t e d that roilowlng a disaster, remedial
              !s_,swlftly fol1owed» but the exception to this rule is
 the football industry which appears to be in the realm of the
 untouchable.
The Minister of Sport has adopted the now standard delaying tactic
beloved of all politicians of appointing a Committee, but after
studying constituent membership and its objectives I cannot envisage
a p p r o v e m e n t s for the safety of spectators in the foreseeable

It Is obvious that disasters can be caused by fire,; there is
already ample evidence that football stands can be set on fire yet
there appears to be no recognised fire engineer on the Committee to
advise on fire defence and means of escape aspects, C o l l a p s i a
crush barriers and structural aspects are another well proven cause
or injury, but again there appears no structural safety engineer on
the Committee.                                               a
1 t18!? some difficulty in reconciling a Committee so heavily
weighted by representatives of the sport, objectively considering
safety having regard to consequent financial and organisational
implications.
It Is not a pleasant pastime to be a prophet of doom, but I
reiterate that the points which I made in my article nearly a year
ago have been fully justified by subsequent events. Those who
attend football matches as spectators must face up to the
     k j ^ y that they may in the appropriate circumstances be dicing
with disaster. Far be it for me to pre-judge the work of the
committee but whatever the outcome their efforts will never be
effective without legislative backing. This is a painful but
historical fact.
     h -if oPf!C€R        HEvJlTT.


                                                       %
                                                       %$f'Mf




     ^ i - n u j S t .............

.   ->                       r •*
                                •® '#»:» «

                                             pS3»i|-



                      ia>... , E M
               SHEFFIELD (0 7 4 2 )      7268S4
                                                           .                   fCACpo
ove- v'Wil
&ne Northern I r e ] an.'     - ' •       -   * * ; ^ i t o r Fire Brigade C

               1 '    '*               »-      .•.v.1 expiffence 1ii f i r e and rescue-   '
               ‘ '      - - ' . i M t - j . •’ .* ponsible for a ll operational Fire
                       and attend and take charge of the the lo re serious
sna                      " -yertcy «,                  its ,                             .     .

14                         a ja r tty of disasters have been foretold and In many
                                  unfortunate that a disaster or series of s a il]
                                    been necessary before appropriate le g is la tio n
                        " r /e e u Indeed Appendix ,A’ to th is & ” >•, ' n q i v m
                                        prophetic picture, of a-view a 'Chief Fire
                            ■ potential disasters i t fo o th ill grounds over
                             .          we reproduce i t unedi\en. The views
                               hat one nan formed the basis of the report which
                            > O from Chief F ire Officers to the Mheatlif
                               •-*'nc; the serious accident at Ibrox Ps.r’ " - : . ]
                     ■. ,          That same report was appended to our
                                      is Popplswell fo il owing the tresu, ' -
                                          Hub; we make no apoloaies for including
                                    any of the points I t contains are current and
                                    9 &t Safety at Sports grounds.

1                               n we hive addressed our views and
                             i mainly to the rescue role of the Fire Servlce
                                        sets pertinent to Safety at Sports
           -      ■■   ^ hsve not dwelt on the f i r e related measures with
                              ■ .   ..■i',- associated within our profession,
        rrm      is intentional as our flews m m expressed to the Inquiry
                                        /    which was more relat ■ n to f i r e
                   ■ The exception m make I s a reference \s -          : safety
                     teans of Escape provisions b u ilt Into the Safety
                         ; for Sports Grounds and Stadia coming under the
       Act,

                " Sgorts lift

                                *'      submit \m we regard a Sports G r o u n d -i$»
                iyijitaking any pla,«         i r t or other compttitive •
                iti                    In the open air'and where accommodation
                :                    open with seating or standing facilities has
                             I fa r spectators. A Sports Sttdiuffl f “ *
                i w^ere accommodation for spectators wholly'
                                  rrounds the area used for the aetiv
                  t h ir e ln .
     If   m   s   i %   Ilf 4 3 4




    for the purpose of this document any reference to sports
    ground, sports-stadium, stadia should be considered to be the
    SSHIS     a




     I ^     I    h® Rt Hon lord H a t l e y submitted to the -Secretary
    q* S^ste i or the Home Department and the Secretary- of State for
    Scotland             the report of Ms inquiry into Crowd              Safety V   Spores

    G r o u n d s * A c t ^1975 I ^ v s d !               * *   * * S * fe*   31         '

   Lord Wheatley in his report concentrated on the stadia -of.
   t'QOtba11 and rugby clubs patronised by p aying members o f the
              o         attend in large numbers to watch sporting events,
   under the heading h7he Mature of the Problem", on .p«gts 2 and'
   -5, paragraphs 8 to 11 of the report Lord Wheatley id e n tifie d
   tne p^otjiem area's common to most stadia,

   Po!lowing Lord Wheatley's report arid subsequently that of
           ' ..pt-ieweTI major steps have been taken to improve the

                        and   stadiums,
   };        v’**w that a number of recommendations Incorporated' in
             1 z Sdfety at Sports Grounds revised in 1985' need to
   o« i»rs clearly defined and in some cases- brought within the
   scope of the Act,                        ■    .    '

Dp __
9s. --




  Many people lose* sight of. the fact that Justice Popplewell m s
  not only IoGkfr?§ at the tragic f i r e which engulfud the stand at
            i        C'ty with the loss of 56 liv e s . He was also taking
  into comideration the trouble which occurred on that same
                    May 1985 at Birmingham City Football Club where
  f«          ' 1-   ;ed major damage at the ground which resulted
                     j t a wall k il l i n g one young mm and in juring
  seventeen other people; hence the t i t l e of the inquiry being '
  ‘ Coriiirttte of inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control i t Sport S-


 T h o incident at Birmingham* which--in'itself w a s s u ffic ie n tly '
                        o               warrant in inquiry was t o t a ll y overshadowed by th t
  d i s a s t e r . a t Bradford.

 Justice P o p p U w e l l made a number of specific racomnendations in
 ms repo rt, i t would be interesting to set hov# much notice
        • -         many sports-grounds took with regards to tra in in g
 and profislofi of stewards and the m a n n i n g of e x it gates e t c .,
 may be a matter for your inquiry,

                                    -     contlnued ...
                                                                                                 %



                                                 3 «*




                                           BS sta4'«tor* r e q m rements be made so
                 especially where they are relevant to crowd control and

S.

                 * ! ! ? : „pfeml se! used for sP°f t are called sports stadia or
                  ?n0^     57 u?fu I s 1™?t e r 1 a l* whether the competition is
                 b n !S «            football * crick et, rugby, athletics or even
                 o r n h W Ih ! r h S m T l l      ?n1y Passing In terest; the real
                                                        are how manvr spafifcatnrs art




                 •he Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, revised in i MO ana
                comonly referred to as the 'Green Guide1 Is in our view a m
                document, there are however a number of matters which would
                benefit from strenot.honprf                       M
                      ,                'i s n j um wei t,cih i issues wmcn t o vs
                             in preventing a sim ilar disaster to that of
                n'f i rs&oraugtr from occurring again*
          ».3   I t is not our Intention to restate our views on „ pc^ a
                construction relating to stands, th e ir f i r e safety and
                    jctural in te g r it y , this we have already done at some lengtr
                « ":“f t1c? / ? p^ iewe11, We would h» e v e r put forward views on
                aspects which some may say are outside our ju ris d ic tio n as
                professional f i r s o ffic e rs . We would state that we in the H r
                Brigade have had great experience in dealing with sim ilar
                probiami m many and varied arena's,' a l l relevant to the
                situation before you and would ask that our comments be noted
                seriously.



         S.     Given-a green f i e l d s ite situation , ground design would be
                fa ’ f ly easy to prescribe, unfortunately the majority of sports
     &          ground? already exist and there is l i t t l e i f no chance of
                grounds being t o t a ll y r e b y fit. in our view problems are not
                omy. associated with matters inside-the curtilag e of the ground
                but are also very prevalent externally,


                suburban areas
                streets through * « St i c              f t fo.11ows. t h i t * < * • £ *411
                0# natural! V r#*«trf <*►*»! Hum f a     tjiA+Ur   * 4?         1      _j* '*»
                park! rtf and t       jund being short of
                                        ** 4 «*




              factors are confirmed i f one looks at the s ite plan of
              of ^ s r? o ? 2 rI« S -a n f f nd f ? contributory to large numbers
              Hillsborough                 turnstyle areas ai was witnessed at

  6 * 1 .!    These restrictions mentioned would have the same lim itin g
              effects i f the ground were to be evacuated In an emergency, i t
                 well Know that people having achieved a position of
              persona] safety slow down or stop to observe what Is haopartinq
              around then.       .                                           M

  6 .1 . ■
              III       ! ou1d ?! t0 have adequate numbers of turnstyles to
              permit a steady throughput of fans, the approach to the
              turnstyies M m g in lin e with the turnstyle openings and not at
              oblique angles* The approach to the t u m s t v i s s af. im n <


             part of the ground,
             some experts a, the
             improved to overcome the crowding that occurred, Wt realist
                                     ha.ve, to. be considered separately and
             would recommend that Local Authority Inspection Teams a r t
             instructed to give th is point serious consideration*
 6,1*4        Fiirnstylas should be clearly narked and id e n tifia b le as to
             wrncft part of the ground they give access and on occas
             sp^ctnc tickets heve been issued turnstyles should be
             spec^l ly designated to co-ordinated tickets allowing access
             that section of the ground specified.

6.1 .5       Wfth regard to turnstyles, we agree       chapter 6 paragraph 67
             of the Green Guide but would recommend    '*■ a ll turnstyles are
             made reversible to enable people to I
             time, is would stress the point made      paragraph 67 however
             that reversible turnstyles are not acven         as a
             escape from a ground and should not form
             or emergency e x it system of the ground.
6 . 1. 6     rn would highlight the need to keep routes adjacent to the
             turnstyle and entrances to the ground clear and free of
             obstructions paragraph 58 of the Green Guide covers th is point
             with regards to ’ Exit Routes', we consider the ‘
             as important as routes into the ground are also routes out at
             wne end of the event.

o «1*.#"7f   Chapter 6 paragraph 45 of the Green Guide highlights
             problems of overcrowding and states* “To a ‘ ‘ ' '
             walls, fences and gates should be of               ;i ght i
             strength and hand or foot holds which might         Climb
             should be avoided". Weekly, evidence is

                                                  * *
          prior to many football league games of fans gaining access
          i l l e g a l l y to grounds one wonders i f this recommendation has
          been noted. We would advocate that Local Au t h o r i t y Inspection
          Teams review this aspect iM e d ia te ly ,

§ ,1 ,8   A problem was caused at Hf1Isborough when one such fan caught
          gaining ille g a l access, was evicted through the pass/exit gate
          ts a large number of fans took advantage of the gate being
          opened and forced t h e ir way in adding to the numbers already in
          the West. Stand lower pens,

<5*1,9    Ground management should make more use of closed c ir c u it
          te levisio n both inside and outside grounds,, such a f a c i l i t y ,
          sited out of reach of the hooligan element would enable
          o f f ic ia ls and police to wonttar crowds and th e ir behaviour, As
          stated in the Green Guide chapter 12 paragraph 194 v i » “such an
          in s ta lla tio n would be of sig nificant value in assisting
          emergency evacuation'** especially i f i t covers the,streets and
          approaches to the ground.

6,1*10 Me would recommend that public address systems should be
       extended to enable messages and instructions to be given to
       spectators queuing to gain access to the ground. Such .a
       f a c i l i t y could also be used to pass coded messages to police
       office rs in that area with regards to problems etc, . See also
       6-2.15 Public Address Systems,

6 ,1 4 1 We^are s a tis fie d with paragraph 183 chapter I I of the Green,
^        Gmde referring to 1Access fo r Emergency Vehicles' we would
         however stress th at the need fo r regular liaison between the
         Emergency Services with regards to this and other such matters
         Gomroon to th e ir involvement. See 12.7 Special Risk Plans,

6*1*12 Paragraph 57 chapter 6, covers Signposting, we doubt however i f
       th is recommendation is being adhered to; we would advocate that
       signposting as detailed in th is paragraph is made mandatory to
       form part of the c e r tific a te of the Sports ground,

6.1,13 Without prejudging any aspect of the disaster at Hillsborough,
       we ask that further consideration be given to paragraph 4 6 ,
       chapter 5 of the Green Guide with regards to contingency plans
       fo r situations where available entrances at a ground have
       proved in s u ffic ie n t to stop unduly large crowds from gathering
       outside,

6*1.14 fcfe cannot accede to the option of opening additional entrances
  J    without some form of crowd control and lim ita tio n of numbers to
       the ground in general or any p a rtic u la r pert thereof.


                               ► . continued »,
             He have,tots! sympathy with the predicament of the police in
             such situations, but would rather dtbat* now a taigfbll
       Aj    solution to preventing such a situation arising than accept i t
             as Part      parcel of spectator a c tiv ity * which seems more
             prevalent and problematic to football than any other sport
             attractin g large crowds,

  s *2       l nt e rn a lly - major consideration has already gone into the
             design and construction of stadia. As professional f ir e
             orffcers we have ourselves had input into recommendations and
             requiremsnts In respect of means of escape and f i r e safety in
             pa rticu lar and we are satisfied that the majority of our views
             have been acted upon.

  6.E.1      Perimeter fences - these appear desirable to discourage pitch
             invasions and th e ir use is widespread p a rticu larly at football
             grounds. There does not seem to be a common standard type of
             fence, the design of which varies from club to club.

  i»2„2      I t is against a ll our professional train in g as f i r e officers to
             accept restrictions such as perimeter fencing and wi would ask
jo j         that a better solution be found; we do of course accept the
             plight of the police and club management faced with dealing and
             controlling the unruly element which frequent football matches,

 6,2,..#    We would recommend that where f t is considered essential to
            provide perimeter fencing the fencing has s u ffic ie n t gates
            permit crowd evacuation forward onto the pitch in a
            condition.

 0.2*4      Such gates as provided should fee at least 1,1 metre wide
            have easy access to the playing area once opened.

 6 .2 .5    Control of the gates should be vested with the police or
            suitable stewards under th e ir

 6,2 .5      Perimeter fence gates should be easily openable from t
            outside, i t may be desirable to have a design which
            e le ctro n ica lly controlled with a fa ils a fe device and
            being overridden manually by police or stewards,

 6.2 .7     fetes in perimeter fences should only be opened in case of
             emergency or to. allow police access to f a c i l i t a t e crowd
             control.

6*2,8       The use of perimeter fences in conjunction with timber stands
            is to t a lly undesirable from a f i r e safety point of view,

  ,f,S      Seating -^one of the strongest recommendations we would is
            th is submission is fo r the provision of i l l seater stands.
 ts.2»i0. Whilst accepting this recommendation w ill be unacceptable to
          sports ground management we feel that i t would prevent
         ■overcrowding from occurring I . e . when a ll the seats are fu ll
          the ground is f u l l !

6*2,11 Justice PappleweTT went some way'to addressing this point in.
       his Inquiry, chapter 6 paragraph 6.16 re fe r s , unfortunately it"
       would seem that people never learn and police and ground ’ .
       management are continuously faced with unacceptable situations
       involving crowd behaviour. In our view i t is now time to get
       to grips with what Justice Popp]ewe!1 describes as the
       'idiosyncrasies' of footballs fans by whatever -method dstwed
       necessary.

6, .2 »1£ Spectator Pens - should our views on a ll seatar grounds-fee
#        rejected^we would advocate that grounds are separated into
       . 'pens' with s u ffic ie n t means of escape provision to accomodate
          the numbers in each pen.                                        ■

6,2*13 The^maximum number per pen should be 1,000, at a density
        s t r ic t ly in accordance with that recommended in the Green Guide
        chapter 16. S u fficie n t stewards or police should be available
      —t o monitor and control access to each pen.

6 , 2 J i The number of pens permitted at each football ground should be
          restricted to the amount that can be accomodated behind each
          goal mouth in lin e with the playing area perimeter.

      ' °«W ic Address System - better use should be made of the public
        address system for communicating information to both crowds and
        stewards*

8 * 2 . IS Public address systems should be capable of being used in ■
           separate area's of the ground„ both inside'and out. They
           should be audible and of distin ct c la r ity to overcome the noise
          ■ generated by the crowd.

6,2.17 Crowd 'Reservoir* Area - area’ s to'the rear of the tu rn s ty i m
       should be s u ffic ie n tly large to accommodate the numbers being
       admitted to that specific area» with s u ffic ie n t pass door
       f a c i l i t i e s available to permit e x it from the ground in an
       emergency. Cognizance should be given to the fact that
       spectators tend to congregate in area's d ire c tly behind
       turnstyles waiting fo r friends to gain admission.

6Y2V18 These area's should be s t r ic t ly controlled by stewards or
       police to ensure free flow in either direction should the need
       arise. Paragraph §&, chapter 6 of the Green Guide relating to
       «x1t gates must be adhered to ,         ' '    ■       '       . .

6,2*1? Ideally turnst y l e s should only permit access to s p e c i f i c area's
       of the ground and numbers enter i n g the area should be m o n i t o r e d
       by the sports ground management. ■
7



     7.1   As Lord Wheat1ey recognised i t Is important to
           f l e x i b i l i t y in any system of control so as to take account
           the d iffe rin g circumstances at individual grounds* factors
                 agir s iz e and node of construction d i f f e r wid<
           to ground. .                   1 —--------- — --------------------

           Under normal circumstances raost spectator sports attracting a"
           regular attendance do not suffer problems caused by ground*
           overcrowding. I t may be that a proportion wish to view from
           om particular part of the ground, with regards to football
           this is usually behind the goal mouths* in general th is does
           not affect the overall capacity of the ground.

           I t is worth considering lim itin g the permitted numbers o art
           aggregate of the actual level of attendance, say over
           1988/59 season, . f o r special events i . e . a 1
           two ttains, special licence provisions should be
           agreed with the Local Authority Inspection Team prio r to
           event taking place,                                      •

           All of the above would be easily re c tifie d i f our
           recommendation for a ll seatsr stands was accepted and
           calculated In accordance with the Green Guide.

           We aiust not lose sight o f the special nature of the event
           taking place at Hillsborough and we would recommend that those
           sports grounds designated as being suitable to accoronrodaie such
           events are limited in number and geographically sited to su it
           a ll needs* The control of these stadia.fo r such events to be
           of l vsry high level and under the ju ris d ic tio n cr
           Constable whose force area the ground Is located.

8,

     8,1   In conjunction with 6.E.9 of this submission regarding i l l
           seater stands we would recommend that fo r sports grounds
           attracting regular spectators or numbers in excess of say
           10,000 the entry to the ground should be by tic k e t only.

           We would also support, a             ship sdhattft-whi eh i ntl udes a
           tamper proof 1defit i t y ^ a r   es previously advocated by numerous
           bodies to past Inquiries-,

     3v3   We consider' that there is benefit in encouraging a ll


           hopefully preclude the trend for grow
           turostyles at the l i s t minute with, a                   ig the
           to open gates because of the surge. I t mig               ;hat entry
           fees could be marqij
           i fs e r ta s fT~ ~ ^ l
Justice Popplewel1 was quite specific in his views on the
train in g , use and provision of stewards at sports Grounds* We
consider that his views, plus the recommendations contained in
th$ Sreen Suida at Annex 8* stewardsng and also chapter 2,
Management Responsibility pertinent to stewards are not hi
properly carried out.

We strongly recommend that a mandatory provision be made to the
Act with regards to the responsibilities of sports grounds
management to provide and tra in etc. suitable numbers of
stewards to be responsible fo r a ll aspects of' the ground w hilst
spectators are in attendance*

The number of stewards required at a sports ground to be
determined by the Chief Constable and the Local Authorities
Inspection Team.

Stewards are often only employed on a casual basis. At t i l t s
they may not even turn up, 'A responsibility should be placed
on the management of the sports ground to ensure the pre
determined number required are on duty. Failure to provide
su ffic ien t stewards should be reflected in a reduced number of
people being allowed in and a substantial fine being levied
against the sports ground management.

Even with the recoirimendations previously made In the Green
Suide i t is known that stewards are often i l l trained in the
nature of the responsibilities that go with the job. I t is
essential that they are fu lly conversant with a ll emergency
procedures and possess I special knowledge of ths area they are
responsible fo r.

A way to Improve the standard of stewards would be for sports
ground management to provide a l i s t of points that stewards
must know and do (as per Annex R Green Guide) and then for then
to be tested to ensure they are competent* preferably by the
p o lic e * Ths management of the sports ground Mould then issue a
c e r t i f i c a t e o f competence which'should be renewed annually.
This is an area where F ire Brigades could'make a positive
contribution In respect of training in f i r e safety provisions.

A specified nuraber of stewards should be under the control of
chief stewards. Chief stewards should be sim ila rly tested but.
to a higher standard to re fle c t t h e ir greater level of
responsibility and th e ir co-ordinating role.

All stewards should come under the ju ris d ic tio n and -control of
10. Evacuation Control

      Li    Mt are not sa tisfied that su ffic ien t manpower is available by
            way of^police or current levels of stewards to quickly evacuate
            a section o f, or a ll the sports ground,. This Is a matter which
            must be addressed and praftrably by our colleagues in the
            Association of Chief Police Officers (ACP0) who have great
            expert ence In this f ie ld ,

   10*2     Froffi our own experience in evacuation fo r f i r e purposes* which
            is not greatly d iffe re n t from general evacuation, we would
            suggest that the starting paint is to decide on the evacuation
            procedure to be deployed and the part ground, s t a f f , principally
            stewards, have to play, The Ideal situation would be to make
            use of the public address system to relay a coded mess
            w ill a le r t stewards and other s t a f f to the nature and
            of the problem,

   10,3     Exit gates should be easily opened from inside and stewards
            should take up pre determined positions to assist in
            evacuation; the emphasis must be on control and avoidance of
            panic.

   10,4     No alarm system should be provided that gives an audible alarm
            in public area's. As with' other area‘$ .o f public
            entertainment p u b lic area’ s situated below a stand should be
            provided with buz2ers and lights to give s t a ff art indication of
            a problem.
   10.5     Telephones should ba provided adjacent to stewards positions so
            they can ring the control rooms on a dedicated number to pass
            on information or raise the alarm in the event of an emergency.
   10. i    Once i t is determined that there is a situation which warrants
            either a p a rtia l or to tal evacuation and stewards are in
            position an announcement should be made on the public address
            system asking spectators to leave in an orderly fashion as
            directed by the stewards.

   I S .7   Any decision to evacuate large numbers of spectators should be
            relayed to a ll emergency service control rooms fo r information
            purposes.

            Should any assistance be required as much information relating
            to the. occurrence must be passed to ensure the. correct
            resources and assistance are mobilised* th is is of course a '
            matter fo r local liaison but needs to be stressed.



   114      A major concern must be th at of ensuring th at high standards of
            safety are maintained once — - J «J - - - 1-- —L—     ■■4— -* **■-
            Local Authority Inspection Team, T            dn§ points/ should'
                        objective. •'                .
              W !   726894
                     '
                                         SOUTH YQ&K5’FIRE                  '
                                          sfe“   .£» »f#?W £   W    nbp
                                                               firWy*     prue a spc-




1 1 .E   fey c e r tific a te or recommendation should explain fu lly a ll the
         measures which should be in force and why,

11.3     ‘During Performance1 Inspections in the farm of spot checks
         should be made to monitor safety standards and the aspects
         conditional to the c e r tific a te by designated members of the
         Local Authority Inspection Tiara or Officers acting on t h e i r
         behalf,

11.4     Regular liaison and discussion should take place between the
         management of sports grounds and representatives of the local
         Authority Inspection leans,

11.5      Instruction and training must be given on a regular basis to
         a ll employees both f u ll and part-tim e, ThiVmust be a
 jh,     management responsibility which should be reinforced as
          necessary by the professional assistance of the. police, f i r e
          officers 2 nd f i r s t aid Instructors*

11.6     The a ttitu d e of clubs and management has on occasion been
          c a v ille r and unhelpful. We would suggest that t h t M s an
          appropriate time to Introduce tougher penalties against
          management who f a i l to discharge th e ir duties in ensuring
          standards of public safety and who do not conform to the
          reconwsndations givan to them by o f f ic i a l bodies 1*e. police or
          f i r e service, or disregard the conditions l a i d down in th e ir
          c e r tific a te or to guidance given in the Green Guide. This
          principle of tougher measures should also apply to the
          directors and senior management of clubs and sports grounds.

 11.7    in addition to the conditions imposed i t would be advantageous
          to issue management of sports grounds with a l i s t of ‘ rules of
          management1 which e x p lic itly details th e ir resp onsibilities
          with regards to public safety,

 11.8    Provision should be made fo r authorised o ffice rs of the Local
         Authority to have power to issue a prohibition notice under the
         Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and where necessary revokt
         the c e r tific a te in force»

 • jjre^ Sc/d e e Resources

 12.1    As indicated at the beginning of this submission our
          responsibility with regards to the Safety at Sports Grounds Act
          revolves p rin cip a lly around the Firs Safety arid Means of Escape
          provisions. The f i r e Service does form part of the local
          Authority Inspection Team and take th e ir duties in this w
          very seriously.

 11*2     As t h i s inquiry is looking s p e c ific a lly a t the di sa ster'which


                 on the rescue
                                    - 12 -




12, 3    Many Fire Brigades have now adopted the t i t l e 'F ire m
         Service1 and fo r good reason, as a large proportion of
         Incidents a t t e n d e d by Brigades a rt non.fire situations
         involving danger to l i f e requiring a rescut capability,

12,4     The Fire Service is the only emergency service which Has the
         personnel4 resources, training and capability to deal with most
         rescue situations* The Fire Service is also immediately
         available and can have large numbers of personnel and resources
         on scene at an Incident in a very short space of tluta.

12.S     The practical involvement of the Ft re Service at incidents, lik e
         Hillsborough is lim ited and mainly revolves around physically
         removing casualties from a dangerous environment, making the
         scerre^safe, carrying out resuscitation and f i r s t aid un til the
         casualties can be handed over to the ambulance service who hive
         a far greater problem when called upon to handle large numbers
         of casualties due to limited resource and personnel
         a v a ila b ilit y .

12.6     At incidents lik e Hillsborough the police have th e ir work cut
         oat maintaining law and order, organising crowd control and
         dealing with the situation in hand and are generally grateful
         fo r any professional assistance afforded to them.
1 2 ,?   Special Risk Plans - there is a need for the emergency services
         to lia is e together with the management of the sports, ground to
         formulate /Special Risk Plans' which should take account of ■
         every conceivable type of incident that could occur* and
         resources which would be required to deal with i t *

12.8     The f i r e Service have special appliances dedicated to .
         and rescue work carrying specialist cutting and rescue
         equipment, including resuscitation apparatus, backed up by
         disciplined personnel, trained in the use of th is equipment and
         qu alified to administer f i r s t aid.

12.9     At an incident such as Hillsborough i t is essential that
         e ffe c tiv e on scene liaison takes place between the Senior
   *
         Officers of the emergency services so that maximum u t ilis a tio n
         is made of personnel and resources available,

11.10    One q u a lific a tio n we would stress is that F ire Service
         personnel and equipment Bust not be used fo r crowd control
         purposes where a c iv il disturbance has occurred, The f ir e .
         Service would, of course* respond and deal with fire s and
         rescue of casualties trapped in buildings or fir e s * in debris
         or wreckage.under such conditions as deemed necessary,

12*11    I t is essential that a ll the emergency services are aware of
         each others resources, s k ills and eapah’ ’ -.f** -. as tim e.is of
         the essence when l i f e is at stake* A sens’ h        >, tjon wu"*l be
         to hold in ter service exercises at designated sports grounds •
         involving s t a ff with a scenario reeoimmnded by the local
         Authorities Inspection Team.             .      '    ■ '
    I*-. 12    Me. in senior positions in the Fire Service have no desire to
               take on the role or responsibility of either the police or
               ambulance service but our usefulness at Incidents involving
               larg® numbers of casualties should not be overlooked or under
               estimated,                       .     ■     •

3.3. Concluding Statement

    13.1       fcfe recognise th at many of the recommendations and suggestions
              m have wade in this submission have a cost Implication
               especially fo r the management of sports grounds, Me feel
               strongly that financial considerations are secondary to
               spectator safety and safety improvements must not be
              .disregarded on the grounds of cost or p r o f it a b ilit y where the
               sports ground is a business enterprise,

    13.2      Certain elements in society never seem to learn, even a f te r the
              h o r r ific events at H i l Isborough* whilst the tragedy was s t i l l
              front page .news and fresh in everyones minds, supposed football
              fans ran r io t at the game between Birmingham City and Crystal
              Palace on the 13th May IM S .

    13.3      fe know we can le g is la te for provisions to make buildings and
              stadia safe, unfortunately i t would seem to be those who
              frequent them who put themselves and others at risk*

    13.4      Wore control oust be exercised over people attending sports
              Sounds and the police given increased statutory powers to
              overcome these factions who are ruining the ethos of sport.




n EASTWOOD
Assistant Secretary
Chief I Assistant Chief F irs O fficers' Association
14.6.89



     Vi
                    A.Chief O fficer's __„—
                                        View in . „1965
                                                    „ „
                                                           ^

                 Safety in Football and Sports Stadia



     ist on

 Cinemas and theatres are a!ready s t r ic t ly controlled by le g is la tio n ,
 and this has been based primarily upon experience gained from
 ; i S I t * 7 * r h1ch f ! ve ° ccurred bott in this Country and 1n other '
 parts of the world* Thsre have, of course, been disasters 1ft
 football grounds, but so fa r there appears l i t t l e evidence that
 anything has been done to p r o fit from previous disasters by way- of-
 ^proving the safety standards for spectators in football grounds.

In 1346 at Bolton, 33 people were k ille d and over 500 injured when
thousands of people forced th e ir way Into the football ground,
crushing other spectators against b arriers, and when these collapsed
the spectators* including women, were suffocated and trampled upon.

In 1964 over 80 people were Injured in somewhat sim ilar
circumstanees 3t Sunderland Football Ground.

In L ira, Peru, 300 people were k ille d and over 1,000 injured whilst
trying to escape from a football ground where a Plot was in progress
and where the Police were using tear gas,

And then only recently 34 people were k ille d and many injured at a
football m a t c h In Turkey,

All the ingredients for a disaster can s t i l l be present p a rtic u la rly
amongst the emotionally charged,, and often tig h tly packed spectators
on the spion kops of football grounds, When large and ground
capacity crowds are attending cup t ie s , and local derbfes, one
often observe access gangways blocked solidly with spectators,
once inside the ground, are usually locked securely in u n til a
15 minutes before the game ends,

lig h tin g pylons, catering s t a lls , and fr a g ile stand roofs* a ll
provide precarious vantage points fo r the mors agile supporters.
Apart from the obvious danger to the supporters themselves they
present a great potential threat to the innocent spectators s ittin g
or standing underneath.

As exciting incidents build up near to goal mouths and in other
parts of the ground, one cart see vast numbers of spectators .pressing
forward* and th is movement nave runs through the whole crowd until
 i t is arrested by crush barriers* or by the ultimate compression of
the spectators in the lower sections of the terraces into a
dangerous solid mass of humanity. Although i t is perhaps d i f f i c u l t
t o imagine the South American or Turkish type riots happening
amongst the phlegmatic B ritis h spectators, I nevertheless believe we
should not be deluded into taking refuge in a complacent a ttitu d e
t h a t i t could not happen here.

                            .* cont i nued . .
I f , as the signs of the tiroes appear to indicate, that hooliganism
and rowdyisen are on the increase, then i t becomes increasingly
d i f f i c u l t to forecast, indeed who can predict the probable effects
of panic* hooligan!so and partisanship upon tig h tly packed crowds of
spectators. I t Is not d i f f i c u l t to imagine at cup tie s or lo ci!
derbies on the ground of one of the lower division clubs receiving a
crowd pulling team which results in a capacity ground, where In such
circumstances the level of f a c i l i t i e s and crowd control experience
and know how* leave something to be desired. The excitement and
atmosphere inherent in the r iv a lr y .o f the game, the partisanship
fic tio n s in the crowds, the stimulous of a few pints of beer before
the game, are a f i r s t class prelude to disaster, so that a ll that Is
new required is an element of rough play* coupled with a few
contentious decisions, and the pattern is set.

Recent Events

Recent events have only emphasised the lack of e l e m e n t a r y safety
precautions In football grounds to protect the spectators and
prevent the spread of f i r e in the stands.

In a Scottish league natch between Dunfermline A th letic and C e ltic ,
one person was k ille d and 49 people injured. Crash barriers
collapsed and hundreds were sent tumbling on to the football pitch.

In Coventry* the main stand was severely damaged by f i r e ,
necessitating it s demolition and reconstruction. The design and .
construction of the old stand fa c ilit a te d the rapid spread of f ir ® .

Two days la t e r the football stadium at Swansea was severely damaged
by f i r e * Fortunately both stands were empty of spectators when the
fir e s occurred* The beginning of this year's football season was
marred by the f i r e which occurred at Nottingham Forest's, Footballs
Stadium. This f i r e started whilst the match was in progress and the
f i r e spread so rapidly that 4,000 spectators had to be hurriedly
evacuated. Furthermore, i t is reported that the fir e fig h tin g
operations were hindered by cars parked in the v ic in ity of the
ground. From the preliminary reports i t appears that a disaster was
once again just narrowly averted.

F ire Risks

I t would probably be tru e to say that the risks where large crowd
situations are present, f i l l into two basic c la s s ific a tio n s . There
is a l i f e and personal safety ris k , with an attendant f i r e and panic
risk where the older type of combustible type stands and fixtures
are s t i l l in use*



                               continued . .
.Preiatalj tftt principle f i r e risk in the average footbdt f .ground Is
 the t r a d it io n a l covered stand, b u ilt prim arily           - hold
 usual corrugated iron or asbestos roof. Once a f i r e secures a noIQ
 in this type of structure it» of course, .spreads ra p id ly , tftd. e t i t . /
 destroy the stand often before e ffective fir e fig h tin g measures can
 be brought Into e f fe c t . ' Firefigh tin g operations can be compliatetf
 by the voids and spaces beneath the stands, where often, combustibiK
 rybbish and disused and worn out equipment is stored, and i t 1s
 therefore* in these places where f i r e can spread undetectfd,

 Where the spaces under stands are u tilis e d fa r offices and 4.re$si«S\
 rooms','ate.,, these areas are often further sub divided by timber .
 studded partitions covered by combustible hardwood or softboard* if.
 such.structu *al conditions f i r e can spread rapidly through .this type ■
 of. accommodation due to the absence of a measure of f i r e res l i t 1113
 cotnpartmentat i on.               ■           .       '■   '

       Prevention

  All spaces    under stands should be cleared of combustible rubbish and
  m aterials,   and a careful inspection made of a ll floors over voids
  fo r cracks   and holes through which cigarette ends and ]iglued
 .matches .of   smoking materials could f a l l ,

 During the time spectators are occupying stands frequent Inspections
 should be made of the voids and a fin a l inspection made at least
 t h ir t y minutes a fte r the spectators Have l e f t the stand,

 M l e le c tric a l equipment and wiring should be examined and tested by
 t competent e le c tric a l contractor at least once i n _every three^
 years, I t should be insured that adequate appropriate f i r s t aid
 fir e fig h tin g equipment is s tra te g ic a lly positioned in the stands*
 and i f there is any doubt about the adequacy or effectiveness of the
 apparatus the Chief Fire O fficer for the area should be requested to
 advise on f i r e defence arrangements,

 Spectators1 Safety and Comfort on Grounds and Stadia            .
 To ensure reasonable standards of safety for the general public
 attending large crowd events* i t is .essential that certain reforms
 should be carried out and the following are a few suggestions in .
 th is regard

 a)    Crowds should be e ffe c tiv e ly compartmented by more crush
       b a rrie rs . These crush barriers and retaining w a lls should be
       constructed to some recognised standard of safety inspected by
       a qualified b u ild in g inspector to ensure th a t they w ill
       withstand maximum crowd pressures with generous safety margin I


                               * continued *»
      :              -728894 -     '   '
                                           S 02*2 22125?   SLC


*

                                            4   -




    b)      Providing stewards, (members of Supporters Clubs) who a fte r
            suitable train ing could supervise each compartment to obviate
            over f i l l i n g and keep access gangways clear of spectators.
            Such an arrangement would be of considerable assistance to th # ■
            club In the provision of effective crowd control efficie n c y,
            and would help the Police in locating and controlling trouble
            makers when a disturbance was in the e ffin g . Stewards could
            2 iso be trtfn e d In the projecting of the family entertainment
            image, and th ereafter would be the social contact and lin k man
            in each crowd compartment. The stewards could be trained In
            F irs t aid to the injured, crowd contra! pyschology, and
           • elementary f i r e prevention* In a comparatively short ptriod of
            time* because spectators usually foregather in siw tlar places
            week by week, each compartment would become a social en tity*
            common to the personal id e n titie s of the regular supporters,
            th e ir fam ilies and associates;

    c)     The provision o f adequate primary and secondary lig h t i n g is
           p a r t i c u l a r ly important during f l o o d l i g h t games;

    tit)   The p ro v isio n of special enclosures f o r c h ild re n and other
           special sections o f the p u b lic who cannot p a r tic ip a t e in the
           usual spectator f a c i l i t i e s .

    Stadium and

    I t would appear there is a mple scope for some of our schools or
    fa tu it ie s of architecture to carry out a c o m p r e h e n s i v e research
    study into the spectator logistics of football ground and Stadium
    design to achieve the standards of safety and comfort b e fittin g 1-1
    Country's approach to the la te sixties and seventies*



    The legal position regarding football and sports stadia is not
    clear; i t would appear that Section 59 of the Public Health Act 1136
    applies to the buildings within the cu rtilags of the football stadia
    and, therefore* safe Ingress and egress can be secured for
    spectators in the stands, Where licensed bars or licensed clubs are
    provided under the stands» the usual public entertainment safety
    standards such as secondary lig h tin g , e x it signs, adequate e x its ,
    fir e fig h tin g equipment, and the flam© proofing of ^furnishing and
    ■decorations,can be insisted upon under the Licensing Act of 1954,

    The legal position of the te r r a c e d sections, sometimes referred to
    as "Spion lops" and other open a ir standing spaces* where the
    spectators are tig h tly packed, is obscure because these pi acts
    cannot be defined as structures, Safety measure in these situations
    are t h t r v p r e left to the individual attitudes or common sense of
    football managements, which of course varies according to the
    Quality of the management,, and to other prevailing cittumsttnces
    which w ill Influence the standards* not least of a ll being
    prosperity and th t financial capability of the organisation,
_   #




         it; m ii be obvious to anyone who thinks about aspects of safety that
         conditions in many football grounds leave a lo t to be desired and
         fiiftiis f Jegislation is clearly needed to regularise the position*
         i t would be re fre s h in g to hope th a t le g is la tio n to provide for
         reasonable safety standards for the public In respect of the use of
         open a i r terracing on sports and football grounds could be secured
         before another disaster occurs, rather than f o il owing the usual
         practice of locking the le g is la tiv e door a f te r the ho^se has already
         boited*

        Past history has indicated that following s disaster, remedial
                   on has sw iftly followed, but the exception to this rule is
        t o t rootbal. Industry w h i c h appears to be in the realm of the
        untouchable*

             ' ' !:*tar of sport has adopted the now standard delaying ta c tic
        beloved of a ll^ p o litic ia n s of appointing a Committee, bit* a ?ier
        ftudyijV: onstituent membership and Its objectives I cannot envisage
                   vemants for the safety of spectators in the foreseeable
        future.

        I t is obvious that disasters can be caused by f i r e , ; there is
        r.'^ady ampin evidence that football stands can be sst on f i r e yet
        there appears to be no recognised f i r e engineer on the Co®       t to
        advise on f i r e defence and means of escape aspects, Collapsing
        crusrig a r n e r s and structural aspects are another well proven causa
        of in ju ry, but again there appears no structural safety engineer on
        the torsfiittee.

        I have some d i f f i c u l t y in reconciling a Committee so heavily '
        weighted by representatives of the sport, objectively considering
        safety having regard to consequent financial and organisational
        implications.

        I t J s not a pleasant pastime to be a prophet of doom, but 1
        re ite ra te that the points which I made in my a r t ic le nearly a year
        ago have been fu lly ju s t if ie d by subsequent events. Those who"
        attend_football matches as spectators lu st fact up to the
        p      ,       i^ et they may in the appropriate circumstances be dicing
        with disaster. Far be i t for me to pre-judge the work of the
        CoHiiittee but whatever the outcome th e ir e ffo rts w ill never be
        effective without le g is la tiv e backing, This is a painful but
        Historical fa c t.
       HEW/JMT                                                     27.7.89
                         Chief Fire Officer                            201


Herr Witte,
Der Oberstadtdirektor,
Fur Brand-und Zivilschutz,
Stadt Bochum,
5-7 Frieda-Schanz Strasse,
4630 Bochum 1,
West Germany.


Dear

HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD, INCIDENT - 15TH APRIL, 1989

Thank you for your letter dated 10th May, 1989.

Having had the letter translated into English I have awaited an opportunity to
provide a suitable and helpful response.

The television pictures did portray horrific scenes of the disaster in which
so many died and many more were injured. A major inquiry has been held and an
interim report is awaited.

On the day in question the County Fire Service responded to a call for
assistance by sending six pumping appliances and two emergency tenders.  On
his arrival the Officer-in-Charge requested an additional four pumping
appliances. With the Control Unit and senior officers this provided sixty-
three Fire Service personnel to assist in first aid and resuscitation work,
together with the movement of injured casualties to a collection point for
ambulances and fatal casualties to a temporary morgue in the stadium.

Prior to the event the County Fire Service had participated in a Working Party
which applied guidance on safety at sports stadia to the Hillsborough Stadium.
I enclose a copy of this document for your information but, regrettably, it is
in English. It must be said that the guidance available did seem to provide a
reasonable safety standard if it could be applied in its totality to existing
stadiums. Regrettably this standard cannot always be achieved.

This disaster has caused many organisations to review their opinion of this
guidance in order to determine if improvements are necessary to prevent a
repetition of the event. On one thing we are all agreed - it must never be
allowed to happen again.



                                                  Cont'd
I also enclose for your information, again only in English I'm afraid, copies
of the following:-

  (i) A brief report on the incident dealing with the actions    of   the   County
      Fire Service.

 (ii) The submission of the Queen's Counsel to the South Yorkshire County Fire
      Service to the Hillsborough Inquiry after the hearing of evidence.

(iii) The final observations of the Counsel to the Inquiry after      hearing   all
      submissions.

 (iv) My   written   submission   to the Inquiry with recommendations for
      improvement of safety standards. This did not form part of the evidence
      taken by the Inquiry with regard to the activities of      the   CountyFire
      Service at the incident or the participation of Officers   in    the Safety
      Working Party.

From specific     points made in your letter I must inform you that pre-planning
did enable fire    appliances to respond reasonably quickly to the stadium in
most    cases,    although heavy traffic travelling on the roads to and from
Sheffield did      provide some difficulties but the Police minimised this
considerably.

When you have been able to study the papers I shall be pleased to enter into
further correspondence with you on this subject, but if there are many points
of interest which you may wish to question a visit to Sheffield might possibly
provide a better opportunity to obtain the necessary answers.

The result of the Inquiry will be issued at least in two parts - the interim
report to enable grounds to be modified where it is considered essential
before the next football season commences, and the final report which is
likely to recommend changes to legislation and the guidance document.

May I assure you that no member of the County Fire Service was either killed
or injured at the incident. Regrettably, a Fireman from another Brigade who
was attending as a spectator was killed and relatives of others were injured.

The disaster has resulted in greater friendship and comradeship between the
Brigades of Merseyside (Liverpool) and South Yorkshire (Sheffield) and this
has considerably assisted the problems of trauma that occurred immediately
after the incident.

If I can be of further assistance please do not hesitate to contact me.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely,




Chief Fire Officer.
City of Sheffield           M e tro p o lita n District



                                      Chief Executive                               Publicity Department
                                      Ian L. Podmore                                Chief Publicity Officer
                                                                                    Shirley Lanstone, BA
                                                                                    Town Hall,
                                                                                    Sheffield S1 2HH
                                                                                    Telephone (07 4 2 ) 7 3 4 7 9 3   Telex 5 4 2 4 3


Your reference                          Our reference                               Date


                                                                                                                 6 June 1989


                                                                                        ■ft ill!
                M r __________
                South Yorkshire County Fire Service
                Wellington Street
                Sheffield                                                                      At & i
                                                                                           0            ^

                                                                                           &            4


                Dear




                Hillsborough Disaster




                Please find enclosed a transiation of.your letter from
                Bochum as requested.




                Y n m rig




                 Appeal Co-Ordinator.




T o co n tact                                             direct, please te le p h o n e
                                                                                                                                   R4461
                                                                                                                                                    3
 Stadt Bochum • Postfach 1 0 2 2 6 9 / 1 0 2 2 7 0 • 4 6 3 0 Bochum 1
                                                                             Der Oberstadtdirektor
     South Yorkshire
     County Fire Service                                                     Amt

     Wellington Street                                                        fur Brand- und Zivilschutz
     Sheffield                                                               Verwaltungsgeb&ude                                            Zimmer

     z. Hd. Herrn Chief Fire                                                  Frieda-Schanz-Str. 5 - 7
     Officer H. E. Wright                                                    Auskunft erteilt                              ‘3F Ourchwahl

                                                                              Herr Witte                                   (0234)sat 54-3615
     England
L
    Ihr Zeichen/lhr Schreiben vom                                       Mein Zeichen   (Bei Antwort bitte angeben)   Tag

                                                                        37                                            10.05.1989


     Liebe Freunde und Feuerwehrkollegen in Sheffield,

     mit groBer Erschutterung haben wir von der schrecklichen Kata-
     strophe im FuBballstadion von Sheffield Kenntnis genommen. Ein
     Ungliick dieses AusmaBes kann man sich nur schwer vorstellen
     und die grauenhaften Fernsehbilder vermittelten einen Eindruck
     des Leides und der Schmerzen der Betroffenen.

     Uns bewegt natiirlich auch                              der -Gedanke, daB Feuerwehrleute oder
     deren Angehorige verletzt                               oder gar getatet worden sind. Wir sind
     in Gedanken bei Ihnen und                               tragen mit an der schweren Biirde, die
     diese Katastrophe fiir die                              Stadt Sheffield bedeutet.

     Da auch hier ein ahnliches Ereignis nicht unmoglich erscheint,
     wurden die Stadien sofort einer genauen Kontrolle unterzogen.
     Wir werden auch Eettungsiibungen durchfiihren, denn ein Hauptpro-
     blem diirfte wohl sein, erst einmal mit Einsatzkraften und Geraten
     an den Ort des Geschehens heranzukommen. Bei groBen Veranstaltun-
     gen sind die StraBen im Umkreis der Stadien hoffnungslos blockiert.
     Wenn dann noch eine Panik ausbricht, haben die Rettungskrafte kaum
     Chancen ausreichend schnell Hilfe zu leisten.

     Sehr geehrter Kollege H. E. Wright, fur den Fall, daB es bereits
     einen Bericht iiber die Rettungsaktionen in Ihrem Stadion gibt,_
     mochte ich Sie bitten, mir diesen zuganglich zu machen. Vielleicht
     konnen durch Ihre Erkenntnisse Ungliicke ahnlichen AusmaBes in an-
     deren Stadien verhindert werden.

     Ich griiBe Sie und die Kollegen der Feuerwehr Sheffield recht herz-
     lich
                                                                    P.S.            Herzlichen Dank fur das uber-
     Ihr                                                                            sandte Video iiber den letzten
                                                                                    Besuch hier in Bochum. Alle Er-
                                                                                    eignisse wurden ausfiihrlich und
     Giintfer Witte                                                                 sehr gut aufgenommen.

    TELETEX 234 332 Stadt BO            Konten der Stadtkasse:                                                Postgirokonto
    TELEFAX 6 2 1 -3 6 4 3              Sparkasse Bochum 1 3 0 0 6 64 (BLZ 4 3 0 5 0 0 01)                    Dortmund 196 37-461
                                        und alle Banken in Bochum                                             (BLZ 4 4 0 1 0 0 46)
                                                                              ..                                                                          -—      * .....
                                                                                               .

                                                                                               T0      C if - t        o f-                          f* >«S<0>
                                                                                                        m-(.                'P
                                                                                                                            p u n i e r

                                                                                                        P t ’g t i c r v
                      -tO ■;.'!•id tecnn icai f r ^ ' s m o r s and tnt&fpro-rors


                          cooperative           im
                        ye Fodti
               Sit) tOV
          0742 661101!
            002 670h0i                                                                         ».0(U                       j -

        TEHTiOM:              iKlfgjOOClf^                                                     SHtrET 1 OF

    Htfr-fc.Rlt'--.           h.£or&€                                           C6*jp<z>t*£*JC€:                  P & o rt            B e c sw ff                            H/im

                                          -.hQ.OOO: s i              f t fg    ^OOMOO      0 ‘=h 0 w . f r «          8*              S, is if1«siS|*,.*ta .;:• i ts i#. I


                         c m - Of B0CK0M
                         Oo-st f a d 1022691102200                                       463 0 B o c h u m        1                        Chief            Escecqtive

                         S o u Lo           f v .r k t h : < i c>j
                         County               Fire*         Service?                                                                      O f f i c e for
                         Wei      i   i   fi g t on     $   i reel                                                                        Civil Protection
                         f n s O h lelci                                                                                                   S -7 F r i e d a S c h a n i
                         0tr
                         Oa   u       Ofttstt          fire          Officer                                                              Mr       Witte
                         Mr 0 £ WeighI                                                                                                    Tel;           234- 543015
                         v^ i                      i                               My    R e f ; 30                Bat©:          I0.5.1S89

                                  »       Ftzwidz            And        firs       Service         Coii.eagyg?              in    S h e f fO *» i d ,

                          •       **■*        -*ifh         graat             shock     that   we      learnt          of
                         i>5i 1o * O f e f f i e i c i f o o t b a l l s t a d i u m .         I t is s l i f f i c u U tc    ftsagiii©                                              a
                         O s i i i * * * " flr t h # s © p r o p o r t i o n s - a n d t h e a/wOOi I. t
                         - o . ‘--v6 y * d ATI .1t u p r - e s s x o i i o f the? s u f f e r i n g a n d p a i n o f t h o s e
                         uO f o -;h. od .

                         the          t h o u g h t , &lf             tcurse,                  -Iki#    i if &     SiSfv i C 1
                                                                                                                             *"           4
                         3                                                                          I l e d sh     s o t r o u b 1 -ssi us ,
                         tnoughts are w i t h you and we share                                               in    your heavy burd
                         Oii:» c a ; j . 3 i r o p ! i e s i g n i f i e s f o r

                        f-rn■;<=> a             Scania;'              occurrence           does       no t     se e m       lapossifcis h»r<?                                ■.■.-■■■,>
                         i ‘-w o.aiiia. iri'eirt? M a w e d l a t e l y                                                     a    ■■
                        * > i i u i « aO. s.r, h» ca,r r y s n g o « t 1
                        pr;.-.D i»!S 'vtnj } ci jncieed bes g e t t i n g
                                  a - 1 w i t h O p e r a t i o n a l perserin*? 1 arid e q u i p m e n t ,
                                  i-^vrhaug the s t a d i a & r @ h o p e l e s s l y b l o c k e d w i t h                                                                 events,
                         :-            <: t hori Oret iks o u t ,
                         •             >it p r o v i d i n g a d e q u a t e h e i p q u i c k l y .




      '
,
            :         , if             is a l r e a d y a. r e p o r t on t h e i if © s a v i n g a c t i o n s
                                r, 1 sbo'ootel l i h o t o asX yo u t o aakti t h i s a v a i l a b l e
                                                                   proportions         in o t h e r 'stadia
                                       yo u r f i n d i n g s .

                                       t o you arnci c o l l e a g u e s    in th e S h e f f i e l d F i r e
S   €•>r V o, f-h ,

r ~>ur h

hooter          Wiite

I                                                                           the last t r i p h e r e     to
    ■ ..     .    Ail,       the e v e n t s   were    v e r y we? 11   r e c o r d e d in detail. ,

                                                                                                                   #
         SOUTH




uj   Z
SUBJECT              DATE
TECHNICAL




            4 0 .A
            42A
                        HEW W ALL
                        TO M A R T EXISTING-
                              6
                                                                TED FENCE, ACCESS
                                                             ATE TO BE MAINTAINED.
         S E E DR& 6705/12
                     v                                                                        HOME     SUPPORTERS


                                  ?%           D ffiD U S H E D ^
                                  % 4^ TUHHSTI1ES.X
                                                                                   /   «y W
                                                                                          [s; I               sm1H sum
                                                                    q y .      As

                                                                nzJoccitad
                    <!ST!K5                                                                            ju t
                                        W        \     HEW TURNSTILE' BLOCK b                          1IHE Of W & &
,c                                                \    10 NATCH EXISTING                                                            THE O W L SHOP,
1                                                                                               4 ’ ^ fflc T ^ T

4                                                                                                            H E W PANEL
                                                                                                        •REQUIRED

                                                                     .PERSONNEL A C C E S S

                                   SEE DR6 5705/14-
    <r
                                                                                                     REFURBISHED LADIES TOILETS.
                              t                                                                      SEE DR& 5705/S.ft




                ie w 1 1
                LADIES |                        REFURBISHED                    K E f URBSSHE0    C
                                    d          GE11TS T                        GFHTS TO ilETS    d
              -4&I-                                   1OHFTS

              -     /                                                                                                                            H EW RE
    see o k    m sirn                    SEE      ms    5705/10^                                                                                 liHDER
                                                                                                                                                 NORTH '
                                                                                                                                                 SEE DR!


ST STAND.
                                                                                                                                   DRAW N         /, P7.U
      WEDNESDAY r:G0TB;'LL CLUB                                              P.L.C                                                               i.i s /
