                                                                            \ C||2 I




       AS/MS                          GP/262/DMB                     25.05.1989

                        Assistant Chief Officer Seaman                   205


City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD
SI 2HH

For the attention of the Acting Head of Department


Dear Sirs,

THE FUTURE OF PITCH PERIMETER   FENCING    AT   SHEFFIELD   UNITED AND   SHEFFIELD
WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUBS

Thank you for your letter dated 17th May, 1989 regarding the future of pitch
perimeter fencing at the above grounds. My simplistic response is to advise
you that the South Yorkshire County Fire Service did not ask for the fences to
be provided and would be happy to seethem removed.

However, this is seen as a matter forparticular consideration by the Police
since the query relates to a crowd control     aspect and the   Guide toSafetyat
Sports Grounds recommends measures forcrowd control.

If the pitch perimeter fences are removed it will         still presumably be
necessary at both grounds to provide a    lower perimeter wall    which willneedto
have access gates (paragraph 205 Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds).

It would seem important to note that the perimeter fences at Wembley stadium
are to be replaced again after the pitch invasions during the Cup Final last
Saturday.

If it is decided that the pitch perimeter fences must be retained because of
the danger of pitch invasions, I would recommend that consideration be given
to the existing fences being replaced by a new design of fence in which each
section is capable of converting into an outward opening gate. This type of
fence, which was recently featured in a television programme, showed the fence
installed at a French football ground and it looked very effective.

iours faithfully




Chief Fire Officer.
City of Sheffield             M e tro p o lita n District

Roger Pensam, FCIS, M B IM , Solicitor                                                         A d m in is tratio n and Legal D e p a rtm en t
Head of Department
                                                                                               Town Hall
                                                                                               Sheffield S1 2HH
                                                                                               Telephone              0742-26444
Our reference
                        GP/262/DMB                                                             Facsimile              0742-735003
                                                                                               Telecom Gold           7 6 :L M X 0 8 6
Your reference
                                                                                               Telex                  54243 SHFLIBG
                                                                                                          or           265871 M ONREF G (quote ref LM X 086)
Date
                         17th May,           1989
                                                                                                             19 MAY 1989
 The Chief Fire Officer,                                                                                   S.Y.C.F.S. HQ.
 South Yorkshire County Fire Service,
 Wellington Street,                                                                                                   II '2   I
 SHEFFIELD.
                                                                                                                 10           , *1
 SI 3SG                                                                                                      3          \         3

  Dear Sir,
                                                                                                                 e>
                                                                                                                      1 6 5           CRd
 The Future of Pitch Perimeter Fencing at Sheffield United and Sheffield
 Wednesday Football Clubs

  As you know the question of pitch perimeter fencing has been highlighted by the
  tragedy at Hillsborough.

  I therefore think it appropriate for the City Council as Safety of Sports
  Grounds Authority to consider the future of the perimeter fencing at both stadia
  in Sheffield fairly shortly.  I appreciate that the Public Inquiry will also
  deal with these matters but it seems to me unlikely that positive
  recommendations will be forthcoming from that Inquiry until either after the
  commencement of the next football season or very shortly before It.  As I am
  sure you are aware both football clubs have Indicated that they wish a review of
  perimeter fencing to be carried out in order that they may take any appropriate
  action by the commencement of next season.

  Would you please, therefore, carefully consider your views on perimeter fencing
  and let me have a note of them.  I would propose that within the next few weeks
  a meeting of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group should consider any
  comments made with a view to the various Council Advisers formulating
  appropriate advice upon which the Council could act.  The Clubs themselves will,
  of course, need to be involved once preliminary consideration has been given to
  the subject.

  I look forward to hearing from you in due course.

  Hours faithfully.
                                                                           - it,                           1/3        <&
                                                                                                       -     'ife h s '


1 Acting Head of JJj^Tartment
                                                                                                                              IT
                                                          f r

  BH30/DMB155


                                                                                           734690 - Mr. Bownes
                       For telephone enquiries on this matter please rin g ....................................................(STD Code 0742)
      FP19/2/4B RG/LG                                           18.10.89

                          DO Grimshaw                             271


Sheffield City Council,
Licensing Section,
Legal and Administrative Department,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD,
South Yorkshire,
SI 2HH.

For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes


Dear Sir,

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975 - BRAMALL LANE

In reply to your correspondence dated 12th October, 1989 which enclosed Plan
No. 11238/7 showing details of proposed additional guard rails in the
John Street Stand, there are no observations from this Department.

Yours faithfully,




      Fire Officer   Q.
