                                                      Department                                           2 Marsham Street
                                                      of the                                              London SW1P 3EB
                                                      Environment                                    Telephone 01-212 3434

                                                                                                                                           /'a/2.
      Press Notice                               389                                    16 August 1984

                         MINISTER FOR SPORT LAUNCHES PUBLIC CONSULTATION PROCESS
                                      ON SOCCER SPECTATOR VIOLENCE

     Announcing    the       publication        today         of    a    Departmental      report      on        soccer      spectator
     violence*, Neil Macfarlane, Minister for Sport, said:-


          "Everyone      is       aware    of    the     Government's          determination          to     do        all    that    is
         possible,       with      the    football       authorities,         to     tackle    the    problem          of     'football
         hooliganism.' Working              together,          we have taken a series of measures which,                              as
■*       the report concludes,              have helped to limit violence associated with football.
         But following          serious     incidents          towards the end of last season, my Ministerial
         colleagues and           I decided          that the time had come for a review of our approach
         and of the options for dealing with the problem.                                 We therefore set up a working
         group    of    officials         from the       four Government Departments principally concerned
          (Environment,        Foreign      and Commonwealth Office,                  Home Office and Transport)                     and
         it is their advice which is being published as a report today.


          The     Report      contains       the       collective          views   of    the    Official          Working       Group;
         although       on    particular             issues        the    advice     emanates        from        the    responsible
         Departments.          My colleagues           and     I are grateful           to the Working Group for this
         report and in particular                for     the speed with which it was produced.                               *e pushed
         them hard as we thought                 it important to form some views before a new domestic
         season opened.


          We accept the thrust of this report.                           It is a reasonable and thorough assessment
        of the problem and of the possible options.                                  It rightly endorses                the current
        partnership between the Government and the football authorities and the emphasis
        upon careful planning, preparation and coordination to deter and reduce violence.
        It   identifies       a    number       of    additional          measures    which    might        be    taken.        These
        measures       are mainly         for the      football authorities,              but we stand ready to give
        all the help we can.               I hope the Football Association, the Football League, the
        Football Trust and others concerned will think about these options seriously in
        the next few weeks, as we propose to do.




        *FOOTBALL SPECTATOR VIOLENCE - Report of an Official Working Group (HMSO £3.80p)


                                                                                                                                      I



\
"What   we   are    starting         today is a process of consultation.                      He   in Government

will think carefully about this report and its advice to us.                                  He seek the views
of all the other bodies involved, notably of course the football                                    authorities.
 I wrote to the Chairman of                   the Football Association,            the Football League and
the   Football Trust                                  two days ago, inviting them to join me over
the coming weeks to discuss it.


"We   look   also    for       the    views     of    the    general     public.     Football          hooliganism
affects and concerns many people and we have chosen to publish this advice from
our   officials     as     a   Departmental          report,     in   order   to   give as many people as
possible the opportunity to comment.                        None of us would pretend that we have a
monopoly     on    ideas       to    combat    soccer       spectator    violence.        Other        bodies     and
individuals       have     different      experience           and    expertise    and    I    believe       it    is
important    to    enable       everyone       to    make    a   contribution.       The       start    of   a    new
domestic season is the right time to start such a debate.                                I look forward to a
wide and fruitful one, inspired by this report, over the next three months."




                                      Press Enquiries:  01-212    4672
                                      Night Calls (6.30pm-8.00am)
                                      Weekends and Holidays: 01-212 7071

                                      Public Enquiries: 01-212 3434;
                                      ask for Public Enquiries Unit
                     PRESS RELEASE ON SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


     Of the five Football League Grounds in South Yorkshire, three (Barnsley,
     Rotherham United and Sheffield Wednesday) have already been granted General
     Safety Certificates by the County Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds
     Act, 1975, following their designation by the Secretary of State and the
     carrying out of improvements.

     The Bramall Lane Ground of the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. was designated
     by the Secretary of State in July, 1984 on the Club's promotion to the Second
     Division. The Club has already carried out a number of improvements to the
     Ground, the remainder to be completed during the 1985 close season.

     Only the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. remains
     undesignated (the Club remaining in the Third Division), but the County Council
     is continuing to work on a goodwill basis with the Club.

     The County Council has also since 1979 had a policy of "winter" and "summer"
     inspections of all five Football League Grounds by Officer Working Parties
     (comprising representatives of the Police, the Fire Service, the County Council
40   and the District Council's Building Surveyor). Such inspections have been welcomed
     by the Football Clubs, who have always displayed a responsible attitude on safety
     matters.

     Naturally, the forthcoming "summer" inspections will take into account the lessons
     of the recent tragic events at Bradford and any revised advice and requirements
     which may be issued by the Home Office.
                 PRESS RELEASE ON SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


Of the five Football League Grounds in South Yorkshire, three (Barnsley,
Rotherham United and Sheffield Wednesday) have already been granted General
Safety Certificates by the County Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act, 1975, following their designation by the Secretary of State and the
carrying out of improvements.

The Bramall Lane Ground of the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. was designated
by the Secretary of State in July, 1984 on the Club's promotion to the Second
Division. The Club has already carried out a number of improvements to the
Ground, the remainder to be completed during the 1985 close season.

Only the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. remains
undesignated (the Club remainingin the_Third Division), but the County Council
is continuing to work on a goodwill basis with the Club.

 The County Council has also since 1979 had a policy of "winter" and "summer"
 inspections of all five Football League Grounds by Officer Working Parties
 (comprising representatives of the Police, the Fire Service, the County Cou^
land the District Council's Building Surveyor). Such inspections have been welcomed
 by the Football Clubs, who have always displayed a responsible attitude on safe y
 matters.

 Naturally, the forthcoming "summer" inspections will take into account the lessons
 of the recent tragic events at Bradford and any revised advice and requirements
 which may be issued by the Home Office.
                PRESS RELEASE ON SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


Of the five Football League Grounds in South Yorkshire, three (Barnsley,
Rotherham United and Sheffield Wednesday) have already been granted General
Safety Certificates by the County Council under the Safety of Sports Groan
Act, 1975, following their designation by the Secretary of State and the
carrying out of improvements.

The Bramall Lane Ground of the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. was designated
by the Secretary of State in July, 1984 on the Club's promotion to the Second
Division. The Club has already carried out a number of improvements to the
Ground, the remainder to be completed during the 1985 close season.

Only the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. remains
undesignated (the Club remainingin the_Third Division), but the County Council
is continuing to work on a goodwill basis with the Club.

The County Council has also since 1979 had a policy of winter and summer
inspections of all five Football League Grounds by Officer Working Parties
(comprising representatives of the Police, the Fire Service, the County Council
and the District Council's Building Surveyor). Such inspections have been
by the Football Clubs, who have always displayed a responsible attitude on safety
matters.
Naturally, the forthcoming "summer" inspections will take into account the lessons
of the recent tragic events at Bradford and any revised advice and requirements
which may be issued by the Home Office.
                                                    Relg/kg-                                                                          AT                                       Crfee*u\j't£’




        < h s m x &\.               y®4U«s^n^e,                                        ti^s-^L                 c ^ z ^ i u A ^                      ,        fc-WvaTkw^

         Itu-'cc^e                                                                                                                           ^          U    ^

         W        ^                                            { ^ ^ v t d                                                                                                     k y       ^




                               C&m^c^             C & ^ ^ clX                    VA^etvr                      ~&u,                                              G (r       ^

                                           A-ot           , t ^ n r ,                    ^ i l # ^                                                                               M
 ^       tu                                      £>tr S - t ^ .          W         -                     c A r tf ^            &2c           c i:                                            '

 $<&U\f^-                      1?>*-«~waU                                                Ctrnru^J'                       <e-t             Ca                    ** U L ^ ^ U f

                 IU a «             V ^ C & e t U                       U*Uo                        l ^                                                                                  U»Y

             ifc^               ^v^et^vs^                              tft-                  S'tcCgL                      ^               'XviUj                t                ^

                 £m,           -tt^          d l o ^                     pj-eW^L(^                               “t*              ^                                         ^ w^/s^                       .
          " jk * _                6 lu X o               k o ^                   ck[ \ ^ c^                          C s a s ^ t^ t                     O ^C L            «* ^ m m W q jJ *

             C-t               Jw^>                                          'ts             -ST                                      \                             \-±^c^sjzLi^r

          -U               taa_              C                                         cJU~.-   _   _   - ^          ^                    H^iT                      C(o-*S_          S^5.<^i


          <9\aU|                      ctvt          E-eil^                       \igte                  ^(^<<,1^ 1.             © t-             ik/M.

          A jS A i^ -^ ,                V ^ t a 4 t U                  C („ O o                                       K ^ u u w S                            u ,v w * & t * ^ j # v a £ ^


          £ ^viL                                         >-2a w c c v ^— --^                        vv\.       "Tt^£_         ' fl\t'Vfr(                   ^fciw >St<S^\ ^ | lo c*£-

         ^                     C ^ S \               G ~ J ~ d                           u                    c^vct.^^^                          -TS                                     «~'

         a                 <2 e-e^tw^iC                       \>xu^ l<>                       w-^k                    ^                     CliJo ,
                                                                                                          ,                                                             Ck pcfuvv Cf
                                                                                                        nlv-c                                                              1.  '-J  __                    JV
         7W_                    U^tx.                    C v ^ A .                                       ^     *>vC^z                 Hl^i                                 ^

          CM/^                  *                             *'         WV* f                                             <iaL| Ijjujt                          *" £           ®*fc                 «H

         4 ^                    '^Fe^WtU                                                                                                     by                         OttltM

             .         ^   ’    —            *                 -   —    «-                                                                                                           r           e



          C_<j£r^c\^\M>'---- -                                iUs>-i-vDL C lA vj-f^                                       “t&UZ               ^ c lt-£ t            f                            ^

                                    f     -tUfc                              .         O ^ ^            aJ.      ^ — crl              -UviL                     ^
                                                * . s                            4L                                        % tt±CiL                wvo
                                             lSwctd_-—/                                                       ^Ty »                                         I
         W                 v^lciW                    W    t   Ute^Wa^aU                             "Ciu^s,                                                         fllw^S
                                                          I                                  ->»                              ,> . _ rT ‘                   —           Rj*-c-r^L

                                                                                                                                          I rtrl.^ .W




                  [i'Sj=>t*^-<fl                   K<^>tty                                tTLtfc'-'fcMl^              vtfw         ”=»                           IVtitZES^       ,
p t o
                                                                                                               1
                    j     "TLvfi.                                    M   ^ w. V^V^JLS *'                 VVi

V0~\\^      CtfcUiL                       CKX'(£n**\5C                   l'-£-,b 1» lfrvc»i»        p£~-           ~tt<Jl

veoM^c          " X ^ w j w<.                            eixr
                                                         <lc~     ^Of-cu?twytk                 cuv^Jk

         o^d(         (£^L\x~CJl          Ctv^gi.        VA^u*c'f-*f*Mj2^JL<3                  v T ^ -t^ X ^            ^

 W*_                               V>-(       ^            K h &'vm JL      ^i<^€
                                                          X>. V   a   -u   q h   a   i\i




            Information from-
            SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
            COUNTY HALL, BARNSLEY, SOUTH YORKSHIRE S70 2TN______________________
            No: 85/185/LM                                  Date: 10th Ma^ 1985




 SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS IW SOUTH YORKSHIRE


 Of the five FoocDail League Grounds in South Yorkshire, three (Barnsley,
 Rotherham United and Sheffield Wednesday) have already been granted General
 Safety Certificates by the County Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds
 Act, 1975, following their designation by the Secretary of State on, the
^carrying out of improvements.

The Bramall Lane Ground of the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. was designated
by the Secretary of State in July, 1984 on the Club'- promotion to the Second
Division. The Club has already carried out a number of improvements to the
Ground, the remainder to be completed during the 1985 close season.

Only the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. remains
undesignated (the Club remaining in the Third Division), but the County Council
is continuing to work on a goodwill basis with the Club.

The County Council has also since 1979 had a policy of "winter" and "summer"
inspections of all five Football League Grounds by Officer Working Parties
(comprising representatives of the Police, the Fire Service, the County Council
and the District Council's Building Surveyor). Such inspections have been welcomed
by the Football Clubs, who have always displayed a responsible attitude on safety
matters.

 Naturally, the forthcoming "summer" inspections will take into account the lessons
fepf the recent tragic events at Bradford and any revised advice and requirements
^hich may be issued by the Home Office.




                         FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT
                    THE PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICE OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL
                      ON BARNSLEY(0226)286141 EXTNS 332, 162 or 165
               South Yorkshire County Council
               Chief Executive & County Clerk:                      Department of Administration
               J. C. Harris, M.A., LLB.(Cantab)                     County Hall
                                                                    Barnsley
                                                                    South Yorkshire S 70 2TN
                                                                    Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                    (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 86141
                                                                    Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5

               Our Ref:                    Your Ref:                Date:
               DV/MH/583/4                 GES/JK                   13th May, 1985

               This matter is being dealt with by      D. Vaughan   Ext. No.   422




  Dear Sir,

  Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

  I attach a copy of a Press Release issued by the County Council today
  in response to requests for information by the media on the situation in
  South Yorkshire following Saturday's tragic events at Bradford.

  It is reasonable to assume that revised advice and/or requirements will be
  issued by the Home Office in the near future, and naturally this will be
  taken into account at the forthcoming "summer" inspections by the Officer
  Working Parties.

  In the meantime and recognising that the season has ended, I would
  particularly stress the vital necessity for safety stewards to be fully
  aware of and trained in their duties on the manning and opening of doors
  and gates on egress routes and in the use of fire fighting equipment.

  Yours faithfully,



4.) T   .£ •   M/VTRCUS



  Chief Executive




  Mr. G. E. Smith,
  Company Secretary,
  Sheffield United Football Club Ltd.,
  Bramall Lane,
  SHEFFIELD,
  S2 4SU.
           Information from=
           SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
           COUNTY HALL, BARNSLEY, SOUTH YORKSHIRE S702TN
           No:8 5 /1 8 5 /LM                                 Datei 10th May 1985




SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS IN SOUTH YORI\ST-II_v^


Of the five Fooccaii League Grounds in South Yorkshire, three (Barnsley,
Rotherham United and Sheffield Wednesday) have already been granted General
Safety Certificates by the County Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act, 1975, following their designation by the Secretary of State o’n the
"carrying out of improvements.

The Bramall Lane Ground of the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. was designated
by the Secretary of State in July, 1984 on the Club's promotion to the Second
Division. The Club has already carried out a number of improvements to the
Ground, the remainder to be completed during the 1985 close season.

Only the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. remains
undesignated (the Club remaining in the Third Division), but the County Council
is continuing to work on a goodwill basis with the Club.

The County Council has also since 1979 had a policy of "winter" and "summer"
inspections of all five Football League Grounds by Officer Working Parties
(comprising representatives of the Police, the Fire Service, the County Council
and the District Council's Building Surveyor), Such inspections have been welcomed
by the Football Clubs, who have always displayed a responsible attitude on safety
matters.

■iaturally, the forthcoming "summer" inspections will take into account the lessons
x>£ the recent tragic events at Bradford and any revised advice and requirements
which may be issued by the Home Office.




                         FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT
                    THE PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICE OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL
                      ON BARNSLEY(0226)286141 EXTNS332, 16 2 o r1 6 5
          South Yorkshire County Council
                                                                       Department of Administration
         Chief Executive & County Clerk:
         J. C. Harris, M.A., LLB.(Cantab)                              County Hall
                                                                       Barnsley
                                                                       South Yorkshire S 7 0 2TN
m                                                                      Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                       (STD 0 2 2 6 ) 86141
                                                                       Telex: 5 4 7 6 7 5

         Our Ref:   D V /A A /5 8 3 /2   Your Ref: LSH/AW              Date:      13 May 1985



         This matter is being dealt with by      D. Vaughan            Ext. No.      422




    Dear Sir,

    Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

    I attach a copy of a Press Release issued by the County Council
    today in response to requests for information by the media on
    the situation in South Yorkshire following Saturday's tragic
    events at Bradford.

    It is reasonable to assume that revised advice and/or requirements
    will be issued by the Home Office in the near future, and naturally
    this will be taken into account at the forthcoming "summer"
    inspections by the Officer Working parties.

    In the meantime and recognising that the season has ended, I would
    particularly stress the vital necessity for safety stewards to be
    fully aware of and trained in their duties on the manning and
    opening of doors and gates on egress routes and in the use of fire
    fighting equipment.

                                                   Yours faithfully,



                                                C S ti) ^      H -A tfR is


                                                   Chief Executive.

    P.S. Could you kindly indicate whether the Club's development
    proposals (outlined on a confidential basis at the meeting held
    at the Ground on 30th January, 1985) are, in fact, to proceed.

    I would add that the Building Authority advise that they hope to
    be able to let me have their report on the existing Ground very
    shortly.




    Mr. L. S. Holloway,
    Chief Executive,
    Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd.,
    Belle Vue,
    Doncaster.
    DN4 5HT
  Information from--
  SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
  COUNTY HALL, BARNSLEY, SOUTH YORKSHIRE S70 2TN______________________

  No: 85/188/LM                                     Dat8:      1 4 -K?? 198?




COUNTY COUNCIL DENIAL


South Yorkshire County Council yesterday, denied that they thr°atened to
close Rother-hair: United Football Club's Millmore ground, after investigations
in 1980, showed that more exits were required, in case of an emergency.


Former police Superintendent, Douglas Lock, in yesterdays edition of the
Morning Telegraph, 14 May 1985, said that when safety implementations had
been suggested by the Authority, "the directors were extremely reluctant to
do anything about it and we had to threaten to close the ground."


A County Council spokesman said, "To suggest that Rotherham United had to be
threatened is a misrepresentation of the situation.    There were differences
of opinion abo-it the means of implementing improvements between the County
Council's Officer Working Parties and the directors of Rotherham United, but
these w?re discussed and resolved.     We never got to the stage where we were

'banging 1bhe big drum'.1'


The County Council has, since 1979, had a policy of "winter" and "summer"
inspections of all five Football Leagu* r.rounds in South Yorkshire, by
Officer Working Parties (comprising representatives of the Police, the
Fire Brigade, the County Council and the District Council's Building Surveyor).
Officer Workine Parties have met with Rotherham United Football Club 2?
 times since 1979.   Whilst former Superintendent Douglas Lock was a
 Sub-Divisional Commander at Rotherham for six months, he was not present at

 these meetings.


                                 END




 For further information, please contact: Lindsay MacFarlaine ext. 275




                FOR FURTHER INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT
           THE PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICE OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL
             ON BARNSLEY(0226)286141 EXTNS 332, 162 or 165
PRESS RELEASE >;
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
COUNTY HALL, BARNSLEY, SOUTH YORKSHIRE S702TN______________________
No,   85/216 /LM                                   Date:        6 June       1985




SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


The majority of sports grounds in South Yorkshire are "satisfactory"

from a safety point of view according to South Yorkshire County Council

Chief Fire Officer Mr Harry Wright.      In a report to the County Council

Fire Service Committee Mr Wright said that       an initial survey had

revealed a total of 30 sports grounds at which stands were provided

for spectators and accommodation provided for players and officials.

Only in four cases had recommendations been made for minor adjustments

and negotiations were now taking place to remedy the faults.


The report follows the recent Bradford City disaster in which more than

fifty people died.   The terms of reference of the review were to

examine all sports grounds of whatever size or sporting activity and to

give interim advice on any matter which gave rise to a risk of fire or

emergency evacuation.    Mr Wright said of the four grounds:         "I should

like to point out these faults are of a minor nature and are being

corrected with a tremendous amount of good will".         He added   "I am

satisfied that any faults will be remedied by the start of the next

season if they are not, necessary action will be taken to ensure the

safety of the public".


The forthcoming "Summer" Officer Working Parties inspections (comprising

representative of the Police, the Fire Service, the County Council and

the District Council's Building Surveyor) will take into account the

lessons of the recent tragic events at Bradford and any revised advice
and requirements which may be issued by the Home Office.
             FOR FURTHER IN FO R M A TIO N PLEASE CONTACT
        THE PUBLIC RELATIONS OFFICE OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL
            ON BARNSLEY (0226)286141 Extns.332,162or165
NEWS RELEASE                                 50 Queen Anne's Gate London SW 1H 9AT
                                             Telephone 01-213 3030/4050/5050
                                             (Night line 01-213 3000)
                                                             June 2 7 , 1985




          ALCOHOL AT FOOTBALL HATCHES: ’TOUGH BUT FAIR MEASURES’


           The Home Office today published a Bill to control the sale and
  possession of alcohol at and on the way to and from sporting events.
  Commenting on the Bill the Home Secretary,       the Rt Hon Leon Brittan QC HP,
  said,

           "We are putting forward tough but fair measures which go to the
          heart of the problem of drimken behaviour and hooliganism at
          football grounds.     The Bill is based upon the current Scottish
          legislation, but also reflects the difference between football
          grounds in Scotland and those in England and Wales.

           "Broadly the Bill will make it an offence to possess alcohol
          when entering a football ground or in football coaches or trains
          on the way to a match.      Drunkenness in the ground or at the entrance
          to it will also    be made illegal.     The sale of alcohol inside grounds
          will be tightly    controlled, but clubs will be able to apply to local
          magistrates for an exemption order allowing them to sell alcohol
          in bars out of sight of the pitch: in considering the application
          magistrates will give particular regard to public order and safety
          considerations and the club's past record in this respect.

          "I have discussed these measures with HM Opposition and the Alliance
          parties and been assured of their a g r e e m e n t tothem.   They share the
          Government's wish to do everything possible to remove this stain
          from a great British game."

 The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc.) Bill

          The Bill's provisions will apply to designated sports grounds and
 designated sporting events. (It is expected that the Secretary of State's
 initial designation order will relate only to football grounds and matches,
 including, in particular, Football League Clubs and international fixtures).
            Clause 1 prohibits drunkenness and the possession of drink on trains,
coaches and mini-buses on the way to or from a designated sporting event.
Offences in connection with possessing drink, drunkenness and possession of
a 'controlled container1 at grounds are created by Clause 2.

            Clauses 3-5 place a general ban on the sale of alcohol within
designated sports grounds but provide for exemption orders to be granted
by magistrates if they are satisfied that public order and safety arrangements
would not be threatened.      Exemption orders will be valid for only five months
which means that football clubs obtaining exemptions early in the season will
need to reapply to the courts for fresh exemptionsfor the second half of the
season.     Clause 6 empowers a police officer to close any bar in the ground if
trouble breaks out.      Clause 7 provides the police with the necessary powers
to enforce the provisions of the Bill and Clause 8 sets out the penalties.
These are outlined below.      Clause 9 includes an interpretation of the terms
used in the Bill; the main ones being:

            'designated sports ground' - means any place wholly or partly used
            for sporting events where accommodation is provided for spectators
            and which has been designated by the Secretary of State;
            'designated sporting event'- means any sporting event or proposed
            sporting event designated by the Secretary of State.

The provisions also apply to travel within England and Wales en route to
sports grounds and sporting events designated by the Secretary of State for
Scotland.    Matches played abroad may be designated for the purpose of
controlling drinking on special trains and coaches.      Clause 10 amends the
corresponding Scottish legislation.     The major provisions of the Bill are as follows:
Possession of drink and drunkenness:
            on coaches, trains and mini-buses -
            Alcohol will be prohibited on a public service vehicle
            or railway passenger vehicle which is being used for the
            primary purpose of conveying passengers to or from a designated
            sporting event.
            offences -   it will be an offence knowingly to cause or permit
            intoxicating liquor to be carried on such a vehicle; the operator,
            hirer or his servant/agent will be liable (Cl(2))
                         a person who has intoxicating liquor in his possession
            while on such a vehicle will be guilty of an offence (Cl(3))
                         it will be an offence to be drunk on such a vehicle (Cl(^))
         at sports grounds -
        Possession of intoxicating liquor or a 'controlled container'
         (i.e. a bottle, can or other portable container which is capable
         of causing injury) will be prohibited in any part of a designated
         sports ground from which the event may be directly viewed.
         offences -    it will be an offence to be in possession of intoxicating
         liquor or a controlled container at any time during the period of a
         designated sporting event in any part of the sports ground from which
         the event may be directly viewed (c2(l)(a)) or while entering or
         trying to enter the ground (c2(l)(b)).
                   -             a person who is drunk in any part of the ground during
         the period of a designated sporting event or who is drunk on entering
        a ground will be guilty of an offence (c2(2)).


Restricting the sale of drink within sports grounds
        The sale of intoxicating liquor will generally be prohibited during
         the period of a designated sporting event ( c 3 ( 1 ) ) »   However, clause 3 (2)
        makes provision for a magistrates court to grant an exemption order for
         licensed premises or registered club premises inside the ground, but
         only in respect of areas out of sight of the pitch.’ In granting such
        an order the court must be satisfied that it is not likely to be
         detrimental to the orderly conduct or safety of spectators. (c3(6)).
        Where such an order ali-eady exists but a police inspector considers
         the sale or supply of intoxicating liquor at a particular designated
         sporting event is likely to be detrimental to the orderly conduct
         or safety x>£ spectators, and it is impracticable for an application
         for variation of the order to be made to a magistrates court, he may
         give written notice to the holder of the order, (or- his designated
         representative) that the existing order should be modified or should
         cease to have effect (c3(7)j(9)).
         Clause 6(1) makes provision for any bar withina designated sports
         ground to be closed at any time during the course of a designated
         sporting event if it appears to a constable in uniform that the
         continued sale or supply of intoxicating liquor is detrimental to
         the orderly conduct or safety of spectators at that event.
        offences -     it will be an offence to sell or supply or to authorise
        the sale or supply of intoxicating liquor in contravention of conditions
        or restrictions imposed under Clause 3(10).
                    - it will be an offence to fail to close a bar if required
         by a constable to do so (c6(2))


Powers of enforcement

         Clause 7 provides a police constable with powers to enter any part
         of a designated sports ground to enforce the provisions of the Act
         (c7(1)), to search persons in or attempting to enter a ground (c7(2))
          to stop public service vehicles and to search such vehicles or
          railway passenger vehicles (c7(3))•


Penalties for offences

         Offences will be triable summarily.        For the offence of:
         -   being in possession of intoxicating liquor on a vehicle (cl(3))
             being in possession of intoxicating liquor in or on entry to a
         designated sports ground during a designated sporting event (c 2 (1 ))
         -   selling or supplying intoxicating liquor in contravention of
         restrictions and conditions (c 3 (1 0 ))
             failing to comply with the request of a constable to close a
         bar (c6(2))
         the penalty is a fine not exceeding £ ^ 0 or 3 months impi'isonment
         or both.
         For the offence of knowingly causing or permitting intoxicating
         liquor to be carried on a vehicle; the penalty will be a fine not
         exceeding £1000 (cl(2))
         For the offences of:
             being drunk in a vehicle (cl(^))
         -   being drunk in or on entry to a designated ground (c2(2))
          the penalty will be a fine not exceeding £100.


Amendment of Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980
         Clause 10 of the Bill contains amendments to Part V of the Criminal
Justice (Scotland) Act 19 8 0 .   It extends the provisions of section 69 in
relation to public-service vehicles to trains; and it applies the Act to
sporting events designated under the present Bill and to designated sporting
events outside Great Britain, so that travel in Scotland en route to designated
sporting events in England and Wales or outside Great Britain would be caught
under the Act.
Notes to Editors


A public service vehicle has the same meaning as in the Public Passenger
Vehicle Act 1981 and includes buses, coaches and mini-buses which are used
for hire or reward.




The Bill does not extend to Northern Ireland.
                                                  Department                                                       2 Marsham Street
                                                  of the                                                          London SW1P 3EB
                                                  Environment                                                Telephone 01-212 3434


Press Notice                                     354                                                     17 July 1985

         FOOTBALL SPECTATOR VIOLENCE                                     M E E T I N G OF M I N I S T E R ' S W O R K I N G GROUP


           Neil         Macfarlane,               Minister               for            Sport,        today            chaired           a        meet i n g
    of     the    Working           Group        set        up        to c o - o r d i n a t e           m e a s u r e s to deal with f o o t ­

    ball hooliganism.


            In a s t a t e m e n t after the m e e t i n g Mr M a c f a r l a n e                                   said:


^           "My        Work i n g        Group        today           continued                 the        discussions                 betw e e n        the
    Government               and     the        f o o tball           authorities                   on       measures             to      be       taken,
    jointly        and        separately,               to       deal        with          the       problems               of    c rowd          control
    and     safety           confronting               the        game.                 The      Football              League          pre s e n t e d     a
    m e m o r a n d u m and r e p o r t e d s p e c i f i c a l l y on m e m b e r s h i p cards.


            "The            issue        of     membership                 cards               is      one        which           c o n cerns            the
    responsibility                  of        f o o tball         clubs             for        e n s uring         safety          and         security
    within        their        own       premises.                The      Government                  expe c t s          them    to        take       that
    responsibility                  seriously              and        regr e t s           the       delay.            I    am     glad           to    note
    that         the        Football          Le a g u e        has      established                   a     Working             Group         to       give
    this      opt i o n       the        full      but       speedy             consideration                     it       requires.               I    look
    forward            to     seeing          an 'early           report,                which        w ill       be        completed              by    the

    end of August.


            "In         the         m e a ntime,            a      Government/football                                 package               is        being
    constructed               for    the       new     season.               The         Government               has       already          announced
    a r ange of actions,                      within         its r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s ,              to reduce and cont a i n
    hooliganism.                   There        will        be    a     strengthened                   r ole       for      the     Police,             w ith
    n ew    powers           under       the     Public          Order          bill          to be         introduced             next        Session.
    Legislation                has        almost            completed                    its        passage                in     Parliament               to
    restrict            alco h o l        at      matches              and          on    journeys              to         and from          them;        we
    know* alco h o l           can        incite           and        inflame                 trouble.            I took the             i n itiative
    to     agree            binding       measures               w ith     E u r opean              Governments                  and     with          UEFA.
    A     Convention            has       b een       ag r e e d       upon             and     should         be       adopted          very           soon;
    discussions               have        started            wit h        UEFA. To             mee t        public               concern            about
    safety,            Divisions          3     and     4       Football                League        clubs        are          to be     designated
    under         the        Safety       of      Sports              Grounds                 Act;         C h i e f Fire O f f i c e r s               have
    been      inspecting             all       sports           grounds;                and    there         is    a       full    inquiry              under
    Mr J u s t i c e Popple w e l l .                 His        i n t e r i m report will be ava i l a b l e very soon.
                                                                            -   1   -
           "The Football           authorities          are     developing         plans    for     more     all
    ticket     and    morning        matches.           Known        hooligans     will    be    banned     from
    grounds.          CCTV    will       be     installed        quickly      at    as    many    grounds     as
    possible,       covering       at    least ^Divisions            1 and    2.    Problem      matches     are
    being, identified          early      so     that    effective        precautions       can    be     taken.


           "The   resolve      and      the    effort    is     there. • The       Government       is    deter­
    mined    that     all    possible         steps   will      be   taken to restore           the good name
    of     football    and     our      country.         Our     discussions        of    possible       actions
    will    continue        with   the Football Association                  and   the Football      League."



                              Press Enquiries:   01 212 3496/3/4/5/2
                                   (out of hours:   01 212 7132)
                                  Public Enquiries:   01 212 3434
                                 (ask for Public Enquiries Unit)

                                                        0000----




•    .




                                                        -2F -
NEWS RELEASE                                50 Queen Anne's Gate London SW 1H 9AT
                                            Telephone 01-213 3030/4050/5050
                                            (Night line 01-213 3000)




                                                           July 24, 1985


                         SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS

               Home Secretary welcomes Interim Report of
                          Committee of Inquiry


     "There is no single, simple method of making sports grounds safe and
free from violence," the Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Leon Brittan QC MP,
said today, "but I believe that the steps taken in the last few months,
coupled with the implementation of the important recommendations of Mr
Justice Popplewell's inquiry, have already made and will make a significant
contribution towards preserving football as a major spectator sport".

     The Home Secretary was responding to the publication of the Interim
Report by the committee which was established following the fire at
Bradford City football ground and the events at Birmingham City football
ground.   Paying tribute to the ’speedy, clear and thorough way in which
the Chairman and his two assessors have tackled this difficult and important
task* the Home Secretary said "No-one reading the report, or who followed
the public hearings in Bradford, can doubt that the Inquiry has investigated
these matters as thoroughly as possible".

     The Popplewell committee makes 32 recommendations (8 of them provisional)
in its report; these recommendations, and the'government's response to them,
are contained in a written statement also published today (copy attached).
In particular the government is asking local authorities, police and sports
authorities to respond immediately to the spirit of the recommendations to
improve safety arrangements at sports grounds.

     The Home Secretary went on however to report the actions already taken
in the immediate aftermath of the events at Bradford and Birmingham.         First,
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act all qualifying grounds of clubs in
Divisions 3 and   k of the Football League and Divisions 1 and 2 of the Rugby
League have been designated, requiring clubs to apply for safety certificates
before admitting any spectators.
     Secondly reports received from Chief Fire Officers indicate that all
uncertificated grounds of the Association Football League and of the 1st
and 2nd Divisions of the Rugby League have been inspected.   Spectator
accommodation at the larger cricket grounds, Rugby Union grounds, race
courses, motor racing circuits, greyhound tracks, tennis clubs and athletics
grounds has also been inspected.   Chief Fire Officers have sent copies of
their findings to the management of those sports grounds visited, indicating
what remedial measures have to be taken.   In some cases this will involve
complete closure of a stand until rebuilding or remedial work has been
completed.

     Fire safety standards at most of the soccer and Rugby League grounds
have been found to be generally satisfactory but some improvements have been
shown to be required and a number of potentially serious fire hazards have
been revealed.   These include stands which are wholly or largely made of
timber, unprotected voids beneath timber floors in stands, combustible
materials stored beneath stands and inadequate gangways or final exit doors.

     Management of sports grounds have responded in a co-operative way and
have either set necessary work in hand or are considering how best to comply
with the requirements.   The attention of the governing bodies of the main
sporting activities is also being drawn to the Report's recommendations in
anticipation that full co-operation will continue to be given to ensure
proper spectator safety measures are in operation at all sports grounds.

     Thirdly the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Bill has been
passed and will be in force by the beginning of the football season.

     Fourthly, steps have been taken to enhance police effectiveness.
In England and Wales the Association of Chief Police Officers has introduced
a new system for exchanging information about the conduct of fans which
should assist in anticipating and preventing trouble.   Three of the Home
Office photographic vehicles will be available to be deployed at football
matches, together with 2 experimental high-definition tripod mounted cameras.
This is in addition to the £ 500,000 worth of equipment purchased through
funds provided by the Football Trust.

     Fifthly, the Minister for Sport has helped to promote and draw up a
Council of Europe Convention on Spectator Violence.
                                                                              'I*.




    INQUIRY INTO CROWD SAFETY AND CONTROL AT SPORTS GROUNDS
    INTERIM REPORT JULY 1985 ( CMND 9585 )




    GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO RECOMMENDATIONS




    GROUND MANAGEMENT


    RECOMMENDATIONS


    1.       Evacuation procedures should be a matter of police training
™   and form part of the briefing by police officers before a football
    match.    (Paragraph 3-9).



    2.       The local authority team responsible for issuing safety
    certificates in respect of designated grounds should, as heretofore,
    include police officers.     (Paragraph 3-15)



    Certificating authorities and chief officers of police will be
    invited to act upon these recommendations (see also Recommendation 10).




•                            ---------------------

    RECOMMENDATIONS


    6.       Those managing sports grounds not governed by safety certificates
    should give serious consideration, with the assistance of fire authorities,
    to the presence in a ground of suitable fire fighting equipment.
    (Paragraph 3-5*0


    7.       Stewards at all sports grounds should be trained in fire fighting.
    (Paragraph 3-55)


    8.       In designated grounds it should be a term of the safety certificate
    that an adequate first-aid room should be provided.    (Paragraph 3.99)




                                          1
10.    Stewards in all grounds should not only be trained in fire
precautions and fire-fighting (see Recommendation 7 above) but should
also be trained in how best to help the police in evacuation.

(Paragraph 3-10*0


14.    Suitable and adequate exits should be provided in all sports

grounds.   (Paragraph 3.138)                                           ___

15.   No smoking should take place in combustible stands, that this
should be a condition of entry to the ground that signs to that effect
should be prominently displayed and this should be a condition of
entry to the ground.    (Paragraph 3-1^)


The relevant sports authorities will be invited to draw the attention
of sports grounds managers to these reconr.iendat.ions, and certificating
authorities will be asked to consider reflecting the recommendations
in new or amended safety certificates as appropriate in the case of
designated grounds.    The fire and police services will be asked to stand
ready to advise cn equipment and assist with training as appropriate.




RECOMMENDATION


9.     There should be urgent consultation between the Health and Safety
Executive and the fire authorities and local authorities as to how best
to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and reports.
(Paragraph 3-95)


The HSE has appointed a member of its Executive to review liaison
arrangements between its inspectors and the fire authorities.    He will
consult Government Departments and others in this review, the results of
which will be made public.




RECOMMENDATION


16.    Fire Authorities should identify and visit all sports stadia in their
areas and should prohibit or restrict the use of any stands which, in their
view, constitute a risk to spectators because of the inadequacy of the fire
precautions.     (Paragraph 3-1^2)
    Chief Fire Officers in England and Wales were invited by the Home Secretary
    on 16 May to inspect all sports grounds and were reminded of the powers
    available to them to take emergency action if, in their view, fire hazards
    constituting a risk to spectators are revealed.   The Secretary of State
    for Scotland similarly asked Firemasters to inspect sports grounds in Scotland.
    Reports received show that fire brigades have not hesitated to recommend
    emergency action where necessary, including in a number of cases a prohibition
    on the use of stands or a restriction on the number of spectators allowed
    into them.




    RECOMMENDATION


    17 -    In order to ensure a complete record of sports grounds a
    local registration system should be set up.   (Paragraph 3-150)


    Consultation will take place with the local authority associations to
    establish how such records may best be compiled and maintained.     The
    recent visits of the fire brigades fsee Recommendation .16) should have
    in practice marshalled much of the relevant data already.




9   STRUCTURES


    RECOMMENDATION


    13-    Building of new permanent stands of combustible materials
    should be prohibited as a general rule.   (Paragraph 3-132)


    This recommendation will be given speedy and urgent consideration
    by the Departments who are responsible for building regulations.




                                    3
GREEN GUIDE


 RECOMMENDATIONS


 4.    The Green Guide should be amended to include in Paragraph 11 a
provision that, wherever practicable, roads within a quarter of a
mile of a sports ground should be kept entirely free of parked vehicle's.
 (Paragraph 3-35)


11.    Paragraph fc.14.6 of the      Green Guide should be amended to read:
"All exit gates should be manned at all times while the ground is used
by the public and be capable of being opened immediately from inside
by anyone in an emergency.11      (Paragraph 3-HI)


12.    The Green Guide should be amended to contain a specific provision,
in relation to stewards,


       (i)         that they   should be trained and instructed to
       deal with any emergency relating to fire or evacuation
       (see also Recomnendations 7 and 10);


       (ii)     that they should be given written instructions
       about the action to be taken in cases of emergency;


       (iii)       that they   should receive practical instruction
       and training appropriate to their responsibility;


       (iv)    that no one should be employed as a steward
       unless they have been so instructed and trained; and


       (v)         that they   should be adequate ir. number, physically
       and mentally capable of performing their duties, effectively
       deployed, effectively supervised and readily identifiable.
       (Paragraph 3-117)


19 -   The next edition of the Green Guide should make it clear
that it applies to all sports grounds.        (Paragraph 3-15*4)
These points will be noted fcr inclusion in the next edition of the Green
Guide which will be needed after the Inquiry's final report is received.
Action will not however depend upon the availability of a fresh edition and
certificating authorities and chief officers cf police (Recommendation 4)
will be invited to take such steps as are open to them now.




CROWD MANAGEMENT


RECOMMENDATIONS


5.     Consideration should be given to making it a criminal offence
in England and Wales to have a smoke bomb or similar device at sports
grounds.   (Paragraph 3-42)


22.    There should be a specific offence of throwing a missile at
sports grounds. (Paragraph 6.57)


The case f6r inviting Parliament to create new criminal offences on
these lines will be studied urgently in connection with the Government's
intention of introducing legislation in the next session of Parliament
following its review of the law relating to public order.




RECOMMENDATIONS


20.    Urgent consideration should be given by football clubs in
England and Wales to introducing membership system so as to exclude
visiting fans.     (Paragraph 6.48)


23 -   Football clubs should review their arrangements for entry and
the organisation of their turnstiles.   (Paragraph 6.62)


Both these recommendations are for football authorities and clubs, but the
Government hopes that they will be given serious consideration.    The
Government has been encouraging the Football Association and the Football
League to introduce a scheme of membership cards and the options are currently
being considered in a Football League working group: that group's
attention will therefore be drawn to the Inquiry's Recommendation 20.
The governing bodies' attention will also be drawn to Recommendation 23
whidi might be influenced by decisions upon Recommendation 20.




RECOMMENDATION


21.    Closed circuit television should be introduced at League football
grounds in England and Wales and in the Premier Division in Scotland.
(Paragraph 6.54)


The Football Trust has allocated £500,000 for the provision of CCTV equipment
in League grounds during the 1985-86 season.    The Trust's attention, and
that of the Football Associations and the Football Leagues, will be drawn
to this recommendation.




MISCELLANEOUS


RECOMMENDATIONS


3-    Early attention should be given by the Home Office Directorate
of Telecommunications to consider the practicality of producing a more
suitable personal radio for the police.   (Paragraph 3.33)


18.   Consideration should be given as how best to deal with temporary
stands and marquees   (Paragraph 3.151)


24.   Consideration should be given to the design of a standard,
efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.   (Paragraph 6.63)


Each of these will be studied as the Inquiry advises.   Recommendations
18 and 24 may best be taken forward in the context of the Inquiry's next
stage and when it turns to examine the Green Guide as a whole.
t PROVISIONAL   RECOMMENDATIONS


 (To be reviewed in the Final Report)


 1.     I ain minded to recommend that in England and Wales the police should
be given the unfettered right of search before entry to football grounds by

statute.'   (Paragraph 3-41)


2.      I am mi n d e d    to recommend that Section 10 of the Fire Precautions Act 1971
 should be amended with a view to giving the Fire Authority power in cases other
 than those which are regarded as wholly exceptional        (Paragraph 3-61)


        Linked with the above, 1 am        minded to recommend that consideration
should be given to introducing legislation giving powers for the Fire Authority
to apply to the High Court,for an Injunction (or to the Court of Session for
an interdict in Scotland) under Section 10 of the Fire Precautions Act 1971-
 (Paragraph 3-61)


4.      I am m i n d e d   to recommend that Section 10 of the Safety at Sports Grounds
Act 1975 should be amended in like manner to Section 10 of the Fire Precautions
Act 1971 (see Provisional Recommendations 2 and 3) and an application to the
High Court for an injunction (or to the Court of Session for an interdict in
Scotland) should be an alternative remedy.         (Paragraph 3-76)


5.      I am m i n d e d to recommend that the Secretary of State should exercise his
powers to designate all sports grounds, whatever their size to include indoor
as well as outdoor activities.        (Paragraph 3-145)


6.      I am minded to recommend immediate designation of any ground
capable of holding over 5,000 spectators, to cover all sports grounds,
 not merely football grounds.        (Paragraph 3.14,6)


7.      I am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to
providing the police with additional powers of arrest under the
Public Order Act, 1936.        (Paragraph 6 .66)


8.      I am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to
creating a specific offence of chanting obscene or racialist abuse
at a sports ground. (Paragraph 6 .67)


These are noted and the Government will stand by to assist the
Inquiry in its further consideration of the matters.
                                          50 Quoen Anne's Gato London SW 1H 9AT
NEWS RELEASE                              Tolophono 01-213 3030/'1050/5050
                                          (Nicjht line 01-213 3000)




                                                                  January 16, 1986


                            SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
                home   SECRETARY STATEMENT ON POPPLEWELL INQUIRY


A       The Government "accepts the need to strengthen urgently" the safety
    measures at sports grounds, the Home Secretary the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd
    CBE MP said today.    "Consultations will begin immediately with the sporting
    authorities and organisations concerned" with a view to extend
    designation this summer under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 to all grounds
    with spectator accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators at which
    soccer, rugby union, rugby league and cricket is played.

         All eligible Football League grounds hr.ve already been designated as have
    Scottish premier league grounds, Rugby League Division one and two
    grounds and the three national Rugby U;iion stadia.

         The principle that safety control* should also be extended to ether
    sports grounds with stands capable of holding over 500 spectators and
£   to indoor sports facilities with accommodation for over 500 spectators
    where adequate controls do not already exist was also accepted by the
    Home Secretary.    The first step will be to establish the facts about
    those grounds and facilities affected and the full practical effects
    of the recommendations.

         The Home Secretary was responding to the Final Report of the Committee
    of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds set up following
    the fire at Bradford City football ground and the events at Birmingham City
    football ground last May.     He expressed the Government's gratitude for the
    speed and conscientiousness with which the Chairman and his two assessors

    had discharged this difficult task.

         The Final Report makes 15 recommendations on crowd safety and control
     at sports grounds.    The full text of the Home Secretary's response is
     attached giving details of the request to local authorities, and chief
fire officers to inspect as necessary both indoor and outdoor sports
premises and proposals to publish a consultative document on legislative
changes in order to achieve the objectives of the safety recommendations

of the Final Report.
     On the question of crowd control, the Home Secretary referred to
the steps already taken to strengthen the powers of the police and courts ,
in particular new police powers of search and arrest in the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act and on further measures, including a new offence
of disorderly conduct, proposed in the Public Order Bill.   He undertook
to look further at Mr Justice Popplewell's recommendations when we have
had time to see how these measures worked in practice.   The latest figures
available suggest that in London so far this season there has been a
reduction of over **0 per cent in the number of people arrested and
ejected; in Manchester the reduction is over 5<$.




NOTE FOR EDITORS

      The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (SSGA) implemented the main
 proposals of the Wheatley Report into Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds
 established following an accident at Ibrox Park in 1971 when 66 people

 were killed and many more injured.

      Designation under the SSGA means that the owner or occupier of a
 stadium must apply to the local authority (county council) for a safety
 certificate if spectators are to be admitted to the stadium.




 * A brief check list of action taken or under way by Government and football

   clubs is attached.
fo o tba ll       h o o l ig a n is m :       WIIAT h a s b e e n u o r / 1 8 b e i n g DONE


                                                                                        AnT     1 QRS         Controls       o n sa l e    and
1.        SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL                                                     g r o u n ds and o n         football



Associated              police        po wer s.
                                                          S= -                             — dfromthe
2.        PUBLIC ORDER BILL

            (a )               C o n tro ls   on p u b l i c a s s e m b l i e s c a n              R e a s o n a b ly        apprehended

                               u s s jr.: urc .n bE                                                      — >■
            (b)                Exclusion          order       s ch e m e .

             .     ,           p..i>aeeinn o f s m o k e b o m b s             and    fireworks made                an off e n c e      (as
            (C)                recommended          b y - ^ T ^ U              in h i s      interim report).


             (d )               E x t e n s i o n of a l c o h o l      controls          to m i n i b u s e s ^

                                                                                     •> r n i c c i l e at or t o w a r d s        a person
                                C larification            that t h r o w i n g       a missile a
             (e)
                                 constitutes         a n offence.

                                 Nev offence of               dlsorderly_conduct                 where distress, alarm or
             (f)
                                 harassment          likely to b e c a u s e d .

                 (g )            Offence        of    incitement             to ® t i ^      P t^ f ^ 7 1^ f ^ h a t r e d as w e l l

                                 C
                                 ar " n ^ f w        M    f h 1Cls     UUe? " o            (p o s s ib le      a p p lic a tio n   to     ra c is t

                                  chanting).

     3.    POLICE & CRIMINAL EVIDENCE ACT

                 U> ^i^rp«:rns1n^rbrens:d
                                        sp”i:rofebelireint0poS
                                                             sreP
                                                                ssai:n
                                  of o f f e n s i v e w e apons.


                  (b) ^“rora^resfcfSinr-^ttrecriv^iyrirfn/orsr1
                                   general        arrest       conditions          is me t .


     4.      CCTV       B e i n g p r o v i d e d by the ^ o o t b a i l                           ^ r b J e n E q u i p p e d to date),
     and     S e c o n d D i v i s i o n s (25 o ut of the
                                                              1 H n m e Office p h o t o g r a p h i c v e h i c l e s c a p a b l e             of
      L     l ^         ir U      u   r s     t m        n^       "ovlng pictures.                  A l s o    *   t r l p o d - „ o u n t e d Borne

      Office           evidence gathering                 c am e r a s .

      6.     LEAGUE GROUND R A T I O N S                             A m e nd e d so as                       to                                 to
      cans, bott les smoke bombs,      fireworks etc.
      anyone r e fu s i n g search by the police.
                                      P O P P L E W E L L F I N A L REPORT:

                                    homf    S E C R E T A R Y ' S ST A T E M E N T




1.         W i t h permission,               cno a k p r
                                        i/tr Speaker,
                                        Mr                     iI snuuiu
                                                                   should     like to m a k e        a

s t a t e m e n t on the Final R e p o r t of            the I n q u i r y into S a f e t y and

Control          at Sports G r o u n d s u n d e r      the c h a i r m a n s h i p of Mr J u s t i c e

p o p p l e w e l l w h i c h was p u b l i s h e d   today.         T h e H o u s e wil l       recall that

the i n q u i r y was e s t a b l i s h e d      f o l l o w i n g the fire at B r a d f o r d City

fo o t b a l l     ground     and the events           at B i r m i n g h a m Cit y on 11 M a y 1985.



 2.          N o w that the i n q u i r y ' s w o r k          is completed, m y Rt Hon                  friend

 the S e c r e t a r y of S t a t e for S c o t l a n d and I r e n e w the Government's

 gratitude           to the c h a i r m a n    and his         two   a s sessors        for the speed

 c o n s c i e n t i o u s n e s s w i t h .which t hey h ave d i s c h a r g e d          their difficult

 task,           in a d d i t i o n to d e a l i n g w i t h    the events           at the Heysel

 s t a d i u m in B r u s s e l s on 29 M a y and d i s c u s s i n g                the causes of

  hooliganism,             the Final R e p o r t m a k e s fift e e n           r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s on.

     s eparately ,       c r o w d s a f e t y and crowd control.



     3.      on      crowd control!           there are a number of                   reco m m e n d a t i o n s

     about the m a i n t e n a n c e of order            at football           grounds:           w i d e r powers

     of p o l i c e s e a r c h and     arrest;        a n e w o f f e n c e of d i s o r d e r l y conduct

     at sports grounds,              and    a review of          the    recent        alcohol       legislate

     as it appl i e s        to e x e c u t i v e boxes.         Continued           p r o g r e s s with

     membership          schemes      is also recommended.


                                                                                          /The Police              and   .
                                        - 2 -



4 .        The Police and Criminal Evidence Act which came into force

on 1 January has already extended the police powers of search and

of arrest in ways which will help them deal with troublemakers at

football grounds.         I shall examine Mr Justice P o p p l e w e l l ’s

 recommendations     for further powers when we see how the new Act

works      in practice.



 5.        on disorderly conduct, the Public Order Bill now before the
 House seeks to create a new offence which will cover hooliganism

 in football grounds as elsewhere.              I shall consider carefully the

 recommendation for a wider offence when we see how the offence in

 the Bill works in practice.



 6.          The Government has already taken a number of steps to deal

 with forms of misconduct about which Mr Justice popplewell

  expresses particular concern.           The Public Order Bill seeks to

  implement a recommendation in his Interim Report that the

  possession of smoke bombs and similar devices at sports grounds be

1 made an offence.        We have taken action to ban some other items

  which may be used as missiles.            The alcohol legislation which was

  passed in the summer makes it an offence to be in possession

  drinks can or bottle in any area of the grounds from which the

  pitch may be viewed directly.



      7.    During the Parliamentary proceedings representations were

      made about the effect on the revenue which clubs derive from



                                                            /executive boxes
executive boxes.     The Government    undertook to monitor the

situation,    and I have received some information from the Football

League and representations from a number of Rt Hon and hon

Members.     I have asked for more information from the football

authorities    and will wish to consider that carefully,     in the light

of the Inquiry's recommendation,       before deciding whether to allow

some relaxation of the controls on alcohol       in executive boxes.       I

shall report my conclusions to the House while the Public Order

Bill is before Parliament.



8.    On membership cards,    I fully endorse Mr Justice Popplewell's

recommendation.     The Public Order Bill contains provisions to

enable the courts to ban convicted football hooligans from

attending matches.     This shows our determination to do what we can

to keep troublemakers away from football grounds,         and to restore

the good name of British football.        It needs to be matched by

equally determined action by the football clubs and the football

authorities.     My Rt Hon friend the Prime Minister has emphasised

to them the value of an effective membership card system.          The

football     authorities have made some progress on this.      In the

 light of the exclusion order scheme in the Public Order Bill I

hope that they will now redouble their efforts.



 9.    i turn to crowd safety.        We accept the need to strengthen

 urgently the measures    already announced by and taken following my

 predecessor's statements on 13 May and 24 July.



                                                   /10.   We accept
10.      We    accept       the r e c o m m e n d a t i o n that      all sports         grounds       and

sports    stadia        in E n g l a n d    and W a l e s w i t h     a c c o m m o d a t i o n for more

than    10,000       spectators         and w h e r e A s s o c i a t i o n Football,           R ugby

League,       Rugby Union          and C r i c k e t      is pla y e d w h i c h      are not     already

designated under              the Saf e t y of Sports Grounds A c t                     should be so

designated.            C o n s u l t a t i o n s w ill    begin    i m m e d i a t e l y w i t h the sports

authorities           and o r g a n i s a t i o n s    c o n c e r n e d w i t h a v i e w to introducing

the n e c e s s a r y Orders         as q u i c k l y     as possible,          but    in any event by

the summer of this year.



11.       In S c o t l a n d my Rt Hon friend                  intends      to in t r o d u c e similarly,

as soo n as practicable,                   an O r d e r d e s i g n a t i n g   stadia       of clubs wit h

accommodation              for mor e than         10,000       spectators          in the First          and

Sec o n d D i v i s i o n s    of the S c o t t i s h Footb a l l League.



 12.      We    accept        the p r i n c i p l e of the         recommendations            that safety

 controls       sh o u l d be e x t e n d e d         to all sports        grounds       and stadia with

 stands       for over        500 spectators,              and to indoor sports               facilities

 with accommodation                for over           500 s pectators w h e r e         a d e quate controls

 do not       a l r e a d y exist.         W e need mor e         facts.        Pres e n t   cen t r a l l y - h e l d

 information           is   limited to stadia               and grounds w i t h a c c o m m o d a t i o n

 for    5,000 or more,             and indoor            premises with          an overall c a p a c i t y of

 more    than        1,000.       The    first        step wil l      be to e s t a b l i s h the full

 practical           effects      of these        r e c o m m endations.         All    relevant        local

 and    fire a u t h o r i t i e s      in England,          Wales     and S c o t l a n d   are to be

 invi t e d     to inspect          all such stands             and p r e mises        not p r e v i o u s l y

 inspected           and    report u p o n t h e m to my Rt Hon                 friend       and myself.

 Po w e r s    are    immediately          a v a i l a b l e u nder    both the S a f e t y of Sports



                                                                                /Grounds Act
Grounds Act and the Fire Precautions Act to deal with any

exceptional hazard which might be found in the course of the

inspections.         Similarly,   chief fire officers and firemasters will

be invited to keep under review the places they inspected under,

previous     initiatives    last year with the object of maintaining

safety standards at those places.                                            ,.


       j

13.        When we have considered these inspections we shall quickly

issue a consultative document          and propose ways of achieving the

objectives of the Inquiry's Final Report,          fitting this into the

review already under way on the future of the Fire Precautions

Act.       Further   legislation may well prove necessary.     There will be

 no avoidable risk meanwhile because any necessary emergency action

 can be taken under existing powers.



 14.       So far,    the figures this season show a marked improvement in

 the number of arrests and ejections          from football grounds.   Our

 measures against hooliganism should have a cumulative effect.               But

 it is too soon to be satisfied.           We have to deal not only with

 hooliganism but with safety;           not only with football grounds but

 with sports grounds        in general.    Thanks in large part to

 Mr Justice popplewell I believe we are on the right track.
