SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB                   6th March 1985



GROUND CAPACITIES




STANDING AREAS




                             Spion Kop                    1^,200

                             Terrace                       4,600

                             Bramall lane Ground           7,250


                                                          26,050



SEATING AREAS




                             John Street Stand             2,737
                 X^o
                             Bramall Lane Stand            2,958

                             New South Stand               7,!
                 (w )
                 ( )                                      39,73.1

    K      /^W-4

                 c »;




          •9
                             u K rrt^     ccrR'n'ric/V'Tfe -

                                      PART 3

                               Ground Capacity



The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the various areas .
of spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified below:-



Tivoli Terracing              5,094

Millmoor Terrace              1,096

Railway Terrace               5,304

Former B o y s ’ Enclosure      464

Main Stand Terrace            3,154

Seats                          3,407

                              18,519
                                 PART 4

                          Safety Stewards



The minimum number of Safety Stewards required for each function shall be .
as follows:
                                                                  12 Stewards
(1)   Manning of exits

(2)   Control and direction of spectators entering or leaving
                                                                   8 Stewards
      the Stadium

(3)   Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency
      including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire        2 Stewards


The Stewards shall be distributed as follows:

                                            Number required for each function
Section of Stadium
                                               U)           (2)          (3)


Millmoor Lane Gate 1                            2
Millmoor Lane Gate 2                            1
Masbrough Street Gate 3                         2
Masbrough Street Gate 4                         1
Masbrough Street Gate 5                         1
Masbrough Street Gate 6                         1
Masbrough Street Gate 7                         2
Masbrough Street Gate 8                         2
Millmoor Lane Upper Level
  Gate between Stands
Main Stand Lower and Upper
  Levels Roving Patrol
Main Stand Staircases to
                                                              3
  Standing Area
Tivoli Stand Walkways                                         3
Millmoor Lane Terrace
   (when large capacity crowd)
                        v o e S i s w f
                            SCHEDULE 3

                              PART 1
                            Crowd Capacity



              » '—      atio'n“        Z e l t T Z T l * Z Z ^ e foUowing

figures--
                                           16,850
Spion Kop
                                            5 567
South Stand Upper                            »
South Stand Lower                           3)310
         ,                                  4,465
West Stand
                                            7,200
West Terrace
                                            2 900
 North West Terrace
 North Stand
              ,                             9,004
                                           ------

         TotalCrowd Capacity                50,174


                                  PABT 2

                              Safety Stewards

  Tfce mu - u » number of Safct, Stewards r e a r e d for each function shaU
  be as follows:-
                                                                 26          stewards (2 per main
  (1)        Manning of exists                                                               exlt)
  (2\        Control and direction of spectators                            Stewards           omitory)
               entering or leaving the Stadium                    38
   m         patrolling the Stadium and dealing
               with any emergency including raising                          stewards (under South
               an alarm and extinguishing any small fire                                     stand)


   The Stewards shall be distributed as follow*-
                                                 Nnmher requirgdjo r e a c h J m c H o n -
    Sfiction of Stadium^                                        2             3


                                                      26
       Each Main Exit (13
                                                                       12
        South Stand
                                                                        8
        West Stand
                                                                       18
        North Stand
        Under South Stand
                                                                     W        ”* * '        ‘
                             SCHEDULE 3

                                 PART 1
                             Crowd Capacity

                                 j             thfi stadium aQd to the various areas
o^apeotator ^         t l^   n       within the 8tadium sha« not exceed the foUowing
figures:-
                                              16,850
Spion Kop
             i „                              5 ,5 67
South Stand Upper
                                               3 310
South Stand Lower                                ’
 Westi.o*
       Stand^                                 4-465
                                               7 ,2 0 0
West Terrace
                                               o 900
North West Terrace
           -                                   9, ooZ
 North Stand                                  — 1----

         Total Crowd Capacity                 50,174


                                     PAST 2

                                 Safety Stewards,

  The minimum number of Safety Steward, required for each function shail
  be as follows:-
                                                                   26         Stewards (2 per main
  (1)         Manning of exists                                                              exit)
  (2)         control and direction of spectators                             Stewards         omitory)
               entering or leaving the Stadium                      38
   m            Patrolling the Stadium and dealing
                  with  any emergency
                  w u n #i*y o m o i &v^vj including
                                           -----     -raising        2        Stewards (under South
                  an alarm and extinguishing any small fire                                   stand)


   The Stewards shall be distributed as follow * -
                                                     ]\Tnmhpr required for panh function_
    Section of Stadium,                                                ^         3


                                                          26
       Each Main Exit (13
                                                                         12
        South Stand
                                                                          8
        West Stand
                                                                         18
        North Stand
        Under South Stand
                 HF/EC/S83                                         28th April* 1978


 Dear Sir,

Safety Of Sports Grounds Act, 197S
QwlertOtt Stadium. Sheffield

With reference to my letter of the 6th April, and your mooting w 1th Mr. Fox
oa Monday Inst, I confirm that the attendance at Owlerton Stadium has been i'greed
by the Working Party at a maximum of 11,000, matte up as follows

(a)   Panorama Bur                                    200
fr)   Seating to front of Panorama Bar             1,200
(c>   Popular Enclosure                            2,800
<d)   Sjpdrtamon's Tavern                             200
(e)   Far Terrace                                  8, TOO
(0    South Terrace                                   Nil
(9)   Greyhound Bar                                   100
<h)   Greyhound Terrace                               800

                                         Total    11,000

Thla figure has been arrived at having regard only to the considerations of
structural safety and means of escape in an emergency, the question of lighting,
fire precautions, fire warning system s etc. to he dealt with when a more detailed
inspection is made, and is conditional on manned barrier* being established at
the following points:-

(a)   At the west end of the closed south terrace, adjoining the Greyhound
      Bar.

(b)   At the east end of the ciosod south terrace, to prevent access from
      spectators on the Far Terri'ce.

(c)   At the Northern end of the Fsr Terrace, ;pproxlm; tely two metres
      from the Sportsman's Tavern, so as to allow an emergency means of
      escape between the barrier and the Tavern, from the Popular Enclosure*


C. Cooper, E sq .,                                               It was agreed . . .
Secretary,
Sheffield Sports Stadium Limited,
The Stadium,
Owlerton, Sheffield,
South Yorkshire
Ski 2 DE
 C. Cooper, JSaq.                                                    23th April, 1976

                                      2.

 it was agreed thut when the following worka have beea carried out to the
 satisfaction of the Working Party, t dmlasion to the Greyhound Terrace could
 be increased from 890 to 1,800;-

 (a)   'III® ireraovfil or alteration of tho solid borrter to tho coot re of the
       Greyhound Terrace, to the etitisfsctiott of the Chief fJulldlag Surveyor
       of the Sheffield CUy Council.

 <b)   The formation of so emergency means of escape at the roar of the
       Greyhound Term co, leading to a concrete epron and steps outside,
       to view of the nature of the exiaUng {errata. Details to be «greed with
       tho Chief Fire Officer.

(°)        addition of step* to the cooon te apron outside the eoiergeney M it
       from tbo Greyhound Bar*

(d)     Work to Incret-ee the fir© resilien ce of the Greyhound Bar, which hr # «a
       iuprotecicd timber floor, supported on unprotected B .S.J'a over tho beer
        and liquor stores end general stores. Suoh work to bo to tho satisfaction      ;
       of tho Chief Firs Officer and the Chief Building Surveyor of tho Sheffield
        Cliy Council.

The currying out of this work .would, therefore, toorense tho ?-groad cnpacity of
the Stadium to 12,000, :»d s s mentioned at tho mooting on Monday last, this
figure could bo increjised further by tho carrying oat of further works, suoh ;-s
tho provision of crush barriers on the Popular fcnelesura «nd the Greyhound
Terrace, and tho provision of ant Is factory concreto terracing on the South
Terrace, but theso are matters which will bo deult with on tho projected detailed
inspection, after which you would be informed of tho exact nature of the works
r e t ir e d , and the numbers by which they would increase the capacity of the
Stadium, so that you would be in a position to judge the economic viability of
each improvement.

Wilt you please let mo know whan It will be convenient for iho detailed iixapaciion,
which H is fctttieipytOti willhot teke less thai two days, to be oarrlod out.

                                     Yours fruitfully,




                                     Chief Executive
                     J     -r 5___; *___________ '''                         ~     ' **                  *     '                            '*■                                         :--yr™




                                                   M etropolitan District


            F.A. Mailett Esq.,
            Chief Executive,         / <y       \                                                                                Department o f Planning fr Dd§i$ft
            South Yorkshire County CoUftcifj W :                                                                                 Director
            County Hall,           fi^l g: j?!                                                                                   Bernard Warren, RIBA, FRTPI
            Barnsley,              I5!!!!    ri                                                                                 Town Hall,
            S70 2TN                                                                                                             Sheffield S1 2HH
    't . F°r the attention of Mr,
        Your reference                                                           rence         b r / jns /sc                     Date        21 st April, 1976


         Safety of Sports Grounds Act. 1975
         Working Party Meeting at Sheffield on 25.4.76.
         at 14.00 hours

         Dear Sir, 7                      .

• •; I enclose herewith a copy of a note prepared by the represenatives of the building
     authority who attended the site survey at Sheffield Sports Stadium, Owlerton, on
         13th Aptil, 1976, for consideration at the above meeting.

M , ..Tour^ faithfully.




        Building Surveyor
■            ■   ■   '




                             >---r
                                AO,

       The office* deiling With this correspondence is ................... I r . . . S . t e u t f t n ............................................................   Tel 7 3 .41.6.9
       $,•               ■ \f: I' ■, ,
        :                   V         Kot’ Chief Architect. G. R. Adamson. Chief Planner. C. J. Dorrell, Chief Civil Engineer.
       ;•                b. J. m & i . Chief Quantity Surveyor. 1---------- - ■ ■ 1 -Building Surveyor.
                                                                                              -         T. N. Blackmore, Group Secretary.
                                                                         fa         ^
                                                                                    ^ICl'
            Meeting of Working Party on Safety .of. Sports grounds Aot. 1975


    Sheffield 3sorta Stadium. Owlerton

    Following on the request from the Sheffield Sports Stadium Limited for a safety
    certificate oovering an attendance of 15,000 for "stock oar” racing commencing
    10.5.76.* a survey was carried out at the ground bn the 13th April, 1976. In
    attendance at this survey were representatives of the Police and Fire Brigades,
    together with Mr.     [representing the South Yorkshire County, M e s s r s . a n d
            (Building Surveyors Division, Sheffield M.D.C.) and representatives of
    the stadium management

    The stadium was looked at from two aspects

    1.     Opening of "stook oar" raoing with a first meeting on 10th May, 1976, and
          involving a request to increase the maximum attendance from a previously
          agreed 12,500 to 15,000.

    2.    The requirements which would be required before a certificate under the
y         "Safety in Sports Grounds Aot, 1975" could be issued, with a view to the
          management carrying out a phased programme of repairs and improvements over
          a period.

    No clear decisions were taken following the survey but a further meeting of the
    Working Party was arranged for 2.00 p.m. on the 23rd April, 1976, in the Building
    Surveyor's Office, Town Hall, Sheffield.

    The following matters need to be discussed and decisions made at this meeting!-

    (a)   With regard to Item 1 above, a survey carried out in 1973 by the Local
          Authority and a consultant employed by the operators resulted in some
          strengthening work to remove structural defects, and while these certainly
          fulfilled the very limited aims, they did not involve a complete structural
          assessment, or full assessment for crowd safety, fire safety, means of escape
          etc., but as a result of it a crowd limitation of 12*500 was agreed.

          As no further work has been carried out there would certainly seam to be no
          basis for any increase in that figure and, indeed, the indications are that
©         possibly a reduced figure Bhould be imposed.

    (b)   With regard to Item 2 above, no plans or details have been provided by the
          operators and these would obviously be required before any survey leading to
          possible certification could be undertaken.

    (c)   Certain points became obvious during the very limited and quick survey which
          was carried out which indicated that further work would certainly be required
          in the following areast-

          The two bar/restaurants do not meet the requirements with regard to surface
          spread of flame or fire resistance, and the bar at the south end (Sherwood)
          has an unprotected timber floor supported on unprotected R.S.J's over the
          beer/liquor stores and general stores.

          The crash barriers generally consist only of 2^' diameter tubular construction
          which appears inadequate to withstand the specified forces, and they are below
          the height reoommended in the guide.

          The south terrace is in an extremely dilapidated condition and is stated not
          to be used. Arrangements will be needed to ensure that access could not be
          gained to this area.

          In the eastern terrace the slope, rise and going of the terracing appear to
        meet the requirements, but in the western terrace the treads slope towards
        the ground and this is considered to represent a danger in crowd conditions.

        With regard to this stand the escape distance from the seated area appears
        to be excessive and there is a degree of obstruction at one of the final
        exits.
        The race notice board at the south end appears, on a visual inspection, to
        be rather dilapidated and further examination is required.

    Prom all of the above it is obvious that a full structural survey of the whole
    stadium will be required, and it would seem that the operators shouldjOMider
    appointing their consultants to do this in conjunction with the suiveys carried
    out by the responsible authorities.

    This note only takes into account the comments from the very q u i c k survey carried
    out by the building authority representatives, and no doubt the Police and Fire
    Brigade representatives will have points to add to it. It will»                     ^
^   sufficient information for the Working Party to arrive at some dec 1b ions on the two
    points in question.
                                                 PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL
                                                 COPYRIGHT RESERVED NOT TO
                                                 BE PUBLISHED IN WHOLE OR IN
                                                 PART WITHOUT COMMITTEE APPROVAL

                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

REPORT OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE                    FERE SERVICE COMMITTEE
                                                 3RD JUNE, 1976

                   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

With reference to my report to this Committee on the 8th January, 1976, the working
parties of officers for each D istrict, the subject of Recommendation 2 In that report,
have now been set up. The first meeting has been held, and notes for the guidance
of applicants for safety certificates have been prepared, a copy of which is attached.

No Regulations have yet been issued under Section 6 of the Act, and I am therefore
not yet able to report on the question of fees to be charged for applications for certificates.

It had been hoped that the first Order under Section 1 of the Act, designating first and
second Division Football Grounds as stadia requiring certificates under the Act would
have been made by the Secretary of State on the 14th June, but It Is understood that
this will not now be so, and the Home Office have Indicated that they are not prepared
to commit themselves to an alternative date. This could well result in the Sheffield
United Football Club having to submit an application for a safety certificate during
the playing season, which could cause inconvenience, and I have suggested to the
Chairman of the Club that the D istrict Working Party could commence work now, In
advance of the Designation Order. By this means, It Is hoped that the work could be
substantially completed during the close season, and that, following the submission
of a formal application when the Designation Order is eventually made, a Safely
Certificate could be Issued alm ost immediately. With this In view, I have provisionally
arranged for a preliminary Inspection of the ground by the Working Party on the
14th June; Confirmation of this action is requested.

At the request of the Secretary of Sheffield Sports Stadium Limited, the Working Parly
have Inspected Owlerton Stadium. This request was made because of the Imminent
commencement of stock-car racing at the Stadium, and the Company wished to have
an opinion, as a matter of urgency, as to what the safe capacity of the Stadium should
be. Whilst any official figure must await either the making of a Designation Order by
the Secretary of State, or action by the County Council under Section 10 of the Act
(under which the County Council may apply to a Magistrates' Court for an Order
prohibiting or restricting the admission of spectators to a sports ground), the Company
were advised of the Working Party’s Informal view that, with the Stadium In Its existing
state, not more that 11,000 spectators should be admitted.

Your officers intend, very shortly, to commence looking at various sports grounds
within the County, to decide whether any action under Section 10 Is thought to be
necessary, and further reports will be made from time to time should any such action
be required.
                                                        F. A. MALLETT
                                                        Chief Executive
Department of Administration,
County Hall, Barnsley.

27th May, 1976
 HF/JD
                                                          Ye^USHtRc,   C w tST'(     c ii_



                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                              GENERAL SAFETY C E R T I F I C A T E ~

Address of premises for                             Oakwell Ground, \
which this Certificate is                           Barnsley,
issued.                                             South Yorkshire.

Occupier of the premises                            Barnsley Football Club Ltd.
        and
Holder of this Certificate.

Use of the premises in                              Football matches
respect of which this Certificate
is issued.

1.   This Certificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council in respect
      of the premises described above, being a Sports Stadium designated
      by Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as
      a stadium requiring a Safety Certificate.

2.   The terras and conditions set out in Part 2 of the Schedule attached hereto
     are hereby imposed.

3.   The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which the South
      Yorkshire County Council consider necessary or expedient to secure
      reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in
      respect of which this Certificate is used.

4.   The words used in this Certificate and the Schedule attached hereto have
      the meaning assigned to them by Part 1 of the Schedule and Section 17 of
      the Act.

5.   The Schedule and Plan    attached hereto all form part of this Certificate.

6.   This Certificate commences on the             day of^fovu-*-^ One thousand
      nine hundred and eighty        for an indefinite period.
                              •Yiv-e




      Date:                      J        ...   Signed:

                                                           Chief Executive on behalf of and
                                                           duly authorised by the South
                                                           Yorkshire County Council.
                         S C H E D U L E


                              PART 1

                          Interpretation
                                                        \
The Act                   means the Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975.

Authorised Person         means a person authorised in accordance with
                          Section 11 of the Act.

The Building Authority    means the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council.

The Chief Constable       means the Chief Constable for the time being of the
                          South Yorkshire Police or, as the case may require,
                          the Police Officer having charge of the Stadium on
                          the occasion of a Specified Activity.

The Chief Fire Officer    means the Chief Fire Officer for the time being of the
                          South Yorkshire County Fire Service or his designated
                          deputy.

The Certificate           means   the written General       Safety Certificateof
                          which   this Schedule forms       part.

The County Council        means   the South Yorkshire       County Council.

The Guide                 means the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" as
                          from time to time amended, issued  by the Home
                          Office, or such other code of practice as may be so
                          issued.

The Holder                means the applicant for and person to whom the
                          General Safety Certificate has been issued and who
                          is a 'qualified person' for the purposes of the Act.

Invalid Carriage          means a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled or
                          not, constructed or adapted for use for the carriage
                          of one person, being a person suffering from some
                          physical defect or disability.

The Plans                 means the document or documents attached to and
                          forming part of the General Safety Certificate and
                          signed by the person signing the Certificate and/or
                          any other document or documents which may be added
                          to or substituted for such document or documents
                          and signed on behalf of the County Council.

Specified Activity        means the playing of a Football match.

Spectator                 means any person occupying accommodation provided
                          for spectators at the stadium.

The Stadium               means the Oakwell Ground, Barnsley.

Structural Parts          includes structures, components, installations, fabric
                          and associated parts of the Stadium.

Vehicles                  includes invalid carriages.

                                                                              \
                General Terms and Conditions


The Holder or his nominee for the time being approved\in writing by
the County Council shall be present whenever the Stadium is used for
a Specified Activity, and he shall ensure that the terms and conditions
of the Certificate are complied with.

The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium
unless a Specified Activity is taking place.

The number of spectators to be admitted to the Stadium and to the
several areas of spectator accomnodation within the Stadium shall not
exceed the number specified in Part 3 of this Schedule.

Subject to the terms and conditions hereof and to the statutory controls
relating thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified
Activity for one or more of the following

(a)   the playing of music or singing;

(b)   the provision of news or comment associated with football;

(c)   the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities, programmes,
       nevs-sheets and souvenirs;

(d)   the sale and consumption of refreshments;

(e)    any other use ancillary to a Specified Activity which has the
       prior approval in writing of the County Council,

(1)   Where the prior written approval of the County Council is
       required under the terms and conditions hereof, an application
       for that approval shall be made by the Holder to the County
       Council at least 21 days before the occurrence in respect of
      which it is required.

(2)   If whilst the Certificate is in operation it is proposed to
       alter or extend the Stadium or any of its installations in a
       manner mentioned in Section 8 of the Act the Holder shall at
       least 21 days before the carrying out of the proposal is begun,
       give notice of the proposal to the County Council.

(1)   The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at least 21 days
       (or such shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent)
       prior to every Specified Activity the methods of admission to be
       employed in connection with the Specified Activity and the
      methods to be used for the segregation of home and visiting
       supporters.

(2)   The Holder shall refuse admission to, or evacuate spectators
       from, the Stadium or any part thereof at any time before or
       during a Specified Activity upon receiving instructions so to
       do from the Chief Constable.
7.    The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at every
      Specified Activity of an adequate number of police officers to secure
      the orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators and the number of
      police officers required at each Specified Activity shall be agreed
      between the Chief Constable and the Holder at least 21 days (or such
      shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent) before a
      Specified Activity takes place.

8.     The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
      of the County Council a suitably equipped First Aid Room and shall
      arrange in relation to a Specified Activity for the attendance of such
      numbers of qualified First Aid assistants as the Chief Constable may
      require and in any event not less than one such assistant for each
      2,000 spectators. The First Aid Room shall be adequately signed and
      shall be capable of being lit by the emergency power supply referred
      to in paragraph 12 of this Part of this Schedule. The Holder shall
      ensure that at all times a doctor employed or retained by the Holder
      is available to attend at the First Aid Room if required and that his
      whereabouts are known to those in the Police Central Control Room at
      the Stadium.

9.     The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity
      of a Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as may be
      required by Part 4 of this Schedule, and shall ensure that the Safety
      Stewards shall be (a) fit and capable to carry out their duties
      (b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by dress
      (d) provided with written instructions as to their general duties in
      order to carry out the following

      (1)   Manning of exits as indicated on the plans

      (2)   Control and direction of spectators entering   using or
             leaving the Stadium

      (3)   Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency including
             raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire.

      Training exercises relating to the action to be taken in the event of
      an emergency shall be held for Safety Stewards and Staff employed at
      the Stadium at least once every three months.

10.    The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked on the Plans,
      all doors and gates which form an egress route between any spectator
      accommodation and the public highway, or other open space outside the
      stadium, shall be so secured as to open immediately and easily from the
      inside and shall be manned at all times the Stadium is being used for
      a Specified Activity by at least the number of stewards required by
      Part 4 of this Schedule. All such doors or gates shall be opened by
      the stewards responsible and secured in the fully open position at a
      time agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable and at any other
      time on evacuation of the Stadium or a part thereof on being ordered
      so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the sounding of the alarm.

11.   (1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of
             the Chief Fire Officer exit signs over all exits from the Stadium
             and all exits from spectator accommodation therein and shall
             ensure that such exit signs may be illuminated by both the main
             and emergency lighting systems. Such supplementary illuminated
             signs in such locations as the Chief Fire Officer may require
             shall also be provided by the Holder.                         \
  The Holder shall ensure that the corridors, gangways and
  staircases indicated on the plans may be illuminated when
  required during a Specified Activity by both the main and
  emergency lighting systems.
                                                   %
  The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this^paragraph
  shall be illuminated whenever adequate natural light is
  deficient during a Specified Activity or as directed by the
  Chief Constable.

  All means of ingress to and egress from the Stadium and to ^
  and from any spectator accommodation therein shall be maintained
  free froirt obstruction and with non-slip and even surfaces and
  in particular stair coverings shall be secured and maintained
  so that they do not constitute a source of danger.

  The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of
  the Chief Fire Officer a separate emergency power supply for ^
  providing electricity sufficient to light all emergency lighting
  throughout the Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the
  communication systems within the Stadium, such emergency power
  supply to be operable independently of the main power supply
  and to come into automatic operation within ten seconds of the
  failure of the latter and to be capable of maintaining the
  necessary power output for a minimum of three hours from the
  failure of the main power supply.

   At least once annually a report as to the condition
   Emergency Power Supply certified by a Chartered Electnca
   Engineer shall be supplied to the Chief Fire Officer.

   Not less than three hours prior to the occurrence of a Specified
   Activity the emergency power supply shall be tested for a period
   of 30 minutes. Any defect revealed in this test shall be
   rectified before the coninencement ot the Specified Activity.

   A competent electrician employed or retained by the Holder
   shall be present during a Specified Activity.

   The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the
   satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer a fire warning system.

   The fire alarm system shall be tested periodically to the
   satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
the Chief Constable

   A Police Central Control Room which shall be provided with
   such a n c i l l a r y equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

    Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention
    room and for administrative purposes.

    A public address sytem which may be audible in all parts of the
    Stadium. The police shall, should they so wish, have the
    unrestricted right to use the public address system for police
    purposes and such purposes will have priority over t e peci
    Activity.
.   15.      (1)    The Holder shall at all times maintain all structural parts
                    of the stadium in sound order and to the appropriate and
                    relevant standards in the Guide and in all cases to the
                    satisfaction of the Council.             .

             (2)    The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance, repair
                    and renewal to the Stadium as may be required from time to
                    time by the County Council.

    16.      The Holder shall at all times maintain all operational parts of the
             Stadium (including the electrical and communications installations)
             and all emergency equipment in good and efficient working order to
             the satisfaction of the County Council and shall undertake such
             maintenance repair or renewal as may from time to time be necessary
             to maintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.

    17.      The notices specified on the Plans shall be maintained legible and
             unobstructed and in the positions allotted on the Plans.

    18.      (1)     The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium
                    shall be restricted to those areas indicated on the Plans
                    unless otherwise approved for emergency purposes by a Police
                    Officer in uniform.

             (2)   The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the
                    satisfaction of the County Council the access routes for
                    emergency vehicles shown on the plans.

    19.      The Holder shall ensure that members of the Press, T.V. and radio
             services having access to the public and playing areas of the Stadium
             are identifiable as such.

    20   .   Television cameras and portable equipment shall be placed only   in
             such   positions as may be agreed between the Holder and   the Chief
             Constable.

    21   .   (1)   Liquid refreshments may be sold or distributed at the Stadium
                    only in containers constructed from soft plastic or other
                    soft material, or as allowed by the Licensing Justices.

             (2)   No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other materials
                    which in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use
                    as missiles shall be permitted to remain in any part of the
                    Stadium to which spectators have access.

    22   .   No accumulation of flammable rubbish, dirt, surplus material or goods
             shall be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium except in a
             place and quantity approved in writing by the Chief Fire Officer.

    23.      No flammable gases or liquids shall be stored or used in any part of
             the Stadium without the prior written approval of the Chief Fire
             Officer.




                                                                                     \
24.   The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably
      qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
      a representative of the Council within    months of the date of the
      Certificate and at least once in each period of 12 months thereafter
      and the Holder shall ensure that after each inspection there is
      provided to the County Council by the said Chartered'Engineer a
      certificate as to the current compliance or non-compliance with good
      engineering and building practices and with the relevant British
      Standard Specifications and Codes of Practice and with the appropriate
      provisions and recommendations of the Guide of all structural parts
      of the Stadium excluding the crush barriers and handrails.

25.   (1)   The Holder shall arrange for all crush barriers and handrails
            within the Stadium to be tested in accordance with the
            appropriate provisions of the Guide by a suitably qualified
            Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
            a representative of the County Council within G months of the
            date of this Certificate and for the results thereof to be
            notified in writing to the County Council.

      (2)(i) The Holder shall ensure that not more than Co months after the
             date of this Certificate and thereafter not less than once in
             each period of 12 months a representative sample of crush
             barriers and handrails amounting to not less than 20% of the
             total number of such barriers and rails is tested in accordance
             with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
             (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a representative of
             the County Council and the results thereof notified in writing
             to the County Council;

        (ii) a record shall be kept of those crush barriers and handrails
             so tested and a barrier so tested shall not be tested again
             within a period of    years thereafter but shall be tested
             again within a period of 5jj years thereafter.

26.    The Holder shall within & months of the date of this certificate and
      thereafter not less than once in each period of five years in respect
      of new installations (and such lesser period as the Chief Fire Officer
      may require in respect of other installations) supply to the Chief
      Fire Officer the certificate of an independent electrical engineer
      as to the current compliance or non-compliance of the electrical
      installation within the Stadium with Section E of the I.E.E. Regulations
      or other sections or Regulations for the time being in force relating
      to the Electrical Equipment of Buildings.

27.    The Holder shall arrange for all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and
      other water supply within the Stadium to be inspected and tested as
      appropriate at least once annually by a competent person to the
      satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

28.    The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be
      made available for inspection at all reasonable time to Authorised
      Persons:

      (1)    A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the Stadium
             during a Specified Activity and to each area of spectator
             accommodation therein mentioned in Part 3 of this Schedule.



                                                                             \
                                                                                 x
      (2)    A record of any accident or incident occurring whilst the
             Stadium is in use for a Specified Activity which causes injury
             to a spectator’, such record to include the name, address, age
             and sex of the spectator injured, the"nature of the injury
             and how it was caused, as far as can be ascertained by diligent
             inquiry, and the location of the incident. The Holder shall
             provide a written report to the County Council within 48 hours
             of all such accidents or incidents.

      (3)   A record of the training and instruction given and the exercises
            held in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 9 of this
            part of this Schedule such record to include the date and time
            and duration of the instruction or exercise, the name of the
            person giving instruction, the nature of the instruction or
            exercise, and the name(s) of the person(s) instructed.

      (4)    A record of all inspections, tests, maintenance, repairs and
             renewals carried out at the Stadium.

29.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council
      shall have the right at any time to require the Holder at his own
      expense to arrange for the conduct of any inspection or test which the
      County Council may consider to be necessary in the interests of
      securing reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for a
      Specified Activity.




                                                                               *




                                                                               i
                                                                               I
                                                                               !
                                      PART 3

                               Ground Capacity


The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the various areas
of spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified below:-


Main Stand Terrace                                        3,900
(Spion Kop end)

Main Stand Terrace                                        3,700
(Pontefract Road end)

Pontefract Road Stand and Terrace                        10,200

Brewery Stand and Terrace




Spion Kop and Former Boys Enclosure

Main Grandstand                                           2,i6 ep
(Seated areas)

iHs ctlo\uz<J[
  VJ          dXusj-ri 'Z.'B


                                                            S’S

                                                        •*(*, *[<{




                                                                             x
                              PART 4

                         Safety Stewards

The minimum number of safety Stewards required for each function shall be
as follows:                                                '        ;
                                          /
(1)  Manning of exits                                           12 Stewards
(2)  Control and direction of spectators entering or leaving
     the Stadium                                                14 Stewards
(3)  Patrolling the Stadium anddealing with any emergency
     including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire       £ Stewards

The Stewards shall be distributed as follows:

Section of Stadium                         Number required for each function
                                              (1)         (2)         (3)

Final Exit Gates Nos. 1 to 12                   12
Internal Gates between -
(a) Brewery Stand and Spion Kop
(b) Spion Kop and Main Stand
    Terrace
(c) Pontefract Road Terrace and
    Main Stand Terrace
(d) Rear of Pontefract Road Stand
    and Brewery stand                                     1
Main Stand                                                2
Spion Kop                                                 2
Pontefract Road Stand and Terrace                         2
Brewery Stand and Terrace                                 2
Main Stand Terraces                                       2
Brewery Stand
Main Stand
^>1
                     c R f m f itATfc     -   ^        -   j   ,

                                 PART 3

                           Ground Capacity

The number of spectators admitted to the  Stadium and to the various areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figur s
specified below


Main Stand Terrace                                3,900
(Spion Kop end)

Main Stand Terrace                                3,700
(Pontefract Road end)

Pontefract Road Stand and Terrace                 10,200

Brewery Stand and Terrace                          9,400

Spion Kop and Former Boys Enclosure                7,500

Main Grandstand                                    2,164
(Seated areas)

Disabled Stand

      Wheel Chairs         23
      Fixed Seats          12
      Loose Seats           20                    ..
                                                  36,919
                              PART 4

                          Safety Stewards

The minimum number of Safety Stewards required for each function shall be as
follows

 (1)   Manning of exits                                            12 stewards
 (2)   Control and direction of spectators entering or leaving
        the Stadium                                                14 stewards
 (3)    Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency
        including raising^jyi alarm and extinguishing any fire '    3 Sfeawards

The Stewards shall be distributed as follows

Section of Stadium                          Number required for each function
                                                (1 ) .     (2 )        (3)

Final Exit Gates Nos. 1 to 12                   12
 Internal Gates between -
 (a) Brewery Stand and Spion Kop                            1
 (b) Spion Kop and Main Stand
     Terrace                                                1
 (c) Pontefract Road Terrace and
     Main Stand Terrace
 (d) Rear of Pontefract Road Stand
     and Brewery Stand                                     1
Main Stand                                                 2
Spion Kop                                                  2
Pontefract Road Stand and Terrace                          2
Brewery Stand and Terrace                                  2
Main Stand Terraces                                        2
Brewery Stand
                                                                        1
Main Stand
                                                                        1
Disabled Stand
                                                                        1
                  ,■:<■;-y>I,/V.fV*«S.-.. ■■•--• ■ ..                        -   -   • .

                            ^I^mlFlCATEr                         -

                                                        PART 3

                                            Ground Capacity

The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the various areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified below


Main Stand Terrace                                                   3,900
(Spion Kop end)

Main Stand Terrace                                                   3,700
(Pontefract Road end)

Pontefract Road Stand and Terrace                                    10,200

Brewery Stand and Terrace                                            9,400

Spion Kop and Former Boys Enclosure                                  7,500

Main Grandstand                                                      2,164
(Seated areas)

Disabled Stand

     Wheel Chairs                          23
     Fixed Seats                           12
     Loose Seats                           20 ■                          55
                                                                     36,919
                               PART 4

                          Safety Stewards

 The minimum number of Safety Stewards required for each function shall be as
 follows:-

 (1)   Manning of exits
                                                                  12 Stewards
 (2)   Control and direction of spectators entering or leavinq
        the Stadium
                                                                  14 Stewards
 (3)   Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency
        including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire      3 Stewards

The Stewards shall be distributed as follows:-

Section of Stadium
                                            Number required for each function
                                                (1) .________ (2)      (3)

Final Exit Gates Nos. 1 to 12                    12
 Internal Gates between —
 (a) Brewery Stand and Spion Kop
                                                            1
 (b) Spion Kop and Main Stand
     Terrace
                                                           1
 (c) Pontefract Road Terrace and
     Main Stand Terrace
                                                           1
 (d) Rear of Pontefract Road Stand
     and Brewery Stand
                                                           1
Main Stand
                                                           2
Spion Kop
                                                           2
Pontefract Road Stand and Terrace
                                                           2
Brewery Stand and Terrace
                                                           2
Main Stand Terraces
                                                           2
Brewery Stand
Main Stand
                                                                       1
                                                                       1
Disabled Stand
                                                                       1
                               PART 3

                         Ground Capacity

The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the various areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified below:-


Main Stand Terrace                         3,900
(Spion Kop end)

Main Stand Terrace                         3,700
(Pontefract Road end)

Pontefract Road Stand and   Terrace        10,200

Brewery Stand and Terrace                   9,400

Spion Kop and Former Boys Enclosure         7,500

Main Grandstand                             2,164
(Seated areas)

Disabled Stand

     Wheel Chairs       23
     Fixed Seats        12
     Loose Seats         2(3                   55
                                           36,919
                              PART 4

                          Safety Stewards

 The minimum number of Safety Stewards required for each function shall be as
 foll o w s :-

 (1)   Manning of exits                                            ,0      ,
 n \   r* 4. i   j i.                                             12 Stewards
 U)    Control and direction of spectators entering or leavinq
       the Stadium                                                ,„
 (3)                                                               14 Stewards
       *3    j        sta(3ium and dealing with any emergency
       including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire       3 Stewards

The Stewards shall be distributed as follows:

Section of Stadium
                                            Number required for each function
                                                (1) ■
                                                    ________ (2)            (3)

Final Exit Gates Nos. 1 to 12                   12
Internal Gates between -
 (a) Brewery Stand and Spion Kop
 (b) Spion Kop and Main Stand
     Terrace
 (c) Pontefract Road Terrace and
     Main Stand Terrace
(d) Rear of Pontefract Road Stand
     and Brewery Stand
                                                            1
Main Stand
                                                           2
Spion Kop
                                                           2
Pontefract Road Stand and Terrace                          2
Brewery Stand and Terrace
                                                           2
Main Stand Terraces
                                                           2
Brewery Stand
Main Stand
                                                                        1
                                                                        1
Disabled Stand
                                                                        1
                            ■£>RhFV


                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                  INTERIM GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

Address of premises for                      Belle Vue Ground,
which this Interim Certificate               Doncaster.
is issued.                                   DN4 5HT

Occupier of the premises                     Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd.
        and
Holder of this Interim Certificate.

Use of the premises in respect               Football matches
of which this Interim Certificate
is issued.

1.    This Interim Certificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council
      in respect of the premises described above, being a Sports Stadium
      designated by Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds
      Act, 1975, as a stadium requiring a Safety Certificate.

2.    The terms and conditions set out in Part 2 of the Schedule attached
      hereto are hereby imposed.

3.    The termsand conditions hereby imposed are those which the South
      Yorkshire County Council consider necessary or expedient to secure
      reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in
      respect of which this Interim Certificate is used.

4.    The words used in this Interim Certificate and the Schedule attached
      hereto have the meaning assigned to them by Part 1 of the Schedule and
      Section 17 of the Act.

5.    The Schedule and Plans attached hereto all form part of this Interim
      Certificate.

6.    This Interim Certificate commences on the            day of
      One thousand nine hundred and eighty six for an indefinite period.




      Date:                                  Signed:

                                                       County Secretary on behalf
                                                       of and duly authorised by
                                                       the South Yorkshire County
                                                       Council.
                         S C H E D U L E

                             PART 1

                         Interpretation

The Act                               means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act,   1975.

Authorised Person                     means a person authorised in accordance with
                                      Section 11 of the Act.

The Building Authority                means the Doncaster Metropolitan Borough
                                      Council.

The Chief Constable                   means the Chief Constable for the time being
                                      of the South Yorkshire Police or, as the case
                                      may require, the Police Officer having charge
                                      of the Stadium on the occasion of a
                                      Specified Activity.

The Chief Fire Officer                means the Chief Fire Officer for the time
                                      being of the South Yorkshire County Fire
                                      Service or his designated deputy.

The Certificate                       means the written Interim General Safety
                                      Certificate of which this Schedule forms part.

The County Council                    means the South Yorkshire County Council.

The Guide                             means the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds"
                                      as from time to time amended, issued by the
                                      Home Office, or such other code of practice
                                      as may be sq issued.

The Holder                            means the applicant for and person to whom the Interim
                                      General Safety Certificate has been issued and
                                      who is a 'qualified person' for the purposes
                                      of the Act.

Invalid Carriage                      means a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled
                                      or not, constructed or adapted for use for the
                                      carriage of one person, being a person
                                      suffering from some physical defect or
                                      disability.

The Plans                             means the document or documents attached to and
                                      forming part of the Interim General Safety
                                      Certificate and signed by the person signing
                                      the Certificate and/or any other document or
                                      documents which may be added to or substituted
                                      for such document or documents and signed on
                                      behalf of the County Council.

Specified Activity                    means the playing of a Football match.

Spectator                             means any person occupying accommodation provided
                                      for spectators at the stadium.

The Stadium                           means the Belle Vue Ground, Doncaster.

Structural Parts                      includes structures, components, installations,
                                      fabric and associated parts of the Stadium.

Vehicles                              includes invalid carriages.
                           PART 2

               General Terms and Conditions


The Holder or his nominee for the time being approved in writing by
the County Council shall be present whenever the Stadium is
a Specified Activity, and he shall ensure that the terms and conditions
of the Certificate are complied with.

The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium
unless a Specified Activity is taking place.

The number of spectators to be admitted to the Stadium and to the                     ,
several areas of spectator accommodation within the Stadium shal
exceed the number specified in Part 3 of this Schedule.

Subject to the terms and conditions hereof and to the s^a^ ° ^ i^ ntr°1S
relating thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified
Activity for one or more of the following.

(a)    the playing of music or singing;

(b)    the provision of news or conment associated with                   football;

 (c)   the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities, programmes,
       nevs-sheets and souvenirs;

 (d)   the sale and consumption of refreshments;

 (e)   any other use ancillary to a Specified Activity which has the
        prior approval in writing of the County Council.

 (1)   Whore the prior written approval of the County Council is
        required under the terms and conditions hereof, an application
        for that approval shall be made by the Holder to the County
        Council at least 21 days before the occurrence in respect ot
        which it is required.

 (21   If whilst the Certificate is in operation it is proposed to
        alter or extend the Stadium or any of its installations in a
        manner mentioned in Section 8 of the Act the o er sla
        least 21 days before the carrying out of the proposal l    g                      .
        give notice of the proposal to the County Council.

 (1)   The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at least 21 days
 '      (or such shorter tine to which the Chief
        prior to every Specified Activity the m   e   _of-admission
                                                      t   h   o   d   s


        employed in connection with the Specified Activity and t e
        methods to be used for the segregation of home and visiting
         supporters.

  P)    The Holder shall refuse admission to, or evacuate spectators
        from, the Stadium or any part thereof at any time before or
        during a Specified Activity upon receiving instructions so
        do from the Chief Constable.
The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at every
Specified Activity of an adequate number of police officers to secure
the orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators and the number of
police officers required at each Specified Activity shall be agreed
between the Chief Constable and the Holder at least 21 days (or such
shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent) before a
Specified Activity takes place.

The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
of the County Council a suitably equipped First Aid Room and shall
arrange in relation to a Specified Activity for the attendance of such
numbers of qualified First Aid assistants as the Chief Constable may
require and in any event not less than one such assistant for each
2,000 spectators. The First Aid Room shall be adequately signed and
shall be capable of being lit by the emergency power supply referred
to in paragraph 12 of this Part of this Schedule. The Holder shall
ensure that at all times a doctor employed or retained by the Holder
is available to attend at the First Aid Room if required and that his
whereabouts are known to those in the Police Central Control Room at
the Stadium.

The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity
of a Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as may be
required by Part 4 of this Schedule, and shall ensure that the Safety
Stewardsshal1 be (a) fit and capable to carry out their duties
(b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by dress
(d) provided with written instructions as to their general duties in
order to carry out the following:-

(1)   Manning of exits as indicated on the plans

(2)   Control and direction of spectators entering using or
       leaving the Stadium

(3)   Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency including
      raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire.

Training exercises relating to the action to be taken in the event of
an emergency shall be held for Safety Stewards and Staff employed at
the Stadium at least once every three months.

The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked on the Plans,
all doors and gates which form an egress route between any spectator
accommodation and the public highway, or other open space outside the
stadium, shall be so secured as to open immediately and easily from the
inside and shall be manned at all times the Stadium is being used for
a Specified Activity by at least the number of stewards required by
Part 4 of this Schedule. All such doors or gates shall be opened by
the stewards responsible and secured in the fully open position at a
time agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable and at any other
time on evacuation of the Stadium or a part thereof on being ordered
so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the sounding of the alarm.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of
      the Chief Fire Officer exit signs over all exits from the Stadium
      and all exits from spectator acconmodation therein and shall
      ensure that such exit signs may be illuminated by both the main
      and emergency lighting systems. Such supplementary illuminated
      signs in such locations as the Chief Fire Officer may require
      shall also be provided by the Holder.
(2)     The Holder shall ensure that the corridors, gangways and
        staircases indicated on the plans may be illuminated when
        required during a Specified Activity by both the main and
        emergency lighting systems.

(3)     The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph
        shall be illuminated whenever adequate natural light is
        deficient during a Specified Activity or as directed by the
        Chief Constable.

(A)     All means of ingress to and egress from the Stadium and to
        and from any spectator acconinodation therein shall be maintained
        free from obstruction and with non-slip and even surfaces and
        in particular stair coverings shall be secured and maintained
        so that they do not constitute a source of danger.

(1)     The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of
        the Chief Fire Officer a separate emergency power supply for ^
        providing electricity sufficient to light all emergency lighting
        throughout the Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the
        communication systems within the Stadium, such emergency power
        supply to be operable independently of the main power supply
        and to come into automatic operation within ten seconds of the
        failure of the latter and to be capable of maintaining the
        necessary power output for a minimum of three hours from the
        failure of the main power supply.

(2 )    At least once annually a report as to the condition of the
        Emergency Power Supply certified by a Chartered Electrical
        Engineer shall be supplied to the Chief Fire Officer.

(3)     Not less than three hours prior to the occurrence of a Specified
        Activity the emergency power supply shall be tested for a p e n o
        of 30 minutes. Any defect revealed in this test shall be
        rectified before the conmencement of the Specified Activity.

(4)     A competent electrician employed or retained by the Holder
        shall be present during a Specified Activity.

 (1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the
        satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer a fire warning system.

 (2 )    The fire alarm system shall be tested periodically to the
         satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
of the Chief Constable:-
         A Police Central Control Room which shall be provided with
 (1)
         such ancillary equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

 (2 )    Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention
         room and for administrative purposes.

 (3)     A public address sytem which may be audible in all parts of the
         Stadium. The police shall, should they so wish, have the
         unrestricted right to use the public address system or po ice
         purposes and such purposes will have priority over the Specified
         Activity.
(1)    The Holder shall at all times maintain all structural parts
       of the stadium in sound order and to the appropriate an
       relevant standards in the Guide and in all cases to the
       satisfaction of the Council.

(2)    The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance, repair
       and renewal to the Stadium as may be required from time to
       time by the County Council.

The Holder shall at all times maintain all operational parts of the
Stadium (including the electrical and communications installations)
and all emergency equipment in good and efficient working order to
the satisfaction of the County Council and shall undertake such
maintenance repair or renewal as may from time to time be necessary
to maintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.

The notices specified on the Plans shall be maintained legible and
unobstructed and in the positions allotted on the Plans.

(1)    The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium
       shall be restricted to those areas indicated on the Plans
       unless otherwise approved for emergency purposes by a Police
       Officer in uniform.

(2)    The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the
       satisfaction of the County Council the access routes for
       emergency vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that members of the Press, T.V. and radio
services having access to the public and playing areas of the Stadium
are identifiable as such.

Television cameras and portable equipment shall be placed only in
such positions as may be agreed between the Holder and the Chie
Constable.

 (1)   Liquid refreshments may be sold or distributed at the Stadium
       only in containers constructed from soft plastic or other
       soft material, or as allowed by the Licensing Justices.

 p)    No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other materials
       which in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use
        as missiles shall be permitted to remain in any part of the
        Stadium to which spectators have access.

 No accumulation of flammable rubbish, dirt, surplus material or goods
 shall be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium e*cept in a
 place and quantity approved in writing by the Chief Fire Officer.

 No flammable gases or liquids shall be stored or used in any part of
 the Stadium without the prior written approval of the Chief H r e
 Officer.
The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably
qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or C i v i l ) in th*
a representative of the Council within      months of th*              f
Certificate and at least once in each p e r i o d * l\ - n t h s thereafter
and the Holder shall ensure that after each inspection there 1
              fs%oT,rcr'"cb
                          o;rra„:rd
                                  orcro"ro:pnLcrwu, gooa
provisions and recommendations of the Guide of all structure                   p
of the Stadium excluding the crush barriers and handrails.

(1)      The Holder shall arrange for allcrush      b a  and handrails
                                                          r r   i e r   s


         within the Stadium to be tested in accordance with the
         appropriate provisions of the Guide by a suitably qualified
         Catered. Engineer (Structural or civil) In the P " ^ " “ o°fthe
         a representative of the County Council xithii.   months of the
         date of this Certificate and for the results thereo
         nptified in writing to the County Council.

 (2)(i) The Holder shall ensure that not more than     months
        date of this Certificate and thereafter not less than once
        each period of 12 months a representative sample of c
        barriers and handrails amounting to not less than 20% of the
        t o t a l number of such barriers and rails is      in accordance
                                                                 t e s t e d


        with the Cuide by a suitably qualified Chartered Enginee
         (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a reP?*?e " t ^ :\ r i t i n g
         the County Council and the results thereof notified in w n t i g
          to the County Council;

      (ii) a record shall be kept of those crush barriers and
           so tested and a barrier so tested shall not be teste                    g
           within a period of    years thereafter but shall be
           again within a period of 5} years thereafter.

 The Holder shall within     months of the date of
 thereafter not less than once m each period of       y                                officer
 of new installations (and such lesser period as the Chief F
 may require in respect of other installations) supply^to the                  Lh
 Fire Officer the certificate of an independent ele^ l“ J
 as to the current compliance or n o n compliance o                            Regulations
 installation within the Stadium with Section E of the I.E.fc.                 Keg
 o r other sections or Regulations forthe time being in force                  relating
  to the Electrical Equipment of Buildings.

  The Holder shall arrange for all fire extinguishers, fire M " " ts and
  other water supply within the Stadium to be inspected and test
  appropriate at least once annually by a competent person to the
  satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

  The Holder shall make and keep the following records which ^ a u j j e
  miade available for inspection at all reasonable
  Persons:

  (1)      A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to th« J ^ dium
           during a Specified Activity and to each area °J\sp®c . -
           accommodation therein mentioned in Part 3 of this c
(2)     A record of any accident or incident occurring whilst the
       Stadium is in use for a Specified Activity which causes injury
       to a spectator, such record to include the name, address, age
       and sex of the spectator injured, the nature of the injury
       and how it was caused, as far as can be ascertained by diligent
       inquiry, and Lhe location of the incident. The Holder shall
       provide a written report to the County Council within 48 hours
       of all such accidents or incidents.

(3)     A record of the training and instruction given and the exercises
       held in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 9 of this
       part of this Schedule such record to include the date and time
       and duration of the instruction or exercise, the name of the
       person giving instruction, the nature of the instruction or
       exercise, and the name(s) of the person(s) instructed.

(A)     A record of all inspections, tests, maintenance, repairs and
       renewals carried out at the Stadium.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council
shall have the right at any time to require the Holder at his own
expense to arrahge for the conduct of any inspection or test which the
County Council may consider to be necessary in the interests of
securing reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for a
Specified Activity.
                                PART 3

                            Ground Capacity

The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the various areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified below:-

Main Stand (seats)                                  1,259
Main Stand (terrace)                                2,500*
Popular Stand Terrace                               4,000*
Rossington End Terrace                              1 , 000*
North End Terrace                                   2 , 000 *
                                                   10,759


*May be increased above these figures upon the areas fully complying with the
requirements of the Act and the Guide (precise figures to be determined once the
scope and extent of the upgrading works are notified and agreed).
                                   PART 4

                              Safety Stewards

The minimum number of safety Stewards required for each function shall
be as follows:

(1) Manning of exits                                             10 Stewards
(2) Control and direction of spectators entering or leaving
     the Stadium                                                  7 Stewards
(3) Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency
     including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire        4 Stewards

The Stewards shall be distributed as follows:

Section of Stadium                                 Number required for each function
------------------                                   (1)         (2)________ (3)

Exit   Gate No.l, Rossington End Terrace
Exit   Gate No.2, Main Stand (East Terrace)
Exit   Gate No.3, Main Stand (Block "A")
Exit   Gate No.4, Main Stand (Block "B")
Exit   Gate No.5,Main Stand (Block "C")
Exit   Gate No.6,Main Stand (North Terrace)
Exit   Gate No.7,North End
Exit   Gate No.8, North End
Exit   Gate No.9, Popular Stand Terrace
Exit   Gate No.10, Popular Stand Terrace
Main   Stand Staircase (Block "A")
Main   Stand Staircase (Block "B")
Main   Stand Staircase (Block "C")
Main   Stand Entrance to Directors Box
Main   Stand (upper level)
Mair   Stand (Executive Club Lounge)
Main   Stand (Guest Lounge and Directors Lounge)
Main     Stand (Ground Floor)
Main     Stand Emergency Staircase (Block "A")
Main     Stand Emergency Staircase (Block "B")
Main     Stand Emergency Staircase (Block "C")
^& es$jr       ^p«--r

                                          ^<fc4££C                 ©         ^     j       t      c        f           c     j        |47S



     1       Wv«^               k^A>0           L&^L              '“C              '             U                 L                 ^^<X2Vv-l^                ''$■<£.

                                                                                           K **& < k               /ZlStr



 tL                                       ~tfc\i2            -\>-c£aX )                fiP'fc—       "tfeja.       ^<s-J-t/ctXv1         C&<-cvcx*_i?       ”S ^ cS r

" t£ \il        (X ^ S ^ v v t^ U s^ s.    ”~ ^ . V a ^      ..    -<?"•£—       '~&&.         'fegllcz.           V t f * < 2 .-   Ztr~y&<^i.*Jl
 ho.              OA-fc<&o(u2.                S / 't -.......      W > 1 ^ ----r-^-____ ^ f r © - ©                        _Jk^^ofc.uvLe>           ? ►UV/sS-i'tM^
 r                         *    'f                         YY *                     -O *                       _                          -A                    y
     va    ........<29v _^£a^   s -v^                     vJ' a*<-^a                                   1iM£L____ ................................. _.._ c X
r$va             jl-cC                                                                               .. ..................                          -           ___
                 'W ,y. uCo                f


^>| &</U, "* A       \^,^ u   m   . *SC<tw4                     i

             ^Ej^r       M o ,         I




                                                                0/        (3 ;


                                  C "t ^
X(<£aU   k     ^vcfcvetwt ( %(<>ii<                    "j^

  Vicu/v.        *?>fc-t£

                                                       fc



                                                     ■ ' c 1'        I.




 I^yit— 1 ^          *T'

 C, %^CXJLf\<^$iiP<}




 Vttf-uw         <S X x ^ - ^



  fcs*^u2XAOfe'iA-<-^_     C{ a j^ )                     j? ^


 ( x x w a a J l ^Fl^ejr V t ^ - ^             i h   ^ j (

  O ^ L ^ t                       - t \    iK?^,
                                                                             w


te?<cc                          ' ^       t

Vfdwv.          ^ >\ ^c u ". \> c k                     / 'o-rv<i- ^ y



^Lr*cfc           tsi t               ^                             v

H       » * v     5   ^    _   J          ( ^ ( f r c A   ,   *f\'j          I




bKcC                  M o ,               M -•

    v     w           < a z -^ (                       k in k     " fe O         i


    Eyvt?                                 S

    T i A                                              ( W w A       ^   9   ^



    fc*>scc                    M o                &




    ^xC C

        K j e-^Civ                 -fc.i\-^(                                 ^



    -fcx-^c c             (V5 e           ^

        (VjfiHr^Xv              ^4/w(                                        I



    U ^dC              N i o t                ^

        PvS^'A/LglJJ'                 '‘S X ^ V ^                                i


        t ^tr             K5o ,                   10

        ’P^fp-.vLcMT                  *> Ui^v\^c('                               1
                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                                   GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

Address onpremises for                              ;15'et(<a v/vA-e        t
which th~iJ[T?ertif icate is
issued.

Occupier of the premises                             M&uCe&txf Football Club Ltd.
        and
Holder of this|^Certificate.

Use of the premises in                        Football matches
respect of which thisj^Cer^T'ficate
is issued.
       _~i.iiEvvvv\
1.   ThisiCertificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council in respect
     of the premises described above, being a Sports Stadium designated
     by Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as
     a stadium requiring a Safety Certificate.

        The terms and conditions set out in Part 2 of the Schedule attached hereto
        are hereby imposed.

        The terms    and conditions      hereby imposed are      those which theSouth
        Yorkshire    County Council      consider necessary      or expedient tosecure
        reasonable   safety gt^th^e^Stadinm when it is in use for an activity in
        respect of   which this^Certificate is used.
                             '3-vCE2't-Wv^#
4.      The words used in this^Certificate and the Schedule attached hereto have
        ■the meaning assigned to them by Part 1 of the Schedule and Section 17 of
        the Act.
                                                                       ~X
5.      The Schedule and Plans attached hereto all form part of this^Certificate.
          "^ivAjCLv-WiA.
6   .   This^Certificate commences on the           day of       One. thousand
        nine hundred' and eighty .^iy for an indefinite period.




        Date:                                   Signed:

                                                          f a &   M   Q   on behalf of and
                                                          duly authorised by the South
                                                          Yorkshire County Council.
                         S C H E D U L E


                              PART 1

                          Interpretation

The Act                    means the Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975.

Authorised Person          means a person authorised in accordance with
                           Section 11 of the Act.

The Building Authority     means the          Metropolitan Borough Council.

The Chief Constable        means the Chief Constable for the time being of the
                           South Yorkshire Police or, as the case may require,
                           the Police Officer having charge of the Stadium on
                           the occasion of a Specified Activity.

The Chief Fire Officer     means the Chief Fire Officer for the time being of the
                           South Yorkshire County Fire Service or his designated
                           deputy.             (

The Certificate            means the written/General Safety Certificate of
                           which this Schedule forms part.

The County Council         means the South Yorkshire County Council.

The Guide                  means the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" as
                           from time to time amended, issued  by the Home
                           Office, or such other code of practice as may be so
                           issued.

The Holder                 means the applicant for and person to whom the
                           General Safety Certificate has been issued and who
                           is a 'qualified person' for the purposes of the Act.

Invalid Carriage           means a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled or
                           not, constructed or adapted for use for the carriage
                           of one person, being a person suffering from some
                           physical defect or disability.

The Plans                  means the document otdocuments attached to and
                           forming part of the^General Safety Certificate and
                           signed by the person signing the Certificate and/or
                           any other document or documents which may be added
                           to or substituted for such document or documents
                           and signed on behalf of the County Council.

Specified Activity         means the playing of a Football match.

Spectator                  means any person occupying accommodation provided
                           for spectators at the stadium.

The Stadium                means the

Structural Parts           includes structures, components, installations, fabric
                           and associated parts of the Stadium.

Vehicles                   includes invalid carriages.
                                                                                                                    \


                                                        PART 4

                                             Safety Stewards

The minimum number of safety Stewards required for each function shall be
as follows:

(1) Manning of exits                                                                               (0 Stewards
(2) Control and direction of spectators entering or leaving
     the Stadium                                                                                   ’’J Stewards
(3) Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency
     including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire                                           Stewards

The Stewards shall be distributed as follows:

Section of Stadium                                                         Number required for each function
                                                                              Cl)_________ (2)_________ (3)
fcaCvJb &CU*. N o . I I (\»VSwc«1<6v\.                                           j             ^                _


           O x H a.                |                                                           _            -



                  VMo . 3          i 'riitiv.
      ,       LUexU                                        ■                  ■'

              CE>(et>U                                                           *     ■       "
                         •5T, VCcuv*.                                                                       _

      \       C B l &t\C " 6 “)
             Gt&3ft- NJo <b.? VIcu*a                                                           ^         -

 ^•jccc                     o - "7 , inJ                                           J           “
                                       / N)txt\-*£                                 I           —
 c2.7c-^C         6rfC£E. M c . ^ ,                     5CeUi^
                                                                               \               -        “
 fc^uC GnCtfc t^C *
       ~Tevra^e                                 „                                I             —        ~
  'ft 4 H ',                       <.
              c m tn fc            “A 0                                          -             1
  Vfo-vA*.
               Q sU tto. M & 0 .                                                   -

                              " c*0

  M       cowa.                                 i*5                                            )       ~
                ^>ive-5c-rs> ^ v£A                                                                      j
  H                                £va^> j=L&^ I'e-u-e.')^)                                             .

  Vlc£^                                         Cfwb'Ue-^p                    —            -
  Y^CLma                      (_ $rU£>jfc'                     o -^Jd                                               I


  Heuvv                             C    ( x ^ ^ Vlwcf)                       "■                       *

  T\ouv^ « S w <            t ^ r ^ ’v - w                                   -                 '
                      C            * A MM

   ^   ,              (U < nh± n kV —               ^                         -
   W a-cw.                                               Zfc~ct*Or<&-x~‘                       i
                      (5.1 en /k       “a O ^
                                              PART 3

                                     Ground Capacity


The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and tb the various areas
of spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified belowS-



  M aw               « e * fe = 0

          ‘> 0 ^ 4   C T-*Tr«J)                                               %SpO




                                                                              (0, 7

                                                                                           'X


                                    TKg.                                               ^   w*2Xv
                                    IX^ju^MkiAX'vtXc)                         CCv^£        GcikidjL

                                        ■•—             "Xfc   Va^       dSfi^e^-wvtvuz^    c^uxc

                           ttc       $6^.                '^K^tr          «H    ifca.
                           v^]V^        <t^c_     voq4 t£ - 6 ^      ^
                   ^<er\-oC i f e r & R              Rov/crftS
                                                                                   n    uvpc   ^y<^>
                                                                              c u ' ^ t ^ T T w :
                                    P\^4ail£—                                          4r- < , ^ o )
                                     jrvviUw'^

                                                                                        10- fr^>
                                    1 H- 6-0
                                                                                          ~)S<0
                                         ~\SXi>
                                                                                       -^~ L (e b
                                    *5 1 (b O C\*»         3 ^SS)
                                                                                       m-3o
                                        "V2.4- O
TM*+CU    T'fcrVtt^L
                                                                                        Lf^fc0
fV^>vtU*                                b Sol
     £ 'Txarro^e
                                        Z S \ 0                                        3 > l l
M *U
                                                                                       l$, 3 6 5
                                            m




                       C   (AAft                     ^

                           Mf      \v^tCtp         C>w   \£Ui^X\.       p v?^"Cr

         ^TawU,              o _ — a^       vuJje^v©^*       U>/\aj<_    vvtmj^
                              » « A V T


                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                         GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE


Address of premises for                                   Bramall Lane Ground,
which this Certificate is                                 Sheffield,
issued.                                                   S2 4SU.

Occupier of the premises                                  Sheffield United Football Club
         and                                              Ltd.
Holder of this Certificate.

Use of the premises in                                    Football Hatches
respect of which this Certificate                         Religious Conventions
is issued.

1.    This Certificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council in respect
      of the premises described above, being a Sports Stadium designated by
      Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as a
      stadium requiring a Safety Certificate.

2.    The terms and conditions set out in Part 2 of the Schedule attached
      hereto are hereby imposed.

3.    The terms and conditions   hereby imposed are those which the South
      Yorkshire County Council    consider necessary or expedient to secure
      reasonable safety at the    Stadium when it is in use for an activity
      in respect of which this    Certificate is used.

4.    The words used in this Certificate and the Schedule attached hereto
      have the meaning assigned to them by Part 1 of the Schedule and Section 17
      of the Act.

5.    The Schedule and Plans^attached hereto all form part of this Certificate.

6.    This Certificate commences on the              day of            One thousand
      nine hundred and eighty six for an indefinite period.




      Date: .........................       Signed:

                                                      County Solicitor on behalf of
                                                      and duly CuLnGriScu j —    SouLi
                                                      Yorkshire County Council.
                         S C H E D U L E


                             PART 1

                         Interpretation

The Act                  means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975.

Authorised Person        means a person authorised in accordance with
                         Section 11 of the Act.

The Building Authority   means the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council,

The Chief Constable      means the Chief Constable for the time being of the
                         South Yorkshire Police or, as the case may require, the
                         Police Officer having charge of the Stadium on the
                         occasion of a Specified Activity.

The Chief Fire Officer   means the Chief Fire Officer for the time being of the
                         South Yorkshire County Fire Service or his designated
                         deputy.

The Certificate          means the written General Safety Certificate of which
                         this Schedule forms part.

The County Council       means the South Yorkshire County Council.

The Guide                means the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" as from
                         time to time amended, issued by the Home Office, or
                         such other code of practice as may be so issued.

The Holder               means the applicant for and person to whom the General
                         Safety Certificate has been issued and who is a
                         ’qualified person* for the purposes of the Act.

Invalid Carriage         means a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled or not,
                         constructed or adapted for use for the carriage of one
                         person, being a person suffering from some physical
                         defect or disability.

The Plans                means the document or documents attached to and forming
                         part of the General Safety Certificate and signed by the
                         person signing the Certificate and/or any other document
                         or documents which may be added to or substituted for
                         such document or documents and signed on behalf of the
                         County Council.

Specified Activity       means the playing of a Football Match or the holding of
                         a Religious Convention.

Spectator                means any person occupying accommodation provided for
                         spectators at the stadium.

The Stadium              means the Bramall Lane Ground, Sheffield.

Structural Parts         includes structures, components, installations, fabric
                         and associated parts of the Stadium.

Vehicles                 includes invalid carriages.
                            PART 2

                General Terms and Conditions


The Holder or his nominee for the time being approved in writing by
the County Council shall be present whenever the Stadium is used for
a Specified Activity, and he shall ensure that the terms and conditions
of the Certificate are complied with.

The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium
unless a Specified Activity is taking place.

The number of spectators to be admitted to the Stadium and to the
several areas of spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not
exceed the number specified in Part 3 of this Schedule.

Subject to the terms and conditions hereof and to the statutory controls
relating thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified
Activity for one or more of the following:-

(a)   the playing of music or singing;

(b)   the provision of news or comment associated with   football;

(c)   the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities,programmes,
      nevs-sheets and souvenirs;

(d)   the sale and consumption of refreshments;

(e)   any other use ancillary to a Specified Activity which has the
       prior approval in writing of the County Council.

(1)   Where the prior written approval of the County Council is
       required under the terms and conditions hereof, an application
       for that approval shall be made by the Holder to the County
       Council at least 21 days before the occurrence in respect of
       which it is required.

(2)   If whilst the Certificate is in operation it is proposed to
       alter or extend the Stadium or any of its installations in a
       manner mentioned in Section 8 of the Act the Holder shall at
       least 21 days before the carrying out of the proposal is begun,
       give notice of the proposal.to the County Council.

(1)   The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at least 21 days
       (or such shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent)
       prior to every Specified Activity the methods of admission to be
       employed in connection with the Specified Activity and the
       methods to be used for the segregation of home and visiting
       supporters.

(2)   The Holder shall refuse admission to, or evacuate spectators
       from, the Stadium or any part thereof at any time before or
       during a Specified Activity upon receiving instructions so to
       do from the Chief Constable.
The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at every
Specified Activity o£ an adequate number of police officers to secu e
the orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators and the
notice officers required at each Specified Activity shall be agreed
between the Chief Constable and the Holder at least 21 days (or sue
shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent) before
Specified Activity takes place.

The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to ^ s a t i s f a c t i o n
of the County Counci 1 a suitably equipped First Aid Room on. = h » U


                      and in any event not less than one such assistant for each
2      0 0 0         spectators. The First Aid Room shall be adequately signed and
shall be capable of b e i n g                lit b y the emergency P ower
                                t i1)
                    r>f »li5 P-irt of this Schedule. The Holder shall
r S ' f .          t , e s a doctor employed or retained by the Holder
is available to attend at the First Aid Room if required and that his
whereabouts are known to those in the Police Central ontro      oom
the Stadium.

The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at
of a Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety te          q - f 0 hv
 r   e q  by Part 4 of this Schedule, and shall ensure.that he Safety
           u   i r   e d


Stewards shall be (a) fit and capable to carry out their duties
 (b) properly trained and lnstructe (c) l en l i         al duties in
 (d) provided with written instructions as to their ge
order to carry out the following

     (1)               Manning     of exits as indicated on the plans

     (2)               Controland direction of spectators entering          using    or
                        leaving the Stadium

     (3)               Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency including
                        raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire.


     T
     . r « 2 . " r £ n              si                                              : u : r a f
     the Stadium at least once every three months.

     The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked ™ ‘'“ o* la,,,>
     all doors and gates which form an egress route between     y P
     accommodation and the public highway, or other open space ou side
     stadium, shall be so secured as to open ™ec «         " Y ^ . g L e d for
     inside and shall be manned at all times the Stad     ^ 1>     B
     a Specified Activity by at least the number of stewards required y
     Part 4 of this Schedule. All such doors or gates shall b ope           y
      the stewards responsible and secured in the ^     °Pe" P ^ l     any other
      time agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable “ ^ a t ^ y ^
      time on evacuation of the Sta lum or   p          sounding of the alarm,
      so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the sounding o

      (1)                  The Holder shall provide and maintain to the                  stadium
                           the Chief Fire Officer exit signs over all exits_tvom t n f
                           and all exits from spectator acconinodation            ®"h the main
                           ensure that such exit signs may be illuminated y
                           and emergency lighting ^ - e m s  uch s u p p l e . ary^liuminat
                           signs in such locations as the Chief Fire
                           shall also be provided by the Holder.
(2)   The Holder shall ensure that the corridors, gangways and
       staircases indicated on the plans may be illuminated when
       required during a Specified Activity by both the main and
       emergency lighting systems.

(3)   The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph
       shall be illuminated whenever adequate natural light is
       deficient during a Specified Activity or as directed by the
       Chief Constable.

(A)   All means of ingress to and egress from the Stadium and to
       and from any spectator accotnnodation therein shall be maintained
       free from obstruction and with non-slip and even surfaces and
       in particular stair coverings shall be secured and maintained
       so that they do not constitute a source of danger.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of
       the Chief Fire Officer a separate emergency power supply for
       providing electricity sufficient to light all emergency lighting
       throughout the Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the
       communication systems within the Stadium, such emergency power
       supply to be operable independently of the main power supply
       and to come into automatic operation within ten seconds of the
       failure of the latter and to be capable of maintaining the
       necessary power output for a minimum of three hours from the
       failure of the main power supply.

(2)   At least once annually a report as to the condition of the
       Emergency Power Supply certified by a Chartered Electrical
       Engineer shall be supplied to the Chief Fire Officer.

(3)   Not less than three hours prior to the occurrence of a Specified
      Activity the emergency power supply shall be tested for a period
       of 30 initintes. Any dcfect revealed in this test shall be
       rectified before the conmencement of the Specified Activity.

(A)   A competent electrician employed or retained by the Holder
       shall be present during a Specified Activity.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the
       satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer a fire warning system.

(2)   The fire alarm system shall be tested periodically to the
       satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
of the Chief Constable:-

(1)   A Police Central Control Room which shall be provided with
       such ancillary equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

(2)   Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention
       room ami for administrative purposes.

(3)   A public address sylem which may be audible in all parts of the
       Stadium. The police shall, should they so wish, have the
       unrestricted right to use the public address system for police
       purposes and such purposes will have priority over the Specified
       Activity.
 (1)   The Holder shall at all times maintain all structural parts
       of the stadium in sound order and to the appropriate and
       relevant standards in the Guide and in all cases to the
       satisfaction of the Council.

 (2)   The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance, repair
       and renewal to the Stadium as may be required from time to
       time by the County Council.

The Holder shall at all times maintain all operational parts of the
Stadium (including the electrical and communications installations)
and all emergency equipment in good and efficient working order to
the satisfaction of the County Council and shall undertake such
maintenance repair or renewal as may from time to time be necessary
to maintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.

The notices specified on the Plans shall be maintained legible and
unobstructed and in the positions allotted on the Plans.

(1)    The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium
       shall be restricted to those areas indicated on the Plans
       unless otherwise approved for emergency purposes by a Police
       Officer in uniform.

(2)    The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the
        satisfaction of the County Council the access routes for
        emergency vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that members of the Press, T.V. and radio
services having access to the public and playing areas of the Stadium
are identifiable as such.

Television cameras and portable equipment shall be   placed only in
such positions as may be agreed between the Holder   andthe Chief
Constable.

(1)    Liquid refreshments may be sold or distributed at the Stadium
        only in containers constructed from soft plastic or other
        soft material, or as allowed by the Licensing Justices.

(2)    No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other materials
       which in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use
        as missiles shall be permitted to remain in any part of the
       Stadium to which spectators have access.

No accumulation of flammable rubbish, dirt, surplus material or goods
shall be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium except in a
place and quantity approved in writing by the Chief Fire Officer.

No flammable gases or liquids shall be stored or used in any part of
the Stadium without the prior written approval of the Chief Fire
Officer, and the existing oil-fired boiler in the John Street Stand
shall not be used until the boilerhouse has been upgraded to the
satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer or an alternative form of
heating has been agreed by the Chief Fire Officer.
The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably
qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
a representative of the Council within    months of the date of the
Certificate and at least once in each period of 12 months thereafter
and the Holder shall ensure that after each inspection there is
provided to the County Council by the said Chartered Engineer a
certificate as to the current compliance or non-compliance with good
engineering and building practices and with the relevant British
Standard Specifications and Codes of Practice and with the appropriate
provisions and recommendations of the Guide of all structural parts
of the Stadium excluding the crush barriers and handrails.

(1)   The Holder shall arrange for all crush barriers and handrails
      within the Stadium to be tested in accordance with the
      appropriate provisions of the Guide by a suitably qualified
      Chartered1Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
      a representative of the County Council within    months of the
      date of this Certificate and for the results thereof to be
      notified in writing to the County Council.

(2)(i) The Holder shall ensure that not more than    months after the
       date of this Certificate and thereafter not less than once in
       each period of 12 months a representative sample of crush
       barriers and handrails amounting to not less than 20% of the
       total number of such barriers and rails is tested in accordance
       with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
       (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a representative of
       the County Council and the results thereof notified in writing
       to the County Council;

  (ii) a record shall be kept of those crush barriers and handrails
       so tested and a barrier so tested shall not be tested again
       within a period of    years thereafter but shall be tested
       again within a period of 5j years thereafter.

The Holder shall within    months of the date of thiscertificate   and
thereafter not less than once in each period of five years in respect
of new installations (and such lesser period as the Chief Fire Officer
may require in respect of other installations) supply to the Chief
Fire Officer the certificate of an independent electrical engineer
as to the current compliance or non-compliance of the electrical
installation within the Stadium with Section E of the I.E.E. Regulations
or other sections or Regulations for the time being in forcerelating
to the Electrical Equipment of Buildings.

The Holder shall arrange for all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and
other water supply within the Stadium to be inspected and tested as
appropriate at least once annually by a competent person to the
satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

The  Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be
made available for inspection at all reasonable time to Authorised
Persons:

(1)    A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the Stadium
       during a Specified Activity and to each area of spectator
       accommodation therein mentioned in Part 3 of this Schedule.
(2)    A record of any accident or incident occurring whilst the
       Stadium is in use for a Specified Activity which causes injury
       to a spectator, such record to include the name, address, age
       and sex of the spectator injured, the nature of the injury
       and how it was caused, as far as can be ascertained by diligent
       inquiry, and the location of the incident. The Holder shall
       provide a written report to the County Council within 48 hours
       of all such accidents or incidents.

(3)    A record of the training and instruction given and the exercises
       held in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 9 of this
       part of this Schedule such record to include the date and time
       and duration of the instruction or exercise, the name of the
       person giving instruction, the nature of the instruction or
       exercise, and the name(s) of the person(s) instructed.

(A)    A record of all inspections, tests, maintenance, repairs and
       renewals carried out at the Stadium.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council
shall have the right at any time to require the Holder at his own
expense to arrange for the conduct of any inspection or test which the
County Council may consider to be necessary in the interests of
securing reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for a
Specified Activity.
                                        PART 3

                                    Ground Capacity


The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the various areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified below:-

South Stand (Seats)                                   7,948

Bramall Lane

   Seats                                              2,958
   Terrace                                            7,354

John Street

   Timber Section Seats                               1,200
   Concrete Section Seats                             1,490
   Timber Section Terrace
     (right-hand section)                         1,048
     (left-hand section)                            -*
   Concrete Section Terrace                       2,832

Spion Kop

  General Area                                   13,930 ^
  Disabled Section
    Wheel chairs                                        40
    Attendants                                          80
  Childrens Section                                    220


                                                  39,100


              f
                  Subject to Pitch Permeter
                  Gates being acceptable and
                  adapted as necessary            4,320

                                                 43,420


               *0n completion of agreed
                work in John Street Terrace            589


                                                 44,009
                                   PART 4

                              Safety Stewards

The minimum number of safety Stewards required for each function shall be
as follows:
                                                                       19 Stewards
(1)      Manning of exits
(2)      Control and direction of spectators entering or leaving
                                                                       36 Stewards
          the Stadium
(3)      Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency
          including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire            4 Stewards

The Stewards shall be distributed as follows:

Section of Stadium                           Number required for each function
                                               (1)          (2)________ (3)

Final    Exit Gates
  "A"    (Shoreham Street)                       1
  "B"    to "L" (John Street)                   11
  "M"    to "O" (Bramall Lane) -
  two    on Gate "0"                            5
  "R"    and "S" (South Stand)                   2

Control and Direction
  Bramall Lane Stand                                         6
      "      " Terrace                                       3
  John Street Stand                                          9
      "      " Terrace
     (Timber Section)                                        2
     (Concrete Section)                                      2


Spion Kop
  Main Area
  Disabled/Childrens area

South Stand

Patrolling the Stadium, etc.
                                                                        2
  John Street Stand
                                                                        1
  Bramall Lane Stand
                                                                        1
  South Stand

In addition, the following internal gates (constituting part of the means of
escape from the Ground) must be permanently manned by Safety Stewards if m
future this function is not performed by police officers:-

      Pitch Perimeter Gates to John Street Terrace           Nos. 1 to 4

      Gates between John Street Timber Stand and Terrace     Nos. 5 to 2

      Gate between the two parts of the John Street
      Timber Stand Terrace                                   No. 9.
