C 0&Z.G.S PouX) t ^ Cc-

   (^£Po&.TS
from*?© Tl4 t /n/$> i/;A.y
                         D o    \Av\ci f e f n   f-                             ;
              M'/fs               Y*'                 '     •c              (7 ~)


              ^ T rp                                                    —
                ; \J 1 \ U I Juj O
               Solicitors and Commissioners for Oaths




        We are pleased to announce that as from 8th J a n u a ry 1990
        our Leeds Office will be practising from new premises a t:- 1

                             Oakwood House                  -.
           “T !~ U .3     6 3 7 RoundhayRoad                         r; ,
                                    Leeds LS8             4BA           '


CJVv'   U<i       '     Telephone: (0532) 494959
                           Fax: .(0532) 487291                   6
•
           ire Services



SHEFFIEL
SI 3F 0
                                    .     ...



                        ■ -U.'T!VI11 KEPCR1



"K\NSMi\SS!0\ OK



.> in .n o .   .                        1.034

  ■■        ON TEL                      0532P424413

 f'V'JTI SON       id                   ..CRUTES SOLOS

START 11 ME                             11 '1.6 16:17.

Is\(ji, r                                  02 "'24 .
       FP19/2/4A                                                   16.11.89

                           DO R Grimshaw                              271




Crutes
Solicitors and Commissioners for Oaths
Trafalgar House
29 Park Place
LEEDS
LSI 2SP

For the attention of Mr Sacks


Dear Sirs

RE; HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

Further to your correspondence dated 15th November, 1989, and telephone
conversation with Divisional Officer Grimshaw, we have been unable to make
contact with Inspector Sawers of West Midlands Police therefore we are
enclosing copies of the statements of Firemen                 and           as
requested. Would you please arrange for these to be forwarded to West Midlands
Police.

If there are any queries on these matters, please do not hesitate to contact
the officer concerned.

Yours faithfully




Chief Fire Officer cJi/O




                       17 fr ' 0CJH.



                            D/i
J M ERVYN JONES M Sc                                                                   F URNI VAL H O U S E
ASSISTANT c h i e f c o n s t a b l e                                                  Furniva! Gate
                                                                                       Sheffield S i 4QN
 HilLSBOft&UGH INQUIRY TEAM
                                                                                       Telephone: 0 7 4 2 731 b4t*
                                                                                       Fax;         0742 731483
WEST M ID L A N D S POLICE HQ
PO B o * 5 2 , Lloyd H o u s e                                                         Medico Legs! Centre
C o i m o r e Circ u s Q u e e n s w a y                                               T       ./phong: 0 / 4 2      7 2 6 *0 &
Rirm m gham B4 6 N Q                                                                    fp.x                  /■-17^624/
T e le p h o n e ; 0 2 1 * 2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , e x t n . 2 0 2 5
                                                                                        Yo,n HfI
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
F o w l e r S t re e t                                                                                        ,!M,i / V S C / I N 3P 3At«1
Birm in g h a m B 7 5 D A                                                                                     11I/A71 13/A5671
T e le p h o n e ; 0 2 1 3 5 9 3 3 3 2                         I 0 is
                                                                                        Df>te
                                                                                                                  N o v e m b e r 1989




        M e s s r s Crutes
        T r a f a l g a r H ouse
        29 Park Plate
        Leeds




         For the a t t e n t i o n of Mr sacks




         Hear Sir

         T refer- to a recent t e l ephone c o n v e r s a t i o n o r i g i n n f i n g - ^r.^ecto*  r

         Sawers of the W est M i d l a n d s Police, Hi 1 1 ^borough Thouj r y :■ c;n .^ r.-nr^
         r e p r e s e n t a t i v e asked that a formal request be f o r warded                     -
         was required,

          1 w o u l d be grateful if you w ould furriian us wit h ?                        r              -   ttie
          r e c o l l e c t i o n o r any s t a t e m e n t mad e to y o u r s e l v e s by^-

             fi )                   - this recoi lection is not I n c l u d e d w - b i n the bun d l e oi
                         others nlreai.  n o u r possession,

          (i


                         from Fen J.




                         that 1 may a r r a n g e for a p'-iice ;
                         a S e c t i o n 9 C r i minal J u s t i c e Act
                         Her Majesty   sty's
                                          *s Coroner, Dr Stefan -^ppo?'.




                                                                                                                                  fh-''fie ‘
       PLE/              REPLY T Q T H E OFFICE A T ,
                                                                 In

                                         X
       „                ' 3 9 1 1   ' 1 5 1 5 : 4 4             35         4 : 4 4 ' -     CRUTE
«v'   - »
            /




            in the event OS' you r e q u i r i n g any : :
            t-
             .vc.• requests, pieaftfi cont<3t:t inspector

            T h a n k i n g you in a n t i c i p a t i o n ot y o u r ;:o~opcrot. j ot,.

            Ymirs fai th f u l l y




                                          "onst.wiilc
                                             1115 1?;43                                        £            4U4!’        CPUTE? SOLCS                       01




                                                                            15 NOV 198Jj

                                                                             <.G.F.S.
                                                                                 h         a
                                                                            K)                 “2,
                                                                            9-                  3             soli« tioi Huiui Commissioner* for Oaths
'0lirK”!          iDS/CT/WED/f^                                                                                                                lYatalgar House
                                                                            e>                 4.                                                29 Park Place
Oil! Kt !                                                                      1 e-s                                                            Leeds i,Sl 2SP
        <1*^tor,Mr
               / SaeKe                                                                                                                                     12QB0
                                                                                                                                            Fax: (05,52! 124413
                                                                                        Cfo                                       Telephone (OKU) 4 »«24«
                   in Novetrber 1989

                   V IA FACSIMILE
                           . ...... ^



                   i-W' Mr Wright
                   Chief Fire Officer
                   .'Sheffield City Fire fierviees
                                 field




                                                        ■           !.J a
                                                                                                                     m    ...-         ! ici" the Went
                             ^           ,
                                         -   osed a copy o f a l e t t e r th a t **•
                             ; -,.!v r*.;iie Hi 13 stoorough inquiry Ttean-
                                                                          B1 •,                                                  h, theri in t h i s
                     V^.AIIO yf>.i t.lease deal with the points and que» i
                      ■Ot’t f ! -




                                                                                                                                          fii-ihjrrtI •»
                                              ] \)tn!WKUmiUgft U        1             h. ,■ • .
    “.Is iili tn n r LL r.                                                            i'l:vr * ■
    M " Hm (,(jrcfiirLl »*                    j.-r-n-t Liowyi r i.L u
                                                                                      ' ).v-ri\ ‘-1 'rr .
    |,,..i .1 kuOenwm                          • iiii f t'ark
                                              !\;4n \ Mm’kcmi*                                 ■
                                                                                               > -=
    . „sj:-T •' ■<                                                                    1A.*. :»■. ‘
    lrt>ntiwK )|r!iji‘ilnp>>r'                f ••*-*!<r'rj:r ll B
    tohn(. i'i.rkcr                            . ViollhHA
                                                      This 111ill is R'Kiilatwl t>\ M■ ! j“-
                                                                                                                          %
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                 FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                          Furnival Gate
 HILLSBOROUGH IN Q U IR Y T E A M                                  Sheffield S1 4Q N
                                                                   Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
                                                                   Fax:        0742 731483
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                             Medico Legal Centre
Colmore Circus Queensway                                           Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
Birmingham J i4 6NQ                                                Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                                   Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street
                                                                   Our Ref:
                                                                                   JMJ/VSC/INSP 3451
Birmingham B7 5DA
                                                                                   HI/A7113/A5671
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                   0 NOV l$
                                                                   Date:
                                                                                   8 November 1989




     Messrs Crutes
     Trafalgar House
     29 Park Place
     Leeds




      For the attention of Mr Sacks




      Dear Sir

     I refer to a recent telephone conversation originating from Inspector
     Sawers of the West Midlands Police, Hillsborough Inquiry Team. Your
     representative asked that a formal request be forwarded detailing what
     was required.

     I would be grateful if you would furnish us with a copy of the
     recollection or any statement made to yourselves by:-

                           - this recollection is not included within the bundle of
                others already in our possession.

      (ii)                   -              who has been referred to by a Sheffield Wednesday
                Football Club Steward as a fireman whom he knows who was one of
                several to Whom he passed an unidentified, apparently deceased, body
                from Pen 3.

               In the event that Mr ]       made a recollection I would be grateful
               to have sight of it, but in any event I would be pleased to receive
                       s details, either Fire Station or home address, in order
               that I may arrange for a police officer to interview him and record
               a Section 9 Criminal Justice Act statement for the information of
               Her Majesty's Coroner, Dr Stefan Popper.




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                   Inspector Sawers, Furnival House, Sheffield
In the event of you requiring any further information concerning these
two requests, please contact Inspector Sawers direct.

Thanking you in anticipation of your co-operation.

Yours faithfully




Assistant Chief Constable
(Hillsborough Inquiry)
                                                                                                                          * 2 ? -2 * " /* ?




Your Ref:
                                                                                               CRUTES
                                                                                               Solicitors and Commissioners for Oaths
                 LDS/CT/WED/MMI
Our Ref:                                                                                                                                 Trafalgar House
              ,.Mr Sacks                                                                                                                   29 Park Place
Please ask for^
                                                                                                                                          Leeds LSI 2SP
                                                                                                                                               DX12080
                                                                                                                                     Fax: (0532) 424413
                                                                                                                          Telephone (0532) 436246
                  15 Noverrtoer 1989

                 VIA FACSIMILE

                 FAD Mr Wright
                 Chief Fire Officer
                 Sheffield City Fire Services
                 Sheffield


                  Dear Sirs

                  Re:      Hillsborough Enquiry

                  Please find enclosed a copy of a letter that we have received from the West
                  Midlands Police Hillsborough Enquiry Team.

                  Would you please deal with the points and queries raised by than in this
                  letter.

                  Yours faithfully




Alan H. Crute, LL.B.            J. Alan Watmough, LL.B.           Kevin McKeman, B.A.                     Offices at:         Resident Partner:
Malcolm G. Gregor, LL.B.        James Bowyer, LL.B.               William K. O’Hanlon, LL.B.
Ian J. Robertson                John K. Park                      David M. Drewe, LL.B.                   Sunderland          Laurence D.Sacks
Laurence D. Sacks               Brian A. Mackenow                 David N. Taylor, LL.B.                  Carlisle
Gordon R. Hetherington          G. Stephen Crute, LL.B.           John Hunter, LL.B.                      Middlesbrough
John C. Parker                  Tim Wallis, B.A.                  James Bell, LL.B.                       Newcastle

                                      This firm Is regulated by The Law Society In the conduct of Investment business
                                                        •D o tn   Cf p )




                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY


                            FINAL OBSERVATIONS




I. INTRODUCTION
1.     A large number of witnesses and a great deal of evidence has
been heard in the course of the 31 days during which the inquiry has
been sitting.     We do not propose in these observations to go into
detail or seek to resolve issues of minor importance.     We will give
our views on the major issues and seek to indicate what in our opinion
are the important findings of fact which the Tribunal ought to make.
We do not conceive it to be our task to invite the     Tribunal to
apportion blame, but we recognise that is inevitable that criticisms
will be made in the course of deciding what happened and why.          We
shall not shrink from making such criticisms as we consider
appropriate.


2.     In deciding what happened, we have been greatly assisted by
the video and photographic records, all of which have been freely made
available by their owners.     We should like also to place on record our
gratitude to the interested parties for their co-operation in
producing relevant documents and witnesses and to the West Midlands
Police for their immense effort in interviewing witnesses and
collecting the necessary evidence and in producing for us, often at
very short notice, exceedingly helpful reports and summaries of their
enquiries.     Without that assistance and co-operation our task would
have been impossible.     As it is, we are conscious that we have
completed this stage of the inquiry within 3 months of the occurrence
of the disaster and that many witnesses who were at the ground and who
could have given relevant evidence have not been called.     We have
taken the greatest possible care to try to call a representative cross
section of witnesses and to ensure that no serious issue has been left
uninvestigated or uncovered by evidence.     We are satisfied that we
have succeeded in this objective and that sufficient evidence has been
called before the Tribunal to enable it to reach proper and accurate
findings.     All parties represented have had the opportunity to
nominate witnesses whom they considered were able to give useful
evidence and we have, so far as possible, tried to accommodate them.
We confidently believe that there are and can be no complaints that
any relevant witness, who could add to the account given by others,
has been overlooked or that any evidence has been omitted which
affects any material finding of fact.


3.       In opening this inquiry on 15th May, there were set out what
the indications were at that stage of the sequence of events.       After
31 days of evidence, it is not necessary to change anything of
importance.    The picture, broadly speaking, remains the same.     By
about 2.30 pm, there was a serious crush outside the turnstiles at
Leppings Lane.    As the minutes went by, the situation deteriorated and
by 2.47 had reached such a state that the experienced police officer
in charge, Superintendent Marshall, decided that the only way to avoid
injuries or death was to open the exit gates to relieve pressure.        He
radioed a message to the controller, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,
who authorised the opening of the gates.    At 2.52 pm Gate C was opened
and about 2000 went through it.    By this time, the two central pens on
the terraces, 3 and 4, were full, although there was space on the
                                    3



wings.    When the gate was opened, no measures were taken to prevent
those entering going down the tunnel ahead of them into the already
crowded central pens.     Most did so, causing severe congestion in the
pens.    As a result, 95 in the pens were crushed to such an extent that
they died and many more were injured.     Unfortunately, the police
officers in the control room and on the perimeter of the pitch failed
to appreciate that the pens were overcrowded and that fans were in
distress.    The perimeter gates, inadequate as they were, were not
opened in time and measures to relieve the situation were
insufficiently expeditious or adequate.     This does not mean that
individual police officers did not do all they could.     The fault lay
in a lack of planning and of leadership and, above all, in a failure
to appreciate the need to control the numbers in the central pens.


II. STATE OF THE GROUND
1.        Following representations by the South Yorkshire County
Council in April 1978, on 7th August 1978 Hillsborough was designated
as a stadium requiring a safety certificate under the Safety of sports
Grounds Act 1975 with effect from 1st January 1979.     The club
appointed Dr. Eastwood’s firm, Eastwood and Partners, Consulting
Engineers, to act on its behalf in its dealings with SYCC and/or
Sheffield Metropolitan District Council "in relation to the ground
being designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act" (Doc: 30).
There were meetings and correspondence about various improvements
which were needed to the ground in order to achieve the capacity
desired by the Club.    The Leppings Lane terraces were awarded a
capacity of 10,100, after the existing crush barriers had been tested
and, as necessary, replaced and new ones positioned.    This capacity
was based on the figure in the Green Guide, stated to be the maximum,
of 5.4 per m2 reduced by about 10% to take account of the lack of
gangways.   This lack was not considered by Dr. Eastwood to be of
significance because of the ease of movement throughout the terrace:
at that time, there were no radial fences.


2.      In 1981 at a cup semi-final there was some crushing. This       was
                               $
caused by a combination of uneven distribution on the terrace, an over
capacity of about 500 and the late arrival, due to traffic problems,
of a number of supporters.     An early goal exacerbated the situation,
because there was a surge, and a number of fans were injured.
Perimeter gates were eventually opened and fortunately sufficient fans
were able to escape to alleviate the problem.     There had been some
crushing at the turnstiles and the police were, according to Mr Vaux,
slow to react to events.     There are obvious similarities to the events
o f 15th April 1989, but fortunately the injuries were few.


3.      It is significant that the police at the time    appear to have
believed that the figure of 10,1000 in the Safety Certificate was too
high: see Doc: 136.   Their letter to the FA does not reflect this
belief - see Doc: 138 - and it does not seem to have been put to the
Working Party of SYCC concerned with the Safety Certificate.      The
answer to the problem was considered to be the division of the terrace
by radial fences with 3 pens of roughly equal areas.     Eastwood and
Partners were asked by the Club at the same time to consider an
alteration to the turnstiles* but that did not in the end come to
anything.
4.        The erection of the pens was not of itself a bad idea.     The
fences were to have gates at the top, to enable egress to be made to
the adjoining pens.    Much has been asked about these gates and the
arrangements, if any, to man them, whether by stewards or by the
police.    It seems they were to have a dual use: first, to enable fans
to go from one pen to another to help in an even distribution on the
terrace as a whole and secondly, as emergency exits in case of the
need to evacuate the pen.    Dr. Eastwood said that he believed there
would be police control over these gates because he recognised the
importance of maintaining the numbers of people in the pens.
Unfortunately, although he was aware of the importance of this
control, he does not seem to have impressed the club or the working
party with it.    The police interpreted control as meaning that the
gates should be left open, only needing an attendant if they were to
be closed and might need to be opened in an emergency.


5.        The reality was, as Dr. Eastwood accepted, that without any
mechanical means of counting, there was no possibility of adhering to
the capacity in the pens.      Accordingly, no capacity was formally
adopted and the safety certificate remained as it was.     Reliance was
placed on visual assessment.    The problem with that was that all
responsible, both police and stewards, accepted and tolerated density
in excess of that which was proper.     Evidence was given by police
officers to the effect that full meant chest to back and shoulder to
shoulder and that it was only when people were in obvious discomfort
that action would be taken to shut off a pen.     This is not
intentionally callous; it is a reflection of what football crowds have
been conditioned to put up with.     It is significant that in both 1987
and 1988 the conditions on the terrace in the central pens were
thoroughly unpleasant, but no-one complained and each match received a
clean bill of health.   The failure to seek the views of supporters or
to take any steps to inquire into their comfort is a notable feature
of the story unfolded in the evidence.   It has led to assumptions
being made which were dangerously inaccurate.


6.      In 1985 there were plans to improve the turnstiles at Leppings
Lane.   In addition, the police asked for more radial fences.    The main
purpose of those changes was segregation, so that home and away
supporters could both be accommodated at the west end of the ground.
In the result, the scheme to increase the turnstile numbers, and to
achieve not only segregation but a means of counting numbers into each
part of the terrace, was not pursued due to the reluctance of the club
to incur the expense.   In fairness to the club, it does not appear
that Dr. Eastwood impressed upon them with sufficient emphasis the
absolute need to keep the numbers in the pens to a safe level and the
desirability of the increase of turnstiles to achieve that.     He said
that he saw it as his duty to advise the club on the safety
implication of any proposal and to raise any objections he may have
had on that score.   But he seems, perhaps understandably, to have
adopted the attitude that the working party was there to approve or to
disapprove and, if it was satisfied, all well and good.   The working
party for its part did not appreciate the absolute need for regulation
of the numbers in the pens and so no steps were taken to review the
safety certificate appropriately.   In the result, the centre pen was
divided by a radial fence down its centre and part of it was taken out
of commission by a second fence to form the sterile area now known as
pen 5.   The barriers in pen 3 had to be modified because one stretched
right across it.     This was done by removing two sections of railing.
This had an effect on capacity and also resulted in the gaps being too
wide.    In 1986, as a result of a police request, barrier 144 in pen 3
was removed because it was said to be causing an obstruction at the
mouth of the tunnel.     This, too, had an effect on capacity.


7.          It is clear from the history that the pens were developed in a
piecemeal fashion.     It is difficult to accept Dr. Eastwood’s evidence
that he made a positive decision not to follow the Green Guide advice
on the width of gaps and that there was a full discussion at the
working party.     There is no record of such a discussion, which is
surprising.     One suspects that the significance of the changes and the
need to ensure that there was no overcrowding was not fully
appreciated at the time and there is an element of hindsight creeping
into the evidence that has been given.     Furthermore, the record of the
telephone calls at docs. 379 and 380 do not suggest that Dr. Eastwood
was as concerned as he now suggests about the need to monitor and
control numbers in the pens.     His evidence that he was misquoted by
his colleague Mr Strange     is not very convincing. Be that as it may,
the result of the changes was that the capacities of the pens
according to the formulae set out in the Green Guide were 822 in 3 and
871 in 4.     A conservative estimate of the numbers in pen 3 at 1503 pm
on 15th April 1989 is 1576.     It is likely that that pen contained at
least double its safe numbers.
8.        In April 1986 the Sheffield City Council became the licensing
authority.   Hr Bownes was the individual responsible.   He himself had
no direct knowledge o f sports’ grounds and their safety and was
responsible for a large number of disparate licensing systems.       In Hay
1986 he reported that the conditions attached to the safety
certificate gave "some cause for concern, as they appear to be
inadequate or inappropriate in some areas".     In evidence, he said that
those were ill-chosen words and he meant nothing more than that the
certificate should be updated to reflect the substitution of the City
for the County Council. We find that evidence     unsatisfactory, but we
are left in the dark as to the precise ways in which Mr Bownes
believed the conditions were inadequate or inappropriate.     They
clearly were in that they failed to reflect the existence of the pens.
Mr Bownes very properly embarked upon a review of the conditions and
decided that the working party system inherited from the County
Council needed to be changed.    Sadly, his review was not concluded,
nor indeed nearly concluded by 15th April 1989.    He was undoubtedly
overburdened and he did not appreciate that there was any real problem
at Hillsborough.   Nevertheless, there can be no excuse for the failure
to sort the certificate out and more particularly to ensure that
something was done to prevent overcrowding on the terraces.     In
fairness to him, the other members of the advisory committee (as the
working party became) did not apparently appreciate the need for
action.   The absence of any certificate at allat Sheffield United      and
the glaring omission to change the capacity for the Kop are
symptomatic of failure to do what ought to have been done.
9.      The police and fire authority both had an input, being
statutory consultees.     But on the key issue of capacity neither had a
direct concern.     The police were, of course, concerned with problems
of order and generally safety.     They were not experts in capacity nor
is it altogether surprising that they thought in terms of visual
monitoring.   The fire service was concerned with the sufficiency of
emergency evacuation measures.     They say they were given to understand
at a meeting on 10th April 1985 that the police would man the gates at
the back of the radial fences and thereby be able to monitor numbers.
The police deny this.     It is difficult to believe that there was such
a positive undertaking by the police: if there had been, one would
expect it to be recorded in writing and it is not.     The only record is
back in 1981 (Doc: 153) where it is noted that the new gates would be
under pal ice control. The probability is that the need to control
numbers was not properly appreciated so that having men at the gates
was not considered to be as important as it now appears.     The fire
service may well have believed that the police would be in charge of
the gates.    In league games they were, and the system involved the
filling of the pens one after the other.     In 1985 and 1986 there were
no semi-finals and the problem of a capacity crowd into all the
terrace did not arise.     This may have given rise to any
misunderstanding.


10.     It will be clear that it is our view that the avoidance of
overcrowding in the pens is the key to safety.     The perimeter fences
are needed to prevent pitch invasions and they, or some similar
barrier, are a requirement of UEFA and of the FA: see Doc: 296.     They
are not in themselves the problem, although the gates or means of
egress through them must be adequate to cater for an emergency.        Those
at Hillsborough were not, being narrower than the 1.1 metres required
by the Green Guide.     Provided that the fans are properly distributed
in proper numbers, no problem of crushing should arise.     Indeed,
smaller areas ought in theory to be safer, since they contribute to
ease of distribution.     However, the smaller the area, the greater the
significance of an increase in numbers over the safety limits.


11.         There are other defects in the ground which contributed to the
disaster.     There were an insufficient number of turnstiles to
accommodate the 24,000 or so fans who were to come through them.       The
Leppings Land entrance to the ground formed a natural bottleneck.
Crushes at the turnstiles were, it seems, not uncommon, but normally
they were shortlived and contained well within the perimeter gates.
Unless fans came to the ground over a reasonably long period,
ie. about 90 minutes, and at a reasonably steady rate, problems were
likely.     Furthermore, there was a complete absence of adequate signing
inside the turnstiles.     All fans were encouraged to go down the
central tunnel and would be forgiven for not being aware of any
alternative route.     Suggestions that anyone who had been before,
indeed any fan who knew football grounds generally, would have
realised that they could go round the side of the west stand we found
unacceptable.    The lay out at Leppings Lane was the result of a need
to segregate.    That need had not existed since the 1987 season, but no
changes had been made and no signs put up.     It was accepted by Mr
Mackrell that the club could not at semi-finals comply with the
requirements of condition 28(1) of the Safety Certificate that a
record be kept of the numbers of spectators admitted to the west and
north west terraces respectively.    There were no means of controlling
the numbers on any part of the terrace within the limits of total
capacity.


III. OTHER PRELIMINARY MATTERS
A. Who was to control the fans on the terrace?
1.      The Green Guide clearly places the responsibility of ensuring
the safety of spectators upon the management of the ground, in this
case, the club: see paragraph 23.    The South Yorkshire Police Standing
Instructions for the Policing of Football Matches (Police Doc: 11)
include as one of the specific duties of stewards that they should
prevent overcrowding and ensure that crowd limits in various parts of
the ground are complied with: see Appendix L paragraph 7(a).     The
evidence of all senior police officers from Chief Superintendent Mole
at the outset has been consistent.    The police did not expect there to
be any stewards on the terraces and no active steps were to be taken
by anyone to control or direct spectators on the terrace so as to
avoid overcrowding.   The fans were expected to find their own levels.
If the central pens became overcrowded, the fans would either turn
round and go back up the tunnel or disperse by the gates at the rear
of the radial fences to the adjoining pens.     The police in the control
room would keep an eye on the pens and, if overcrowding was detected,
should take steps to stop more coming in.     Alternatively, although it
was not part of the match operational order, police officers on the
perimeter of the pitch and in the west stand would report any problems
to Control to enable them to take necessary action.     The club was
clear that it had no responsibility for the management of the fans on
the terrace and said there was an agreement, not in writing or
specifically recorded (pace Mr Lock whose evidence in this regard we
consider unsatisfactory: such an agreement would in our view
necessarily have been recorded somewhere), that the police should take
on that responsibility.    At league matches, it seems that the police
did manage the pens.   At semi-finals, the arrangement was as described
above.


2.       In the light of the evidence, which is all one way, it is in
our view futile for the police to attempt to suggest that the club and
not they were responsible for the safety of the fans on the terrace.
It is interesting to note that in Harris v. Sheffield United Football
C l u b . South Yorkshire Police asserted that their responsibility went
beyond maintaining law and order and extended to the safety and
comfort of the fans.   This is not at all surprising, since it was
accepted in evidence that the police were concerned with the safety of
everyone in the ground.    There certainly ought to have been a clear
and explicit written agreement between the Club and the police to
ensure that there was an effective means of maintaining and
controlling the numbers going into the pens to prevent overcrowding
and its attendant dangers.     It was a grave defect that not only did
no such agreement exist but no arrangement at all was made which
produced any effective means of avoiding overcrowding.     The policy of
allowing the fans to find their own level was dangerously useless:
Dr Eastwood’s description of it as ridiculous is clearly right.
Furthermore, the monitoring of the state of affairs in the pens by
Control was ineffective.     It is quite extraordinary to find that Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield could look at a photograph of pen 3 at 2.45
(Composite II DB16/29) and say that there was still plenty of space in
it.   There manifestly was not, particularly when one bears in mind
Dr. Eastwood’s evidence that people tend to avoid the very front
because it is below the level of the pitch and so the view is poor.
That evidence of Mr Duckenfield is a good example of the conditioning
referred to in 11/5 above and the dangers of reliance on visual
monitoring.   It seems, too, that the view from the control box       tended
to give a false impression.     No field glasses were available and the
camera, which could have been used for close-up shots, was defective
and in any event not used at the material time because those in the
control box were concentrating on the problems outside the turnstiles.
The police failed to make it clear to the officers who could have seen
the numbers building up that they should report to control; there was
nothing to that effect in the Operational Order or any briefings and
Mr Duckenfield’s evidence that-he expected the offrcers to report
those matters is not credible.     There was no system to deal with
overcrowding and the problem does not appear to have been foreseen.
This is surprising since in 1988 the tunnel was blocked off to prevent
more going into the central pens, which was overcrowded although not
dangerously so.   That was not reported in the course of any debrief
and was unknown to Chief Superintendent Mole or any senior officer
involved in the planning.     It ought to have affected the 1989
operational order.


B. The decision to give Liverpool the Leopinqs Lane end
1.      Chief Superintendent Mole made it clear that he would only
agree to police the semi-final at Hillsborough if each t e a m ’s
supporters had the same end as they had had in 1988.     That decision
was in our view justified and it was left to the FA to decide whether,
                                    14



in the Tight of it, to choose Hillsborough.      The 1988 fixture had,
according to Mr Evans’ report, gone well.       In fact, Liverpool had then
complained that, although they had more support, they had the smaller
ticket allocation.     In addition their supporters had further to
travel.   Mr Kelly accepted that, in retrospect, the choice of
Hillsborough for the second year running was somewhat unfair to
Liverpool.     It was also unfortunate that Liverpool’s complaints about
the choice of Hillsborough for 1989 were not put before the Committee
which had to decide on allocation.       Liverpool and its supporters had
reason to feel unfairly treated.     There were no factors which
militated in favour of Hillsborough rather than Manchester United.
Those set out by Mr Kelly in his evidence are unconvincing.        The truth
seems to have been that it was thought convenient to use Hillsborough
because things seemed to have gone well in 1988.


2.        Although the wrong decision was in our view made, it is
difficult to see how it had any direct connection with the tragedy.
There were no doubt a number of fans who were unable to get tickets,
perhaps more than there might have been had the match been played
elsewhere.     This may have resulted in more ticketless fans coming to
Sheffield in the hope of getting into the ground.       Certainly, there is
evidence of considerable numbers of fans asking for tickets.        It is
clear that after the tragedy, some Liverpool fans were blaming the
allocation of ends.    We do not think that an inference can be drawn
from that that large numbers of ticketless fans gained admission.           In
the shock and confusion things were said which were not properly
thought out.    There is no reason to change the opinion stated in
opening this inquiry that a disaster such as this could have occurred
at any semi-final and that, if Nottingham Forest supporters had been
allocated to the Leppings Lane end, an Inquiry might well have been
considering why some of them were crushed to death,


C. The testing and collapse of barrier 124A and the removal of 144
1.      Two sections of barrier 124A in pen 3 collapsed as a result of
the overcrowding.   There can be no doubt that that collapse caused a
number of deaths.   The barrier had been tested by Dr. Eastwood’s firm
in July 1988 and had passed.


2.      The test had been carried out in accordance with
Dr. Eastwood’s interpretation of Annex C to the Green Guide.     The
force of 6.0 KN/metre width has to be applied for three 5 minute
periods, a record being kept of the amount of-deformation during each
loading and of the percentage of recovery.    If the recovery is less
than 50% after the third application of force, there is a failure: if
it is 50%-75%, there must be a retest.    As may be apparent, the
question is 50% or 75% of what?    Is the recovery by reference to the
position of the barrier before the first application of force or
before the third?   If the former, a span of 124A recorded 53% and
should have been retested; if the latter, it recorded 100% and passed.
 Dr. Eastwood adopted the latter and so passed it.    He justified his
interpretation in evidence.    We think he was wrong and that safety
ought to have dictated that the recovery must be by reference to the
position of the barrier before the first application of force.      But we
do not think we can be criticised for adopting his interpretation,
because it is fairly open on the language of Annex C and has some
support from the tests in the British Standards.
3.        Although the collapse of the barrier caused deaths, there were
many who died elsewhere in pens 3 and 4 and, if it had not collapsed,
fans would in all probability have been crushed to death against it.
In his statement, Dr Eastwood said that it was in his view "reasonable
to believe it failed on 15th April 1989 because it was subjected to a
significantly greater crowd pressure than is envisaged in the 1986
Guide".     That evidence was not challenged, since it is manifest that
the gross overcrowding in pen 3 would have created an excessive
pressure.     The vertical run behind it to barrier /<+-«)       and the
diagonal run to the tunnel side of the pen at the top would have
increased that pressure.     There is no certainty that the different
interpretation and a retest would have led to renewal of the barrier
or that, even if it had been renewed, it would have survived the
pressures exerted upon it.     Furthermore, e v e n i f it had survived, it
is difficult to say that lives would have necessarily been saved.          It
is incidentally unfortunate that Dr Eastwood’s test records were
incomplete, since the test of one out of three of the spans was not
recorded.     It happens that in the case of 124A the one omitted was the
one which survived.


4.        We should also refer to the removal of barrier 144 in 1986.
This did materially affect the capacity and we think that insufficient
consideration was given to the adverse effects of the removal.        It
made it all the more important to regulate the numbers going into the
pens; this no-one seems to have appreciated.      Its removal made it the
more easy for fans coming down the tunnel to spread out into the pen
and we believe that its absence did result in a greater flow down the
pen. The evidence of Inspector Bullas, who was looking down from the
west stand, of a sea of people flowing down the pen is graphic and
consistent with the sort of movement one would expect.       A number of
fans spoke of being carried down the pen from the tunnel as they
entered after Gate C was opened and we .know that at least 20 of those
who died came in through Gate C after 2.52 (a fact which gives the lie
to the opinion expressed in some quarters that drunken late-comers
killed those who     had arrived in good time) and some of those ended up
at the front of pen 3.


D. The Police Planning
1.      The police operational order for 1989 was essentially a
reproduction of that which had apparently worked well in 1988.        So
much was this so that it omitted to include the instructions to the
police Tango units to assist the ambulance and fire services to make a
rendezvous point     at Herries Road Bus garage as had been agreed in
August 1988: see     Doc:477.   This omission might have been important: in
the event, despite the emergency that arose, it seems to have made
little difference.    Since there had been a minor pitch invasion at the
end of the 1988 match the Order underlined the instruction to serial
1, the offices on the perimeter track, to forbid anyone "access to the
track from the terraces without consent of a senior officer (except to
receive medical attention)".     In this context, senior officer meant an
inspector of higher ranking officer.     Thus it was drummed into all
officers that access to the pitch must not be permitted except in the
most exceptional circumstances.     This led to the failure to react
quickly enough to the emergency that in fact arose.     Police were
conditioned to believe that any attempt to come out of the terraces
must be a pitch invasion and therefore must be prevented.      In
addition, there was insufficient planning to deal with the arrival of
fans at the turnstiles.     It was assumed that they would arrive in a
steady flow and that there would be no build up. It is interesting
that there was a considerable body of evidence from fans to the effect
that in 1988 there had been a much higher profile policing en route to
the ground.     Fans coming down Leppings Lane had been stopped and asked
if they had tickets and steps had been taken to weed out those who had
not and to control those going to the turnstiles.     Some witnesses even
talked of a recollection of barriers across Leppings Lane.     The police
denied that there was any difference and there is nothing in the
Operational Order which suggests any change,     save for a reduction in
numbers of officers posted to public order duties away from the
ground.     It may be that the relatively smooth running of things in
1988 has led people to think there was more control than in the chaos
of 1989, whereas in fact there was no material difference.      In any
event, it is clear that in 1989 insufficient consideration was given
to the possibility of the arrival of large numbers at once or to the
problem of a substantial number of latecomers.     The need to control at
a distance from a ground was identified in 1926; that lesson was not
learnt at Hillsborough.


2.         The plan had been operated in 1988 by Chief Superintendent
Mole.     He had considerable experience of overseeing the policing of
Hillsborough.     He was moved to a new post at the end of March 1989 and
was succeeded by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.     Mr Duckenfield had
little recent experience of policing football grounds and had not been
to Hillsborough for some 10 years.     That was, of course, not his
fault.    He inherited a plan which had appeared to work well and was
content that it would work well again.    He did not have the experience
to recognise all the potential problems.    This was not his fault, but
we feel that he should have taken more time and greater care to
familiarise himself with the ground and all its problems.
Alternatively, Hr Mole could have been asked to deal with the match,
notwithstanding his new posting, since to require that Mr Duckenfield
should be in control if such an important match with a capacity crowd
so soon after his appointment was to ask a great deal of him.


Ill    SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989
A.    The crush at the turnstiles
1.        Because of the need to segregate Liverpool from Nottingham
Forest fans, 12 turnstiles which normally were used to gain access to
the North Stand from Penistone Road were not used.    This meant that
all 24,000 Liverpool fans had to enter by the Leppings Lane
turnstiles.    1-10 were allocated to the 9880 in the North Stand, 11-16
to the 4465 in the West Stand and A-G to the 10,100 on the terrace.
This meant that there was considerable pressure on the turnstiles and,
assuming a hoped-for rate of 800 an hour was achieved, it would have
taken well over an hour to get everyone in.    Any hold ups would have
increased that time.    The design of the ground made this imbalance of
turnstiles inevitable and it is a defect which undoubtedly contributed
to the disaster.


2.       It was essential that there should be no impediment to the
smooth operation of the turnstiles.   However, there are a number of
things which did cause fans to congregate outside the turnstiles and
to obstruct and delay the entry to the ground.    In particular, we
would identify the following matters:-
(i) The confusing nature of the tickets coupled with the
signing outside the turnstiles.    1-10 were marked A, 11-16 C
and A-G B, so that they ran ACB.   B was the other side of a
wall to A and C, so that anyone getting himself on the wrong
side had to extricate himself and go to the other side.
Furthermore some of the signs placed to show the appropriate
colour coding of the relevant turnstiles were too low and
invisible once a substantial queue built up.    Police officers
said that there were numerous queries from fans as to where
they should go and that the signing was not at all good.      The
Club ought to have made sure that the tickets and signs were
clear.


(ii) The activities of-ticket touts.   There were touts-.--
operating, albeit not in large numbers, in the vicinity of the
Leppings Lane turnstiles: one at least was arrested for
obstruction.   Touts are a menace because (a) they encourage
fans to come without tickets in the hope of being able to buy
one, (b) they sell supporters tickets for the wrong end of the
ground, thus imperilling the segregation of the fans and (c)
they cause obstruction.   Ideally, they should be barred from
the vicinity of any ground, but there are difficulties in
devising a means of curtailing their activities without
preventing the perfectly lawful and unobjectionable swapping
or selling of tickets other than as a business.
(iii) The presence of ticketless fans.    The evidence makes it
clear that there were many fans asking for tickets.     Police
officers on duty at and near the turnstiles give various
estimates of the numbers, ranging from 200 to 2000.     Fans have
told the inquiry that much more was done in 1988 to try to
weed out the ticketless than in 1989.    Whether or not that is
right, very little was done in 1989.     The police told the
inquiry that there was little they could do, since no offence
was committed in being near a ground without a ticket,
provided there was no obstruction or breach of the peace.        We
do not think the police are so powerless.     Ticketless fans do
cause problems and, in sufficient numbers, are almost bound to
cause an obstruction.   It is in our opinion perfectly
reasonable for a police officer to ask a fan if he has a
ticket and, if he has not, it is lawful to refuse him access
to the immediate vicinity of the ground.     Such refusal can be
justified on the basis of an apprehended obstruction.      In any
event, we suspect that in many cases an indication by an
officer to a ticketless fan to go away would suffice.


(iv) Some ticketless fans tried to get in by bribing turnstile
operators or by rushing or climbing over turnstiles.     Others
with tickets for the Kop tried to get in the Liverpool end.
Both of those categories of people delayed the turnstiles and
affected the smooth running of entry to the ground.
3.       By 2.30pm all pretence at orderly queueing had ceased and
there was a crush of fans at the turnstiles.   Although, according to
the operational order, officers outside the turnstiles had inter alia
to form orderly queues, the Inspector in charge (Inspector Sykes) told
the inquiry that that was an impossible task when a large crowd
attended.   By 2.40pm or thereabouts the police had lost control.     The
crush got worse and worse and the gates had to be opened.   Attempts to
save the situation by the use of mounted officers failed.   Despite the
views of Inspector Hand-Davies, which must be given considerable
weight, it seems to us that the area was too confined to permit of
effective action by horses. T h e y did not have sufficient room to
manoeuvre and were enveloped by the crowd since individuals were
unable to move away, there being nowhere to move to.   Superintendent
Marshall himself was overwhelmed by the crowd and his efforts to
alleviate the crush were ineffective.   At some stage, an attempt was
made to shut the perimeter gates and to form a barrier of horses to
prevent new arrivals coming down Leppings Lane joining the back of the
crush and so making things worse.   This tactic seems to have
succeeded, at least for a time, but it was too late, for, very soon
afterwards, Gate C was opened.   Evidence was given that, despite the
barrier, fans were forcing themselves through, even going under the
horses’ bellies.   The perimeter gates, or some of them, were pushed
open.   The evidence of what precisely happened is confusing.   There is
no doubt that there were fans, particularly among those arriving at a
relatively late stage (i.e. 2.45 onwards) who, perhaps because they
had had too much to drink or because of selfishness or to create
difficulties in the hope of getting an advantage (e.g. admission to
the ground without a ticket) or for some other reason, did push and
shove and exacerbate the position.     But those were a minority.


4.          The manual log kept by Superintendent Murray shows that at
14.17 there was a request to close Leppings Lane.     Mr Marshall and Mr
Duckenfield think the request came later and certainly Leppings Lane
was not closed to traffic until after 2.30.     If Mr Murray’s timing is
correct, the police outside were aware of problems building up at a
comparatively early stage.     We find it surprising that no measures
were taken by those inside the ground in the control box to try to
seek information to ascertain whether many fans were still coming
towards the ground.     It is also surprising that nothing was done by
the Commander outside to deploy officers to try to control the fans
arriving further away from the ground to create a breathing space.          At
about 2.30, Mr Duckenfield, seeing the crowd at the turnstiles, asked
Mr Murray if they would get everyone in by 3pm.     Mr Murray said he
thought they would.     It does not seem to have occurred to them to
check the turnstile count or to find out how many were to come.        It
should by 2.40 at the latest have been apparent that all would not be
in by 3pm and the kick-off should have been postponed.     It had been
decided that kick-off would only be postponed if there were some
reason other than their own volition which caused late arrival of a
substantial number of fans.     This was to adopt too inflexible an
approach.     Postponement might not have eased the crush, but, since it
was accepted by many witnesses that things got worse nearer to 3pm
because fans did not want to miss any of the game, it might well have
done.   If a dangerous situation was created, it should not have
mattered what caused it.     If postponement of the kick-off might
reasonably have overcome the danger, it should have been done.


5.        All the police witnesses concerned in the policing asserted
that they did not foresee that there would be so many arriving late,
and at once.    They go on to suggest it was unforeseeable.   We
disagree.    It is, we would have thought, not in the least surprising
that fans should be reluctant to spend many minutes standing on a
terrace or, for that matter, sitting in a seat with very little in the
way of entertainment provided.    There was some evidence of knowledge
by the police that fans were developing a pattern of arriving 15
minutes or so before kick-off because, it was thought, they were
seeking alcoholic refreshment elsewhere since they could not get in
the ground: see Doc: 434A.     This was not particularly referable to
Liverpool fans, but, on the day, the police were at a fairly early
stage aware of a considerable amount of drinking by supporters.       It
was a fine and fairly warm day, such as would encourage people to sit
around in the sunshine.    It was an all-ticket match, so that fans
would be forgiven for believing that it would not take very long to
get in.


6.        In any event, we do not think that those who arrived |hour
before kick-off can properly be branded latecomers, particularly since
the tickets said spectators should be in their places by 2.45.       It was
taking up to 20 minutes to get through the crush and into the ground.
Once the crush developed, there was more difficulty in getting through
the turnstiles which worsened the crush.
7.         It has been said that, had the fans not pushed, the problem of
crushing would not have arisen.       This is a superficially plausible
view.   But it ignores the reality of crowd behaviour.       It has not been
seriously suggested by any police officer that the mood of the crowd
up to about 2.30 was other than good natured.        It is precisely because
people who are aiming to go to a particular place through a limited
means of access do tend to crowd together that there is a need for
control.     And, as one witness said, once you are in that sort of a
crowd, you only move forwards or sideways, never backwards.        Sideways
was constricted, so all were tending to move forwards.


8.         We should refer to other factors which have been suggested as
causative of the crush.


           (a)   Ticketless Fans
           As we have already said, it is very difficult to estimate the
           number of ticketless fans.     It has been suggested that there
           were a substantial number who were determined to get into the
           ground without a ticket.     There is some evidence, notably
           from Mr Taylor, the effect of which is that some fans were
           overheard expressing the intention to get in by way of an open
           gate or to cause a gate to be opened.    Attention is drawn to
           the arrival of large numbers of Liverpool fans at all-ticket
           League matches in the hope of gaining admission.     And it is
           pointed out that at this y e a r ’s Cup Final there were up 1000
           fans who had come to force an entry to Wembley Stadium.        We do
           not doubt that there probably were some fans who came without
tickets determined to gain entry.      But we find it impossible
to accept that the crushing was caused by such fans so as to
engineer the opening of a gate, a theory propounded by
Superintendent Greenwood.      (See Day 12, p.95).    That would
have involved a truly amazing degree of preparation and good
fortune.      However, there may well have been a number of fans
who took advantage of the situation and were happy to
exacerbate and make use of the crush.      Opportunists probably
did hope that a gate would be opened and that they would get
in through it.      To that extent, ticketless fans may have
contributed to the difficulties at the turnstiles.


(b)   Drink
Many witnesses, particularly the police, refer to a large
consumption of alcohol, mainly lager.      Fans arrived in
Sheffield in good time but then stayed outside the ground
drinking, either at pubs or in public places.        Some police
officers suggested that the ban on the sale of alcohol in the
ground contributed to this pattern of behaviour.        It was
pointed out that, having regard to the crowds, those seeking
drink inside the ground, if it was permissible to sell it,
would be unlikely to succeed in getting more than a pint (i.e
a single drink).     It does certainly seem that a significant
number of fans did decide to take advantage of the sunshine
and drink so that they arrived comparatively late and in a
condition affected by alcohol.     The drink had increased
selfish and stupid behaviour, leading to pushing and a
         failure to take any notice of police appeals to hold back.
         There was a considerable amount of boorish and loutish
         behaviour (e.g. urinating in gardens or backyards, throwing
         empty cans all over the place, shouting, swearing and
         chanting) which sadly tends to be associated with football
         crowds.   That sort of behaviour is inexcusable.   But it was a
         minority of fans who were guilty of it and it did not cause
         the trouble.   It probably contributed to the inability of the
         police to alleviate the trouble once it had arisen.


         (c)   Hooliaanism
         This is really coupled with the taking of drink, although
         those may well have been fans who did not need drink to behave
         in a thoroughly antisocial fashion.   Police horses were burnt
         with cigarettes, there was pushing and shoving and some fans
         behaved in a thoroughly selfish way, concerned only to get
         themselves into the ground without caring for the comfort or
         safety of their fellows.   But this sort of behaviour was that
         of a minority and did not cause the problem.   The primary
         cause of the crushing was the bottleneck at Leppings Lane, and
         insufficiency of turnstiles and a failure by the policy
         properly to control fans arriving before they reached the
         perimeter gates and the turnstiles.


B.   The opening of the gates
1.       At 2.47 Superintendent Marshall radioed the first request to
open gates.    Ground control was focussing on gate C and so it was that
 gate that was expected to be opened.      At 2.48 it opened to eject a fan
 and some 200 or so outside burst in.      This happened before Mr
 Duckenfield was able to decide on an answer.         Shortly afterwards the
 request was repeated, again that the gates should be opened.         Chief
f Superintendent Duckenfield realised that to open the gates would be to
 act contrary to all the planning and# would let unsearched and
 possibly ticketless fans into the ground.      He had a difficult decision
 to make and he took his time making it.      Unfortunately, neither he nor
 any of his advisers in the control room took any steps to prepare for
 the consequences of opening Gate C in particular.         The inevitable
 result would be an influx of fans down the central tunnel and into
 pens 3 and 4:      this should have been foreseen.     Mr Murray attempted,
 he says, to contact Mr Lock, but was unsuccessful.         Otherwise, no
 attempt was made to contact or t o warn the stewards irr therltrb. --The
 suggestion that the officers on the concourse ought to have acted on
 their own initiative does not bear examination: they did not know
 that   the gate was to be opened nor did they know that pens 3 and 4
 were already full.      In fact, by 2.50 pens 3 and 4 had reached their
 safe   capacity.     This should have been obvious to those in the control
 box.    Even if it was not, steps should have been taken to prevent the
 large numbers who were bound to come through Gate C from going down
 the central tunnel.


 2.      At 2.54 the teams came out onto the field.         This resulted in a
 roar from the crowd, encouraging entrants to the ground to hurry to
 their places.      So it was that the greater portion of the 2000 or so
 who entered through Gate C went into pens 3 and 4.         They came in in an
orderly fashion, glad to escape from the dangerous crush outside.         At
2.58 Gate A was opened, but this time there was some preparation
inside, largely because of the foresight of Sgt. Higgins.      Mr
Duckenfield took additional     steps by deploying a serial to the front
of the North Stand to cater     for that influx which might have caused
trouble to the seated customers in that stand.     Those standing on the
terrace were left to fend for themselves.


3.       It is clear that the failure to take any steps to prevent fans
going from Gate C to pens 3 and 4 was the effective cause of the
disaster.     The decision to open the gates cannot be criticised:    the
failure to foresee the result can.


C.   Inside the ground
1.       It has been submitted that a video shows activity in pen 3
suggesting that the barrier broke before 2.52.     We do not find that at
all likely.    It is contrary to the evidence that is available from
fans who were in the vicinity of that barrier.     It is also less
probable, since a surge in an overcrowded pen was far more likely to
have done the damage.    It was believed at an earlier stage of the
inquiry that the surge of fans coming in from Gate C, coinciding with
the arrival of the teams on the pitch, caused the collapse.     The
evidence now available suggests it may have occurred later, possibly
even as late as 3.05, when the hitting of the bar at the Nottingham
Forest end caused a surge on the terrace.    There is much conflict, but
it seems that by 3.02 or thereabouts, when Gate 3 had been opened
properly, a pile of bodies was already obstructing it.
2.         Since no steps were taken to prevent it happening, the pens
got fuller and fuller.     As they did, people began to be crushed to
death.     Some fell to the ground and were asphyxiated as a result:
others were unable to breathe standing up.      Almost all died from
traumatic asphyxia - the crush was so great that they could not
breathe.     As this happened, they began to cry out in distress.      The
police officers at the perimeter fence were slow to react, partly
because they were accustomed to overcrowding, partly because the noise
level made it difficult to hear that the cries were of people in real
distress and partly because they were conditioned and instructed to
Itatte/w*
p « K 5 w * e the integrity of the pitch. PC Hooson told the inquiry that
he came past the North Stand and, as he approached gate 4, he realised
                                          CJt
that fans were in distress and he tookjjupon himself to open Gate 4.
This was sometime between 2.55 and 3pm.      Thereafter, Gate 4 remained
open.     PC Illingworth, the officer on Gate 4, does not agree; he says
he opened that gate.     It is possible that it had originally been
opened by PC Illingworth and shut again and then reopened by PC
Hooson.     But insofar as there is a conflict of evidence to be
resolved, we would submit that PC Hooson’s account is to be preferred.
PC Illingworth must feel himself open to criticism; PC Hooson has, on
the face of things, no axe to grind.


3.         Gate 3 was opened, according to PC Smith, by the force of the
fans in the pen.     He shut it again.   The same happened again and it
was only then that he appreciated the need to keep it open to try to
help to extricate the injured.     This account, courageously given, is
corroborated by fans.     Dr Eastwood accepted that, given sufficient
pressure, the gate could have opened in the way described.
4.           It is not       possible to say precisely when the gates were
opened,      since the       videos available were not focussed on the pens at
the crucial time.        The photographs in Composite Album II show gate 4
open at      15.00 and       gate 3 at 15.02.   Videos show both gates closed at
15.00:45 (MAP     1) and gate 4 open at 15.00:50 (MAP 3).      The earliest
that Gate 3 is shown open on a video is 15.03: 49 (MAP 8).         All this
makes Mr Grobelaar’s timing very suspect and his description of the
various moves in the match is not borne out by the video of the game.


5.        Not only was there a slowness to react to the situation in the
pens, but also, once fans had begun to climb over the perimeter fence
(at about 3pm), the immediate reaction was that it was a pitch
invasion.     This was unlikely for various reasons, not least because
(a) the fans did not go on the pitch and (b) there was no conceivable
cause for an invasion at that stage of the game.         Valuable minutes
were spent while those in the control box tried to find out what was
happening.


6.        Attempts were made by standing on the perimeter fencing and
gesticulating to get those at the back of the pens to move back.
These attempts failed.       This was not in the main due to cussedness
on the part of the fans, but to (a) an inability to move and (b) a
failure to realise what was going on down the front.         No senior
officer thought to send police down the tunnel to haul fans out the
back - that was left to the initiative of junior officers.
7.         There was an absence of leadership by the senior police
officers.     Individual efforts were made to try to save lives and to
evacuate the pens, but the picture was one of chaos and lack of
organisation until Chief Superintendent Nesbitt came on the scene at
about 3.15.     No attempt was made to use the tannoy to try to summon
medical assistance until about 3.20.       Similarly, those not directly
involved, particularly the Nottingham Forest fans on the Kop, were
left ignorant of what was happening.       Chief Superintendent
Duckingfield defended his decision to say nothing on public order
grounds.     We can quite see that fans had to be kept in their places to
avoid interference with the emergency services, but we think that some
announcement should have been made.       Most football fans are decent
law abiding people and, if treated as human beings, are likely to
react sensibly. - When m     announcement was eventually made, the fans
all behaved well.


8.         The club had an agreement with the St. J o h n ’s Ambulance
Brigade to provide sufficient numbers to comply with the requirements
of the safety certificate.      Their members did all they could when the
tragedy occurred.     SYMAS had very prudently, by stretching the
relevant DHSS guidelines, determined that two of their personnel
should attend the ground with an ambulance.       Two complementary tickets
had been provided -for league games, but not for semi-finals.        It did
appear that there could be some criticism of the club for withdrawing
the tickets, but we heard from Mr Mackrell, and we have no reason to
doubt,that it arose from an administrative error.        In any event, the
personnel were at the ground and able to react quickly.        There was,
however, a lack of proper liaison with the police, largely because the
police had no plan specifically to deal with a disaster at
Hillsborough Stadium.     The same comment applies in respect of liaison
with the fire service, who were eventually called to produce bolt
cutters to remove the perimeter fencing.      The first fire officer to
arrive was told he w a s n ’t wanted.   In addition, there was confusion
between the club and Dr Purcell as to his role.       He thought he was
present to administer to the team or directors and was not the
physician referred to in the safety certificate.


9.       Much publicity was given to the attempt by the police to
summon the fire brigade and the conversation seeking to identify the
precise location of Hillsborough Stadium.       It would be unfair to blame
the fire brigade operator for her endeavours to get the right
information for the computer.      She expected the police to be precise
and there ought to be full briefing so that the police know what is
needed of them.     There was some confusion as to what was needed from
the fire brigade.


10.      Complaints have been made of the lack of proper medical
equipment.   We do not think any football club could reasonably be
expected to carry sufficient equipment to cater for a disaster of the
magnitude of that which occurred.       But there should have been at least
a resuscitator.     The SYMAS ambulance had all necessary equipment and
oxygen was quickly available.      It became clear that a defibrillator
would not have been a sensible piece of equipment to use in the pitch.
 We were not impressed with the complaints made by Dr Ashton and Dr
Phillips in that regard.
11.      Although there was confusion and disorganisation and a failure
to act as expeditiously in summoning the necessary assistance as was
desirable, we doubt that the delays caused deaths which would not in
any event have occurred.     We do think that, had the perimeter fence
been opened earlier and positive steps taken to get people out of the
back of the pens, some lives might have been saved.         But we doubt that
the delays in seeking medical aid and a sufficiency of ambulances made
any real difference.     As was pointed out in evidence, the first 4
minutes are crucial and immediate mouth to mouth resuscitation is the
only really effective and practical treatment.         This was given by
police officers, St. J o h n ’s personnel, fans etc.


12.      Much ill-feeling was generated by the allegation made that
afternoon that fans had taken down a fence and thereby caused the
tragedy.    This version was given by Mr Duckenfield to Mr Kelly at
about 3.15.     Mr Duckenfield has admitted that he deliberately did not
tell the truth.     That account had been given to the fire service and
to SYMAS.     There was scope for misunderstanding, since the call to
SYMAS may well have referred to the forcing of a perimeter gate.            That
possibility of misunderstanding cannot exonerate Mr Duckenfield.


D.    Radio Communication
1.       Radio communications were generally poor.       This was largely
due to the fact that over 100 officers had radios and so, particularly
as the situation became more difficult, there was a tendency for more
than one to talk at once.     In addition, shortly after 2.30 a problem
was apparent and the control box seemed to have lost transmission.
The reserve station was brought into use.    This was so badly sited
that it was impracticable to use it.    Hence the control box had to use
a set instead, thus losing the ability to switch to non-talk through
so as to override all other transmissions.    It did gain the advantage
on talk through that it was able to compete on equal terms with the
other officers.


2.       The situation was wholly unsatisfactory.   Many messages did
not get through.   Officers on the perimeter were not heard trying to
announce that there was crushing and asking for ambulances.
Superintendent Marshall could not get through his request to open the
gates and had to route it via the police station.


3.       Since an inspection by a Home Office expert has disclosed no
faults, the breakdown must have resulted from too much traffic on the
air.   Too many officers had radios for the system to cope.     Clearly,
consideration will have to be given in Stage 2 to means of improving
communications and avoiding the problems which arose.


IV.1    As will be apparent, we have not sought to cover all the
matters dealt with in the evidence.    We have not thought it necessary
to suggest the resolution of disputed evidence as to who said what and
when in relation to numbers still to come into the ground.      No doubt,
those matters are important to the individuals involved.      It is
possible that some people ought to have been aware of things which
should have led them to take action which might have changed events.
We are not satisfied that identification of the shortcomings of
individuals in those sorts of respects will help the Tribunal in its
task.   No doubt the parties concerned will, if they consider such
incidents to be important, deal with them in the course of their
submissions.


2.       This was a wholly avoidable disaster, but one which was bound
to occur so long as nothing was done to control the numbers going into
the pens and to provide a sufficiency of turnstiles and
policing to avoid a dangerous build up of fans seeking admission.
Luck prevented it happening before; that luck ran out on 15th April
1989, with the tragic consequences which have led to this Inquiry.     It
is clear that there must be education of all concerned, police,
stewards, spectators, so that overcrowding can be the more easily
recognised.    Ignorance, complacency and lack of foresight, not
deliberate callousness, led to the disaster.    Perhaps the lessons can
now be well and truly learnt and this will be the last of the series
of inquiries into disasters at football grounds which have led to loss
of 1 ife and injury.




                                        / ANIJREW COLLINS Q.C.
  SUBMISSION ON PART ONE OF THE


       HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY



           ON BEHALF OF



SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


               AND


      CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY
                           THE INVOLVEMENT OF THE FIRE SERVICE ON
■ein                          15TH APRIL, 198JT, AT HILLSBOROUGH




       1. (a)     It is not suggested in the light of the evidence                                      tendered

                  at     the     Inquiry         that       the       earlier summoning of the Fire

                  Service would have resulted in the saving of lives or                                       the

                  prevention          of     injuries.            Nevertheless         it is regrettable

                  that     notwithstanding              the          obvious        need     for        cutting

                  equipment,          once       it    became          apparent       that       persons were

                  trapped behind the perimeter fence in pens                                 3    and    4,     no

                  request        for       the    Fire       Service          to attend was made until

                  15.13.45.       Every appliance carries cutting equipment which                                    Hornsby
                                                                                                                     20.73.F
                  could        have         speedily             removed        the    perimeter         fence.

                  Emergency tenders also carry heavier duty portable cutting

                  equipment       which          could,          if    necessary, have been used to                  20.75.C

                  remove the radial fences.



            (b)   Chief Superintendent Duckinfield accepted that by 15.04 it                                         Duckinfield
                                                                                                                     8.107.E-F
                  was     apparent to him that people were trying to get out of

                  the pens and that               they       were          having    difficulty         getting

                  through      the     gates. Although he accepted that an obvious

                  solution would be to cut some of the fence down, he stated

                  that     the    thought         did        not       immediately pass through his

                  mind.     It is noted however that at 15.07                           a    request          from   S.A.I.
                                                                                                                     P.11
                  ground control for a fleet of ambulances was made.



       2.         Calling the Fire Service

            (a)   Following       a    request for bolt cutters made at about 15.12

                  by radio from the area                    of       the    perimeter       fence       to    the

                  ground       control           box         at       Hillsborough,         Sgt.    Goddard,         Goddard
                                                                                                                     18.89.B-H
                  immediately telephoned the                         police    garage       at     Claywheels
                                                        -    1   -
        Lane    asking    for   cutting          equipment.      They        replied that

        they    had   none   available           and    Sgt.     Goddard        therefore       Goddard
                                                                                                18.97.P-H
        signalled to PC Bichard who was also in the control box to

        radio Police      Control    at      Snig       Hill     to    call     the     Fire

        Service.



  (b)   PC Bichard passed the following message on the VHF channel                              S.A.l
                                                                                                P.16
        to Force Control at 1513.



               "Hillsborough ground control              could        you    contact     the

               Fire Service, we want some hydraulic cutting equipment

               to the ground to cut some of the metal                       fences.      Fire

               Service urgently required Leppinga Lane end."




        A   police    operator, PC Jones,in the incident room at Snig
                                                                                                Waugh
        Hill ForceControl           acknowledged          the message            with    the    31.113.G

        words:


                                                                                                S.A.l
               "Roger Fire Brigade urgent up to Leppings Lane Roger"                            P.16



  (c)   This    request   was   overheard by Chief Inspector Edmundson                          Edmundson's
                                                                                                additional
        and he went       to the adjacent              operations       room     to     give    statement

        instructions to one of the operators.



' (d)   Meanwhile,        in the operations              room    Julie        Webster,     a
                                                                                                Webster's
        temporary control       room     assistant,            was    dealing     with     a    statement

        telephone     call   from    Fire Control Operator Davies at the

        South Yorkshire Fire        Service            central control            room    in

        Wellington     Street reporting a house fire in Gatty Road in



                                     -   2   -
           which it was thought people were trapped and                       lives       might

           therefore be at risk.


                                                     *
     (e)   Chief Inspector Edmundson interrupted Miss Webster's call
                                                                                                  Edmundson1s
           telling      her    to   tell    the     Fire     Service         that     cutting     additional
                                                                                                  statement
           equipment was wanted at Hillsborough.



     (f)   The conversation between Miss Webster and Miss                      Davies       is

           recorded     in    the   transcript of the Fire Service tape and

           the part relating to Hillsborough took                     from    15.13.45       to

           15.14.58, a total of 1 minute 13 seconds.



3.         Comments

     (a) It      is   to be noted that although the message passed by PC

           Bichard to Force Control complied with the requirements of

           the    emergency procedure in that the precise location that

           the Fire Service were to attend and the type of                          equipment

           required     were    specified,         Miss Webster who spoke to Miss

           Davies made no mention of Leppings Lane or                    the        need    for

           hydraulic     cutting       equipment.        This    procedure          had    been

           agreed upon at       a   meeting     between         the    three        emergency     Core
                                                                                                  478
           services on the 9th August, 1988.



     (b)   Inspector     Sewell     accepted       that the necessity to provide

           such information to the Fire Service was obvious and                            that   Sewell
                                                                                                  31.32.A-F
           the Fire Service was entitled             to expect such details from

           the police.       By contrast, such           detailed      information          was

           provided     by    police    force      control      at     Snig Hill to the           Clarke
                                                                                                  24.75.E-F
           Ambulance Service.




                                           - 3 -
(c)   Hiss Davies whose call had been interrupted, had                           to    make

      sure that she had satisfactorily dealt with the Gatty Road

      fire whilst at the same                  time    trying to       deal    with     the
                                                       ;
      police request for assistance at Hillsborough.



(d)   She    needed        to    know the address of Hillsborough Football

      Ground to make             sure    the    appliances were           sent   to     the    Davies
                                                                                               20.40.C-D
      correct     place and as quickly as possible from the nearest

      fire stations.             She was, in our           submission,       entitled    to

      expect     that           police    force       control would know the place

      where     the     Fire       Service      were       required     as    they     were

      presumably already in attendance. If more detail as to the

      location could in fact have been provided , it                          could     have

      caused     an unnecessary delay,if she had mobilised the Fire

      Service to the district of Hillsborough. This                           would     have

      been     the appropriate alternative procedure in the absence

      of such information.



(e)   She asked for the             road       three       times whilst       typing     the

      information          into     her    computer          and the    first    enquiry

      produced        an    answer       unrelated         to   the    question.        The

      address,     Penistone            Road,    was       finally     provided by Miss

      Davies' supervisor, Mrs



(f)   If the police at Snig Hill had relayed                      the     message       from

      ground     control         that     the    Fire       Service    was required at         Davies
                                                                                               20.46.B-C
      Leppings Lane, that information would have been typed into

      the    computer       by     Miss     Davies         and produced an immediate

      'special risk' response.




                                          - 4 -
(g)   Miss Davies needed to know the nature of the                                incident       at

      which     the    Fire     Service was required to attend so that a

      decision could be made as                    to   what       type     and    number       of
                                                        ;
      appliances        should      be        sent.         In    the     circumstances the

      statement that there had been a                       major       accident     was       not

      helpful     and     it     is unfortunate that PC Bichard's request

      for hydraulic cutting equipment which would have indicated

      the   need       for   emergency             tenders was not relayed to Miss

      Davies.



(h)   Although         'Sheffield             Wednesday           Football         Club'        was

      programmed         into       the       computer,           'Hillsborough       Football

      Ground' was not.           This omission has now been remedied.



      When the first           fire       appliances             arrived    at     the     ground     Swain
                                                                                                      20.47.P-G
      (15.22),        both     at   Leppings            Lane and Penistone Road, the
                                                                                                      Fletcher
                                                                                                      20.57.A-D
      police officers on duty were unaware that the Fire Service
                                                                                                      20.64.G-H
      had   been      called,       where they were required and what they                            Housley
                                                                                                      20.78.B-C
      were required to do.            The provision of police tango                           units   20.79.G-H
                                                                                                      Sewell
      to    assist        the       Fire          Service        was    omitted      from       the
                                                                                                      31.9.E-G
                                                                                                      31.32.F-33.H
      operational orders for the day.                       By this time however, the
                                                                                                      Fletcher
      Leppings     Lane      terraces             had   been       virtually cleared and              20.58.G
                                                                                                      20.81.B
      thereafter the Fire Service personnel did what they                                     could

      to assist in attempting to resuscitate the casualties with

      oxygen, and organize the movement of the                             injured       to    the

      ambulances.




                                          _   5   -
 THE     INVOLVEMENT       OF THE FIRE SERVICE AS A MEMBER OF THE

                  OFFICERS' WORKING PARTY

                                           4

The Fire Service as a member of the Officer Working                           Party

and     later the Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group gave

advice to the local authority.



Until 7th September, 1987, the Fire Service was designated

the     primary    authority        for   means        of     escape    and    fire    Core 27

precautions.           Thereafter    the       Fire         Service     area     of

responsibility         was    defined      as    fire       precautions,       fire

alarms, means of escape, emergency                    lighting        and    stadium

capacity.         It   was    recognised        however that the areas of              Core 418

potential overlap of responsibility was                       quite     extensive.

It had been pointed out on the instructions of ACFO Seaman Seaman
                                                           20.53.E-H
by DO Grimshaw that the Fire Service would only be able to 20.57.C
                                                            Ex 11
put forward capacity figures based on means of escape. It ..Pare Service
                                                           bundle (annotations)
may well be that Mr Bownes did not appreciate the full
                                                           Bownes
significance of these reservations. The source of advice 29.102.H-106.A

for the effect on holding capacity of the structure of the

terrace     including        crush   barriers           was      the        Building

Surveyor's Department.



Thus,     for example, when the removal of barrier 144 in pen

3 was discussed and determined on 7th August, 1986, it was                             Calvert
                                                                                       30.23.A
not expected of the Fire Service representatives to advise                             30.50.G-51.B

on how holding capacity would be affected, if at all.



The local authorities, through                 their    representatives          Mr
                                                                                       Bownes
Vaughan     and    later     Mr   Bownes,       were responsible for co­               29.100.C-101.B

ordinating the work of the Working Party.                       It     was    their
duty on the basis of the advice received,                          to      effect      any

necessary        amendments          in   the Safety Certificate.                 On 5th

June, 1986, the City of               Sheffield          Metropolitan        District         Core 312

Council,        informed the Fire Service that a re-draft of the

Safety Certificate would shortly be complete but the first

draft     was     not     sent      to the Fire Service until 7th July,                       Core 387

1987.     Following       the       Fire    Service's         comments        on       13th   Fire Service
                                                                                              bundle Ex.74
August,        1987,     (including         a query as to whether stewards

could control crowd limits)                   a   revised         draft     (excluding        Core 506

schedule        three which set out the proposed capacities) was                              Fire Service
                                                                                              bundle Ex.86
sent to the Fire Service on                 30th        March,      1989.         In   the    Core 481
                                                                                              Seaman 23.57.G-58A
meantime,        the    Fire Service were frequently told that the
                                                                                              Bownes 29.109.H
re-drafting was in hand.



It was appropriate for the                  Fire       Service      to     give     their

advice     on     means        of    egress       in    an    emergency       with the

following considerations in mind:                                     ---



(a) The holding capacity of the pens would not                              exceed       54

    persons per 10 square metres



    Paragraph           15.3    of    the 1976 Green Guide, states that                       1986 Green Guide
                                                                                              Paragraph 220
    the number of people that can be                         safely       accommodated

    in     a    terrace        is    either the holding capacity or the

    capacity of the exit system.                       The Fire      Seirvice      makes      Seaman
                                                                                              22.149.C-150A
    an     assessment          of    a reasonably safe time to evacuate                       23.27.C-H

    through the exit system                 bearing          in   mind      the     risks     Eastwood
                                                                                              27.68.F-69.E
   which are likely to occur.                     The west terrace and stand

   being concrete structures were regarded                            as    having       a

   very        low     fire     risk.       The        maximum holding capacity

   namely 54 persons per 10 square                       metres       permitted         by

   the      Green       Guide,       when     applied to the total area of
pens 3      and      4    would           produce         speeds     of    evacuation

through their respective exit systems which were below

six minutes and as such                       well      within     what     the    Fire
                                                ;
Seirvice       regarded          as       the       safe    limit.        The holding

capacity to be determined by the                            Building       Surveyor's

Department        on      the     basis            of the construction of the

pens including the state and                            position     of    the    crush

barriers       was       likely           to be less than the maximum and

would     therefore          produce               an    even    more      favourable

evacuation time.



The     Club    and/or the police                       would be able to control

the numbers of spectators entering the pens.



A plan for separate turnstiles for different                                 sections

of the terrace was considered privately by Dr Eastwood                                     Eastwood
                                                                                           27-74.D
and the Club in 1981. At a Working                               Party meeting        on

18th    April,           1985,        a         revivalof        such a scheme was         Core 211

approved but was later                        abandonedbythe         Club    because

of    the   expenditure                   involved.         On     25th July, 1985,        Core 263

Eastwood and Partners wrote to South Yorkshire                                    County

Council enclosing inter alia plans 6705/8A and 6705/17

which showed a revised                        turnstile      layout.        This    was

substantially            approved             by     the Working Party on 29th             Core 265
                                                                                           Jackson
July, 1985 and was put into effect.                              At no     time    when    10.40G-41.B
                                                                                           10.43.D
these    various          proposals were under consideration was                           Eastwood
                                                                                           27.74.D-75C
it said by the police or the club that there                                was     any    27.76.F-77B

problem     in controlling the numbers entering different                                  Seaman
                                                                                           23.60.H
pens nor was it urged                         that      theschemes        which    gave    23.61.C-D
                                                                                           23.64.A
turnstile control should be adopted for that reason.                                       Calvert
                                                                                           30.48.C-49A
                                                                                           Bownes
                             -    8       -
                                                                                           30.2.A-B
            The    Club     and     the police adopted a system of feeding

            the west terrace exclusively from                  turnstiles          A-G    by

            using the personnel gate in^the wall between turnstile

            'A' and the rear of            the      west    stand     for       spectators

            wishing to reach the north west terrace (pens 6 and 7)
                                                                                                Eastwood
            thereby       reducing       the    potential       for       control          of
                                                                                                27.79.C-81.D
                                                                                                but c.p. 28.32 H-33A
            admission       to     the    pens      on the terrace.         This scheme
                                                                                                Seaman
            which was in operation on 15th April, 1989                       was     never
                                                                                                23.62.D-63-B
            even brought to the attention of the Working Party.



     (c) Such        capacity       would       provide     for reasonable ease of

            movement.



            Even with the maximum holding                  capacity       permitted        by

            the    Green     Guide,       the    density       of spectator packing

            would permit ease of movement through the pen                          and     it

            is most unlikely that a serious crushing problem would

            occur.        The     Fire    Seirvice     video        and     photographs

            demonstrate            the      maximum        density         of      packing

            contemplated by the Green Guide.



4.   The gates in the perimeter fence and in the radial fences

     in the west terrace.



     These were never intended by the Fire Service to cater for

     the     numbers      which     were admitted to pens 3 and 4 on 15th

     April, 1989.         When the perimeter gate to pen 3 was opened,

     many    persons        were    already lying across the mouth of the

     gate and it is, in our submission, highly                       unlikely,       even

     if    the     gate     had    been     1.1 metres wide, that evacuation

     could have been conducted at such a rate as to                          save        life

     or           prevent           serious            injury.              That           is

                                            - 9 -
not to say that the gates would not have been adequate for

the   kind of emergency which could reasonably be envisaged

if the appropriate holding capacity had been adhered to.



Perimeter Fence Gates



(a) Paragraph 18.3 of the 1976 Green Guide                       requires       that
                                                                                            1986 Green Guide
      access to playing pitches must be made as difficult as                                Paragraph 209

      possible in normal circumstances whilst providing                             the

      police      with     proper          access to the terraces for crowd

      control and enablingthe pitch to be used in the                          event

      of     a     serious          emergency.       Paragraph        7.9.1    which

      requires that such fences be provided with                       gates        for

      use    in    an emergency does not stipulate the frequency

      or minimum width of such gates.



(b) Paragraph 215 of. the 1986 Green                     Guide   provides that

      perimeter         gates       should    have    a minimum width of 1.1

      metres subject           to    paragraph       6   which       accepts    that

      deviation         from    individual       guidelines          are   possible

      without necessarily detracting from the overall safety

      of    the   ground        and      paragraph 8 which states that it

      should be borne in mind that, when using the Guide                             to

      assess       whether           existing        circumstances         provide

      adequately for the safety of spectators, the criterion

      to    be    aimed     for       is    that of a reasonable degree of

      safety.



(c) Gate 3 which           has       a     clearancewidth       of    0.81m     was         Eastwood's
                                                                                            statement p.22-3
      installed     in     1985 when the radial fence dividing the
                                                                                          Health & Safety
      centre      pen    was        installed.       Gate   4    which        has     a   Executive Report
                                                                                          Paragraph 2.6
                                    - 10 -
    clearance       width    of    0.77m was installed prior to the

    application for a Safety Certificate.

                                          t
(d) None of the perimeter gates in the west                    terrace        were
                                                                                       Seaman's statement
    taken     into account by the Fire Service in calculating                          paragraphs 2.4(iii)
                                                                                       2.12(±v)(c) and (d)
    the time in which the terrace or                  the    pens     could      be

    evacuated       in the event of an emergency which required

    total evacuation.          The gates were intended for use                   in

    the     event of local emergency to permit the evacuation

    of a relatively small           number       of     spectators        and    to

    allow access by the police.



(e) There        is a conflict of interest in applying paragraph                       Greenwood
                                                                                       12.42.E-F
    18.3 of the 1976 Guide (now paragraph 209 of the                            1986   12. 6 6 .C
                                                                                       Kelly
                                                                                       25.75.C-G
    Guide) ( see (a)(i) supra).



(f ) The    Fire Service did not consider it advisable-in all
                                                                                        Seaman
    the circumstances to mark the gates with                      exit      signs.      22.151.G
                                                                                        Seaman's statement
    They    were not regarded as primary or secondary routes                            2.4.(vii)

    of escape. On this particular terrace, evacuation                           was

    to     the    rear,     and   the   placing of exit signs on the

    perimeter fence         gates   would        be     likely      to    attract

    spectators       away     from the preferred route and lead to

    an exacerbation of any existing crushing problems.



(g) Prior to       15th   April,     1989,       the    Fire      Service       had     Calvert
                                                                                        30.42.C-E
    received       no evidence or suggestion that the widths or
                                                                                        Seaman
    number of gates in the perimeter                   fence   of     the     west      23.6O.G
                                                                                        Kelly
    terrace        were     inadequate.        Further,      Hr     Walker,      an     25.75.G-76B

    inspector appointed by the                Football      Association , who

    was    well aware of the need for such gates and able to

    compare them with          similar        gates    at    other       football
   grounds when considering the perimeter fence                          in   1987

   had made no complaints about the gates.


                                                i
                                                                                     Greenwood
   At     the     Spurs -v- Wolves match in 1981, gate No.2 was
                                                                                     12.22.D-F
                                                                                     12.63.F-H
   used satisfactorily to evacuate well in excess of                           100
                                                                                     12.64H
   spectators. The Fire Service was not provided with any                                 22.3.B-H
                                                                                     Core 132-141
   of the detailed accounts of the incident                        set   out    in
                                                                                     Seanan 23.6O.C-F
   the reports and correspondence and in any event, there
                                                                                     Calvert
                                                                                     30.41.B
   was no complaint or discussion at the time                        about     the
                                                                                     30.42.B
   width        of    the gates.            Indeed, a complaint was made to

   the police at the time that too                     many   spectators       had

   been allowed to escape rather than too few.



(h) It    is     a    requirement of paragraph 7.9.2 of the Green                    (1986 Green Guide)
                                                                                     Paragraph 215
   Guide 1976 that perimeter gates should be                        controlled,

   so     that        immediate        access       to the pitch or perimeter

   track can be ensured in the event of an emergency.                           It

   follows           in    our   submission that if they are to be an

   effective safety measure:



    (i)         There must be an awareness by those controlling

               the        packing      of the pens of the possibility of

               crushing among the spectators.



   (ii)        There must be constant vigilance to ensure that

               any difficulty or problem                within   the     pen    is

               noted.



  (iii)        Prompt action must be taken to open the gate or

               gates        if   the    need arises. In relation to the
                                                                                      Core 140
               1981 incident, the Chief                Constable     said     that

                                  -    12   -
           his    only     criticism of his senior officers was

           for not opening the gates earlier.


                                          ‘
(i) However:



    <i)    Prior to the game on the 15th April, 1989 Chief                             Duckinfield
                                                                                       7.140.G
           Superintendent           Duckinfield           had    concluded, in

           the light of the discussions and information he

           had,      that      the     pens        on    the    Leppings       Lane
                                                                                       Mole
           terraces did not present a major problem.                            The    7.88.C-D
                                                                                       Murray
           probability         of    crushing           was not specifically
                                                                                       II.67.E
           mentioned in any briefings.                                                 Greenwood
                                                                                       12.29.E



           The operational orders emphasised the                         need    to    South Yorkshire
                                                                                       Police. Vol.I
           prevent        spectators gaining access to the pitch                       Tab 14
                                                                                       Appendix 'B'
           but the function of the perimeter                       fence       gates

           in     providing         ameans          of    escape       in certain

           eventualities, particularly crushing,                         was     not

           referred to.



           Thus on or before 15th April, 1989 the officers

           on the ground do not appear to have                         been    made

           aware     of    the dangers of crushing in the pens,

           particularly if they became overcrowded.



    (ii)   Although the Safety Certificate                      had    not     been    Eastwood 27.70.G-71A

           amended       so    as    to       give each individual pen a

           designated capacity,               both       the    club    and     the    Mackrell 30.74.D-E

           police    were       aware         of   holding capacities for              Mole 7.13C

           pens 3 and 4, which they understood to be 1,000                             Bullas 14.103.E

           and     1,200      respectively.             This does not appear

                              - 13 -
        to have been passed on to the                       police       officers          Finnegan 17.128.H

        on    the        ground,             but    it     would       have     been       Smith 17.118.C

        irrelevant to do so if the policy of permitting

        the   spectators            in       the    west        terrace to find

        their own level was adopted.                       There was also             a    Duckinfield
                                                                                           8.85.B.-D.
        general      failure            to     appreciate the difference

        between full in terms of physical                          comfort       and       Bullas
                                                                                           14.114.D-F
        tolerance and full in terms of safe capacity.



(iii)   The   officers             in    the       control       room who were,            Duckinfield
                                                                                           8.31.B
        inter alia, to survey and control                          the    packing
                                                                                           Murray
        of    the pens had a restricted view of the front                                  11.96.C

        rows of the           terrace.             This    was     due    to     the       Goddard
                                                                                           18.96.C-H
        cranking         at    the       top       of     the fence, and also
                                                                                           Bichard
        because the video cameras (with                          the     exception         19.63.C-E

        of    the    colour             camera on zoom) did not show a

        clear picture of                what       was     happening       in    the

        pens.



(iv)    On    15th April, 1989, the police in the control                                  Bradley 1.95-A-B

        room, on the perimeter track and                          in     the    west
                                                                                           Golding 2.57.D-E
        stand     were        not        aware      that pens 3 and 4 were

        over full until                 many     spectators        had     already         Cruice 2.98.C
                                                                                           2.99-A
        sustained         serious            injuries       through crushing.              D Hughes 3-20

        Accordingly they did not open the gates in                               the       Bambrook 3-42.C-43.D


        fence       in    sufficient            time.       Indeed       there       is    Garrett 3-83.D-G

        evidence that after the gates to pens 3                                and    4    Lowe 3.91.B

        had been opened, they were closed again. In our                                    Connolly 4.55.E-G

        submission the gate                  to     pen     4    was     initially         Garrett 4.71.C

        opened      by        PC    Illingworth            and    while        he was      Smith 7.112.D-115.E

        shepherding spectators through gate 6 into                                   the   Illingworth 17.135-E
                                                                                           Hooson 29.30.D-E
                              - 14 -
                      terrace it was closed by an unidentified person

                      but then re-opened by PC Hooson.

                                                  ‘

      (j) If   it      had    been    appreciated          that    the     number           of

          spectators         entering    pens     3    and 4 exceeded even the

         maximum holding capacity i.e. 54 persons per 10 square

         metres and steps had immediately been taken to prevent

          further spectators from entering the                     centre        pens       by

          closing       the tunnel and the radial gates, any crushing

          problem that arose could have been safely resolved                                by

          evacuating an appropriate number of spectators through

          the perimeter fence gates.              These would have permitted

          evacuation at a rate of at least 60 persons per minute

          per pen (attributing to each gate only one unit width,

          namely 0.55 metres.)

                                                                                                  Pen 3        Pen 4
      (k) Even      with      the
                                high degree of overcrowding in pens 3 Golding                                  Greenwood
                                                                      2.58.C                                    12.66.H
          and 4,       there is evidence that, when gate 4 was first                                          „ 12.68.A-B
                                                                                                  Postlewaate
                  ,             ,                          . _     ..       ,    ..         ...   3.140.G     Garrett
          opened,        people       were      evacuated          through       it     with                   3 84 A
                                                                                            Cruice
          reasonable          ease.     The    situation          at     gate     3     was   2.101.E-G Bambrook
                                                                                                     enwood    3>47-P-G
          otherwise because the barrier had collapsed and people                                   re,,
                                                                                                  12.66.P-G    Illingworth
          were lying on the           ground      across      the        mouth    of     the        12.68.A-B 17.133.E
                                                                                                  12.37.G-38B 17.141.B-G
          gateway thus obstructing the exit.                                                        Inquiry    South Yorks
                                                                                                  Doc. 255      Police Photo
                                                                                                                DB/17 @ 14.59

(B)   Radial Pence Gates



      (a) The primary and preferred exit route from pens 3 and 4

         was the central tunnel               under    the        west     stand.       The Health & Safety
                                                                                                  Executive Report
         Health         and    Safety    Executive          have        calculated      the       paragraph 6.3

         maximum permitted holding capacities of pens 3                               and     4

          under        Paragraph        15.4(a)       of    the .1976       Guide        and

                                      - 15 -
   Paragraph 222(a) of the              1986     edition      as     1,015        and

   1,036    respectively. Taking a                flow rate of 60 persons               1976 Green Guide 16.2

   per minute per unit exit width of 550mm the three unit                               1986 Green Guide
                                                                                        Paragraph 234
   widths       at    the tunnel for pen 3 provide                 an exit time

   of 5 minutes 38 seconds for 1015 spectators and the                              3

   unit    widths        at    the tunnel for pen 4 provide an exit

   time of 5 minutes 45 seconds for 1,036 spectators.



(b) In compliance with paragraph 6.13 of                   the      1976     Green

   Guide an alternative exit route was provided, although

   its possible use in an emergency was regarded                           by     the

   Fixe     Service       as    extremely        remote.      The alternative

   routes were through the radial gates each of which are

   of     two   unit     widths.        Thus pen 3 could be evacuated

   through the gate into pens 1 and 2                    in    8    minutes        27

   seconds and pen 4 could be evacuated through the gates

    into pens 6 and 7 in 8             minutes      38     seconds.          It    is

   submitted           that     if    an    announcement         was    made       to

   evacuate the whole of              the   west     terrace,          spectators       Seaman 23-59.G-60B

   would naturally move towards the exits round the south                               Calvert 30.47.C

   and north ends of the west               stand       creating       a     vacuum

   into     which       the    spectators        from    pens 3 and 4 could

   readily be absorbed.



(c) There is a potential             conflict      between       the    need       to   Evans
                                                                                        26.25.G-M
   evacuate          spectators      through     the radial gates if the                Eastwood
                                                                                        27.76.B-C
   tunnel cannot be used for that purpose and the need to                               Calvert
                                                                                        30.47.D-48B
   prevent pens 3 and 4 being overcrowded by migration of

   spectators from the outer pens.                   However,          paragraph

   50   of the 1986 Green Guide states that a smooth, free

   flow through an exit route               to    the      outside      is      best
   achieved by controlling the crowd flow at the entrance

   to the     exit       route.       The    provision   of     a    wider     or

   additional gate in the radial fence would be likely to

   hinder the free          flow       through    the    alternative         exit

   route      via    the north and south ends of the west stand

   in that spectators would be entering                   the    outer       pens

   from the centre pens at a greater rate than they would

   be leaving them.



(d) It would have been            undesirable      to    mark    the       radial    Eastwood
                                                                                     27.76 .D
   gates or exit routes since that would                   in an emergency

   be likely to deflect spectators from the preferred and

   speedier        exit route even when the tunnel was open and

   available. Furthermore, the gates served not merely as                            Seaman
                                                                                     23.4.C-E
   emergency        exit    routes          but were also there to enable

   safe distribution of the spectators to take place.



(e) When the radial fences were approved                  by    the        Officer

   Working      Party      on 11th September, 1981, it was made a                    Core
                                                                                     153
   condition that the new gates in the radial                        fences     at

   the     rear     of    the        terrace    should   be     under      police

   control.         It    was        clearly    understood      by    the     Fire
                                                                                     Seaman's statement
   Service     that        such      control    would be effected by the             2.11.(ii)

   gates being constantly manned. It was a matter for the

   police     to     decide       how many officers were deployed to

   carry out that function.



(f) Paragraph 7.9.2 of the 1976 Green Guide required                         that

   access     points       through a pitch perimeter fence should

   be "controlled so that immediate access to                        the    pitch

   can   be    ensured          in    the event of an emergency".             The

                                - 17 -
   condition        imposed      in     relation         to     the radial fence

   gates should have been read in this context.

                                             t
(g) According to Superintendent Stuart, the requirement of                                Stuart
                                                                                          31.108.D-H
   the    Working        Party       that    the        radial gates should be

   under police control was interpreted by the police                                as

   a     conditional      control           in    the     sense that the gates

   would only       be    manned       when        segregation       was      taking

   place.      There      is     no    evidence          that    this      was ever

   discussed or given approval by the Working Party.



(h) In our submission, in order to control the numbers                               in

   pens 3 and 4 it was essential to man the radial gates.                                 Evans
                                                                                          26.25.D-E
   If further entry into pens 3 and 4 was to be prevented                                 26.26.B-E

   by     closing     the central tunnel, it would be necessary

   to prevent or at least control                       movement     through        the

   radial     gates.      A police officer or officers stationed

   at the back of the terrace could have                         supervised         the

   packing     of     pens       3    and        4, directed spectators, and

   notified police control when the                      pens     were       reaching

   their      appropriate             capacity.           Furthermore,         in    an
                                                                                          Eastwood
   emergency when the tunnel could not be used the police                                 27.75.E-76B

   officer     would      be     immediately             available      to    direct

   spectators to the presence of the gate and                           assist       in

   the      passage       of         spectators         through      it.      In    our
                                                                                          Sewell
   submission,        a   police       officer          or      officers         could    31.31.E-G

   properly    carry       out       these        functions      without         being

   "swamped"     providing           the     maximum         possible        holding

   capacity      envisaged            by     the     Green      Guide      was      not

   exceeded.
(i) It    appears that on 15th April/                   1989       spectators        did

   not     leave     pens       3    and 4      by way of the radial gates

   after serious difficulties had arisen within the pens.

   The    Fire       Service        anticipated that were the gates in                     Seaman
                                                                                           22.151.D-E
   the radial fences to be                 used       for    this    purpose,         an

   announcement          on    the       public       address       system to that

   effect would be made.                 If    there     had       been     a   police

   officer on duty at the gate he would have been able to

   make spectators aware of the existence                           of    the     gates

   and     assist        in   keeping          the    gangway clear.            Had the

   number of spectators in each pen                      been       kept    even     to

   their    maximum           possible holding capacities, permitted

   by the Guide, relatively                    free    movement       towards        and

   through the radial gates would have been possible.



(j) However,       the     apparent           failure of spectators to make
                                                                                           Sykes
   use of radial gates was probably due in                           part       to   the   15.6 .H
                                                                                           Evans
   unwillingness of persons at the rear of the terrace to
                                                                                           15.97.G-H
   move     from     the      positions         they         had     secured         for   Morgan
                                                                                           15.132.C
   themselves.           In    this       context it is to be noted that                   16.15.D
                                                                                           Bums
   when the police started trying to evacuate                              spectators
                                                                                           17.35.G-36A
   from     pens     3    and       4    through       the    tunnel       they      had   Pearson
                                                                                           17.60.B
   difficulty in getting them to                      move    even       though      the   Aitken
                                                                                           17.63.H
   tunnel      was    clear.            Many    people       had to be forcibly

   ejected and dragged out.




                                - 19 -
                           IN SUMMARY (



There     is no justifiable criticism that can be made of the

Fire Service as to the manner in which they                       responded          to

the     call    for   assistance         at 15.13.45.         The request came

from South Yorkshire Police                Headquarters         Force     Control.

The     Fire    Service     in    the      interests       of    a    prompt        and

appropriate response were entitled to proceed on the basis

that     the    police    would       be      able    to   provide details of

precisely where their appliances were to                        attend       and    the

precise        purpose    for    which        they    were required.          On the

basis of the information that had been                     passed       to    Police

Force Control, all such information was in fact available.



In     anyevent,         even    if any criticism can justifiably be

made against the Fire Service on this score,                         in   view       of

the    times      involved,      it   had       no causal       connection with

deaths and injuries sustained in the disaster.



In so far as there was any delay in the                    updating          of     the

Safety Certificate, that was neither caused by, nor was it

the responsibility of the Fire Service.



As regards the pens on the west terrace, and in particular

the    perimeter      fence      gates        and    radial     gates, the Fire

Service, in giving         advice        to    the    Working        Party,        were
entitled       to     proceed      on the basis that the Club and           the

police would control the numbers in, and the safe                     packing

of,     the    pens.     Even       if the numbers in the pens were as

high as the maximum possible holding capacity permitted by

the   Green Guide, it is submitted that the perimeter fence

gates and       the    radial       gates     would     have   performed    the

functions       for    which       they     were intended.     The perimeter

fence gates would have permitted the                    safe   evacuation    of

sufficient       numbers to resolve any local crushing problems

that could reasonably have been anticipated as                     likely    to

occur     in    those       circumstances.        The     radial gates, with

appropriate         directions,       would     have    provided     a      safe

alternative         means     of    escape from the centre pens if for

some reason, which was regarded as                    highly   unlikely,    the

tunnel was to become blocked.




                                   - 21 -
Written answer of Divisional Officer R Grimshaw to questions arising                      from

the Officer Working Party meeting on 18th April, 1985.




The    police     indicated    that    with    the   system   in   operation       since 1981

involving their officers controlling the terrace and the                  club's     stewards

directing       spectators    as   necessary    behind   the west stand,       they       hadnot

experienced any difficulty with over-crowding of the existing                  pens up to

that   date      in   1985   and they could not see there being any difficulty in

controlling the proposed smaller pens, particularly as               there     was     to be

segregated      turnstile     access   to     each of the original three areas on the

terrace.



It was made clear by Divisional Officer Grimshaw that               the    gates     at   the

rear   of   the radial fences were required for use in case of any emergency

to allow lateral egress from the terrace and assurance was given that                     the

police had and would continue to man the existing gates and would also man

the proposed gates in the new fences.
       PP19/2/4 s RG/MS                GP/262/DMB                       25.05.1989

                          Divisional Officer R. Grimshaw                     271

City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD
SI 2HH


Dear Sirs,

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975 -
DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

In reply to your letter dated 30th March in connection with the above,         please
find below the observations of this Department.

The final revised Safety Certificate Conditions have been examined and the
four points referred to in your letter have been reconsidered.

With regard to the four points referred to

(a)   It is agreed that the wording of Condition 11 should be satisfactory
       without stipulating an age range but the experience in Barnsley, where
       they have some difficulty recruiting suitable stewards was that fifteen
       year old boys were being appointed and it was felt that at that age they
       may not be able to cope with an emergency situation.

(b)   On the Police knowledge of the whereabouts of a      doctor,   there   are   no
       further observations.

(c)   Should any match be such that large numbers of the press, TV or radio be
       attracted, it would help the Police and club officials if all personnel
      belonging to these organisations were identifiable, particularly where
      they have access to areas beneath stands whilst a match is in progress.

(d)   The attendance of a competent electrician is required within the period
      prior to 3 hours before the commencement of any game in order to test
      the general and emergency lighting and fire warning systems. Should an
      electrical fault occur whilst a match is in progress, it is felt that
      this should be investigated and rectified immediately in order that the
      match can continue with complete crowd safety. This was a condition of
      the County Council Certificate.
Other matters noted are

(a)   In the "Interpretation of the General Safety Certificate" the Definition
      of the Certificate has been modified. In the previous draft reference
      was made to what the Certificate was comprised of, this has now been
      omitted.   Should the fact that the Certificate comprises the general
      conditions, schedules, plans and 'Guidance for Safety Certificate
      Holders', be recorded at this stage?

(b)   In Schedule 4, the requirement to test emergency lighting and fire
      warning/public address systems "not more" than three hours prior to a
      specified   activity   taking   place   should   read "not less" than
      three hours prior to a specified activity taking place as in the
      original South Yorkshire County Council conditions. The reason for this
      is to allow the batteries for such systems to become recharged prior to
      the event commencing.     You have extended this requirement to all
      lighting systems (excluding the emergency lighting) and all doors, gates
      and turnstiles etc., specifying the three hour time limit in each
      instance. The three hour time limit is only critical in respect of
      emergency lighting and fire warning public address systems for the
      reason specified above, therefore, as regards normal lighting and doors
      etc., subject to them being tested on the day of the event, no specific
      time limit is considered to be necessary.       It could certainly be
      considered to be onerous to require all such tests within three hours of
      an event commencing.

(c)   Following my previous comments, Condition 12(a) has been modified to the
      effect that stewards must prevent overcrowding under the direction of
      the Safety Officer or the Chief Steward or an Authorised Officer.
      Whilst this may be satisfactory when considering migration from one
      section to another once spectators are within the ground, it is felt
      that this matter can be more reliably controlled by strictly limiting
      the numbers admitted to each section at the turnstiles. As each section
      is filled, the turnstiles, which are capable of recording this fact
      should be locked. This may not be considered to be a relevant condition
      for   inclusion   in    the Certificate but certainly needs further
      consideration before any Certificate is issued or amended.

(d)   There is no Schedule 3 setting out the capacities of each section of the
       ground attached to the draft conditions. It is recognised, however,
       that these need further consideration by the Officer Working Party
       before finalisation since figures will be needed for each part of a
       ground from the Police, Building Control and Fire Seirvice to determine
       the actual limits.

(e)   Schedules 1 and 2      detailing numbers of stewards to be on duty at a
       specified activity and the duties to be carried out will need detailed
       consideration and again it is felt that these are matters for discussion
       with the Officer Working Party for final resolution by yourselves.

It is now hoped that you will be able to finalise the adoption of the General
Safety Certificate conditions as quickly as possible in order that the
outstanding amendment to the Certificate issued to Sheffield Wednesday FC and
the issue of the Certificate to Sheffield United FC can then be progressed.

This will entail a full evaluation of all aspects by the Officer Working
Party, i.e. ground capacities, stewarding arrangements, firefighting and
emergency evacuation procedures etc. This will require the provision of up to
date plans of all buildings, stands, terraces, etc.
The County Fire Seirvice are willing to give every assistance to   achieve   this
aim.

If you have any further queries on these matters, please do not hesitate to
contact the Officer concerned.

Yours faithfully,




Chief Fire Officer.
       AS/MS                          GP/262/DMB                     25.05.1989

                        Assistant Chief Officer Seaman                   205


City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD
SI 2HH

For the attention of the Acting Head of Department


Dear Sirs,

THE FUTURE OF PITCH PERIMETER   FENCING    AT   SHEFFIELD   UNITED AND   SHEFFIELD
WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUBS

Thank you for your letter dated 17th May, 1989 regarding the future of pitch
perimeter fencing at the above grounds. My simplistic response is to advise
you that the South Yorkshire County Fire Service did not ask for the fences to
be provided and would be happy to see     them removed.

However, this is seen as a matter for    particular considerationby the Police
since the query relates toa crowd control aspect and the Guide toSafety  at
Sports Grounds recommends measures for crowd   control.

If the pitch perimeter    fences are removed it will     still presumably be
necessary at both grounds to provide a lower   perimeter wall    which willneedto
have access gates (paragraph 205 Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds).

It would seem important to note that the perimeter fences at Wembley stadium
are to be replaced again after the pitch invasions during the Cup Final last
Saturday.

If it is decided that the pitch perimeter fences must be retained because of
the danger of pitch invasions, I would recommend that consideration be given
to the existing fences being replaced by a new design of fence in which each
section is capable of converting into an outward opening gate. This type of
fence, which was recently featured in a television programme, showed the fence
installed at a French football ground and it looked very effective.

Yours faithfully,




Chief Fire Officer.
                                                                                             A CO f O

                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE

                      SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

                             HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD



The South Yorkshire          County     Council      received       an    application            for   a

General     Safety    Certificate        in     September,      1978.         The      club engaged

Eastwood and Partners, a Sheffield based firm of                        consulting          engineers

as their consultants.



In    November   1978, the draft General Safety Certificate which had been

prepared by the County Council following consultation with the                               Officer

Working     Parties    was      submitted      to    the    Fire      Service       Committee for

approval to be used throughout the county.



On 2nd January, 1979, the Chief Fire Officer                    sent      a   memorandum          (ref

FP19/2/4/HEW/JMB)       to      the   Chief     Executive       of South Yorkshire County

Council suggesting that officers              of    the    working       party      undertake          a

comprehensive       survey      of    Sheffield     Wednesday Football Club in unison

rather than separately.           The Chief Fire Officer suggested that                      a    copy

of    the   report of each department be provided to each other department

involved to enable problems to            be       discussed       so    that     an    acceptable

approach    might     be     determined       and    consolidated into a single report

which should be forwarded to the club.                    The   memorandum          made     several

other observations regarding the standards necessary.



(i)           On 17th      January,      1979       the South Yorkshire County Council

            received a report (Ref. WE/KH/1610) prepared by Eastwood                               and

            Partners       on    ground capacity of Sheffield Wednesday Football

            Club, in connection with             their     application           for    a    General

             Safety    Certificate.           The   report      indicated        that the Green

            Guide had been used as            the    basis      for      their      calculations,
although      as with probably all existing grounds, it would not

be possible to satisfy all the recommendations in                            the    guide

and reasonable compromise would be needed.



Paragraph       (b)    of    the      report    dealt     with the west terrace

(including lower level at the north west corner).                            The report

considered      that        despite    the fact that the full area of the

west terrace could accommodate about 8,000 spectators, due to

the    lack    of     gangways        an    allowance        should    be     made    for

circulation         space     in   order       that    good    packing        could    be

achieved.        It     further suggested that an allowance of 10% be

made for this purpose, resulting in a suggested capacity                              for

the west terrace of 7,200.



Crush       barriers    were to be designed to match the capacity of

7,200 spectators            and    additional         barriers    and        appropriate

strengthening          of    existing       barriers     would        be provided for

where necessary.



Reference is also made to the evacuation time                          for    the    west

terrace,      this     being       about     six   minutes based on the exits

already available and also to the fact that                       some       spectators

will    be 25m from an exit although movement along the terrace

will be easy and quick



Note Paragraph 15.4 of the Green Guide refers to reduction of

       available       standing        area when the width and positioning

       of    gangways       does      not   meet      with    recommendations          of

       Paragraph 7,5.1 of the Green Guide.
(iii)   A    meeting       of    the     Officer       Working        Party was held on 12th

        February, 1979, the purpose                of    which        was     to   discuss       the

        report    prepared by Eastwood and Partners and to consider the

        views which should be put to the club.



        With regard         to the west terrace, it was considered that due

        to    the lack of depth of the terrace, the offer to reduce the

        spectator limit to 7,200 and with a                      discharge         time    of    6.6

        minutes       it    would        have   been     unreasonable to insist on the

        provision of gangways or additional exits.



        It was noted however that, subject to existing crush barriers

        passing       the       tests,     they would require special attention in

        view of the apparent sharp edges and corrosion.



(iv)    A further meeting of the Officer Working Party                             was    held    on

        30th     March,         1979, in order to review the position since the

        meeting of the 12th February, 1979                       as     difficulty        had   been

        experienced         in     arranging       a    meeting         with the club, due to

        amongst other things, adverse weather.



        Since the meeting of 12th February, the                         County       Council     had

        contacted      the        Home     office regarding the application of the

        Green Guide         and had been informed                that basically,           any new

        work or reconstruction had to be to a standard not lower than

        that set out in the Green Guide but that maximum                              flexibility

        had to be maintained in the case of existing structures.



        The    Fire    Service           had    contacted        four       other brigades with

        designated         grounds       and     only       in        one     case       had     the

        recommendations of the guide been strictly adhered to.
        In   addition     to the condition of the crush barriers referred

        to at the meeting of 12th February, attention                 was   drawn      by

        the Building Authority to the poor condition in places of the

        terracing and the stepping arrangement of the                 steps      on   the

        north west corner.



        On   2nd    April,    1979, a meeting was held between the Officer

        Working Party and the         club    to   discuss      the   views      of   the

        Officer     Working     Party in respect of the report submitted by

        Eastwood and Partners.



        As far as the west terrace was concerned, it was agreed                       that

        the club's proposal for additional barriers and reductions in

        capacity to 7,200 without the need              for    additional        gangways

        should be implemented.         The question of the condition of some

        of the existing barriers and the stepping arrangement on                       the

        north     west    corner     exit would    be     the subject of detailed

        discussions between Dr Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.



(Vi)    A meeting of the Officer        Working      Party      and   the     Sheffield

        Wednesday       Football     Club was held on 18th April, 1979 during

        which the club accepted that the stepping arrangement on                      the

        north    west    corner      exit should    be          rebuilt. The matters

        concerning the crush barriers would be reconsidered after                      it

        was seen which of the crush barriers failed on testing.



(vii)   In   correspondence dated 1st May, 1979, (Ref. BR/JNS/SC) from

        City of     Sheffield      Building   Surveyors        to   South   Yorkshire

        County     Council,   which     summarised      the     Building Surveyor's

        requirements in       relation to      matters        discussed     at    recent
                    meetings.       The   Building Surveyor indicated that, subject to

                    the downward slope of exit steps at                 the    north    west       corner

                    exit    being     corrected     and    the capacity being restricted to

                    that agreed between the police and the club, that                        department

                    considered the west terrace to be acceptable.



           (viii)   In     correspondence dated 16th May, 1979, (Ref C2088/FP19/2/1/

                    FMB/VP) from South Yorkshire County                 Fire    Service       to    South

                    Yorkshire City Council, enclosed were plans numbered 1610/12,

                    1610/11, 1610/9A, 1610/8A, 1610/7A, 1610/6A,                   1610/4A,             1610/

                    2XA,     1610/1XA     and   a   recommendation of work schedule to be

                    undertaken.



                    With regard to exit routes             from    the    west    and     north         west

                    terraces, these were considered to be satisfactory.



                    The     provision     of    exit     signs    was    required       in    the       work

                    schedule, the siting of which was               indicated      on     the       plans.

                    There     was     no requirement for such signs on the west terrace

                    exits.



                    The schedule also detailed            that     adequate      roads       should       be

                    provided     to    ensure     that    speedy    and       direct access can be

                    obtained by emergency vehicles to all exterior parts                           of    the

                    stadium and that it must be ensured that parked vehicles will

                    not obstruct emergency vehicles on these access roads.



A S /D G

23.05.89
 (ix)       Memorandum from South Yorkshire County Council to Chief                 Fire

            officer,      dated 8th June, 1979 (Ref. DV/BB/583) enclosing the

            work schedule forwarded to Sheffield Wednesday Football                 Club

            which   had    been   collated    from the detailed comments of the

            various disciplines represented on the Working Party.



 (x)        A meeting of the Officer      Working    Party      and   the   Sheffield

            Wednesday      Football   Club was held on 12th November 1979 when

            it was noted that work detailed in          the     schedule    dated    8th

            June 1979 had been carried out as far as the west terrace was

            concerned.



 The General     Safety    Certificate   in   respect    of     Sheffield   Wednesday

 Football   Club    was    issued with conditions on 21st December, 1979, the

 conditions being:-



 8(1)       acceptance of existing first aid facilities on an interim

            basis only



12(1)       arrangements for emergency lighting in the south stand being

            only acceptable for the       duration      of    the   existing   battery

            life.



14          acceptance of police facilities on an interim basis only.



30          no   spectators being allowed to use the stadium in conditions

            of extreme wind and/or snow loadings
Memorandum to Chief Fire Officer from South Yorkshire                                County

Council (Ref DV/MB/583/5) dated 14th March, 1980 stating that

despite the fact that the               certificate          had      been     issued      as

recently       as      21st    December,       it was felt that the Sheffield

District Officer Working               Party        would    have      to     review      the

situation       due     to     the    pending        FA    Cup     semi-final between

Arsenal and Liverpool on 12th                  April,       1980.         Comments        were

requested       on      any    outstanding          matters      for      which the Fire

Service had primary responsibility.



Memorandum to Chief Fire                Officer       from       Stn.O.                   (Ref

FP19/2/4A) dated              20th march, 1980, detailed areas of concern

that were revised during an inspection of the ground on                                   12th

March, 1980.           These included:-



(a)     training of stewards

(b)     exit     signs        not    being     of    the    required         standard       as

        detailed in schedule II of the certificate.



(c)     non provision of             fire    alarm        systems      as    required       by

        Schedule II of the certificate



Memorandum       to South Yorkshire County Council from Chief Fire

Officer        (Ref.     FP19/2/4/HEW/JMB)            dated      26th       march,     1980,

incorporating           the         features    detailed         in    the     memorandum

referred to at 1.6(ii) above.



Correspondence to             Sheffield      Wednesday        Football         Club       from

South    Yorkshire        County Council (Ref.DV/MH/583/5) dated 31st

march,     1980        incorporating         the     features       detailed         in    the
        memorandum       to    South Yorkshire County Council referred to at

        1.6(iii) above.          Additional observations made by the Building

        Surveyor were also included in this letter.



        Correspondence         from     Sheffield     Wednesday       Football    Club to

        South Yorkshire County Council (Ref. EE/CB) dated 3rd                      April,

        1980     acknowledging        receipt of letter referred to at 1.6(iv)

        above.    An explanation as to the lack of training of stewards

        was    given that this would be undertaken on completion of the

        fire alarm system which was in hand.                  All    other     matters    in

        the     letter    of the 31st March were passed to Dr Eastwood for

        his professional advice.



(vi)    Correspondence from Eastwood and Partners to South                       Yorkshire

        County     Council       (Ref    WE/KH/1610)         dated 4th April, 1980 and

        8th April, 1980 explaining the reasons for non                       provision    of

        exit     signs     and    fire      warning    system       and dealing with all

        matters referred to by the Building Surveyor.



(vii)   A     meeting     of    the   Officer    Working       Party     and     Sheffield

        Wednesday       Football      Club     was    held    on    10th April, 1980 to

        discuss the areas of concern             recently       communicated       to    the

        club     and in view of the FA Cup Semi-final to be held on 12th

        April, 1980.          The points covered by the letters from Eastwood

        and    Partners on 4th and 8th April, were discussed and as far

        as training of the            safety    stewards      was    concerned     it    was

        agreed     that       there   was    little point until the fire warning

        system had been completely installed.                   It was   noted     however

        that the Fire Service had given instruction to some stewards.
Correspondence           from    South Yorkshire County Council to Chief Constable

(Ref FAM/DV/MB/583) dated 3rd September, 1980 outlined the                              concern     of

the    Chief      Executive       of   the police policy of locking away supporters

inside grounds until such time as home supporters have cleared the area

mid     suggesting        that instead of being allowed to approach locked gates

at the end of a match, the away supporters should be                          held      back   in    a

relatively safe place, such as on the terrace.



Concern      was     also       expressed    at modifications being made at Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club at the                   request    of    the    police,     without        the

knowledge of the Officer Working Party.



Correspondence            from    Eastwood       and   Partners to South Yorkshire County

Fire Service (Ref. AJC/CW/2401) dated 16th                        January,     1981,     confirming

that     the      fire    alarm     installation          and    modifications       to the public

address system had been completed during July 1980.



A meeting of the Officer Working Party and Sheffield Wednesday Football

Club was held on 7th April, 1981 the purpose of which was to review the

ground due to the pending FA cup semi-final to be held on                               11th   April,

1981.        Following      consultations          between       South   Yorkshire County Fire

Service and the police had resulted in the production of an                               "Emergency

Evacuation          Procedure".        The club undertook to circulate copies of the

procedure to all stewards who would be on duty for                           the   FA    Cup    Semi-

Final .



A     copy   of     the    procedure        is    filed    and     dated 12th Hay, 1981.            The

procedure detailed the signal to be                    adopted      to   inform      stewards       and

police       that     an emergency had arisen and the actions to be followed on

hearing further announcements over the public address system.
1.10 A meeting of the Officer Working Party and Sheffield Wednesday Football

    Club    was       held   on    8th    June,     1981.        It    was noted         that following

    experiences         at   the         FA   Cup   Semi-Final        in    April, the club          were

     considering       revised       arrangements on the terracing in front                         of thewest

     stand and that the Officer Working Party would be consulted when                               these

    had substance.



1.11 (i)          Correspondence          from Eastwood and Partners to South Yorkshire

                  County      Council         (Ref.WE/JAS/PB?3563)          dated      2nd   September,

                  1981,      detailing        the   club's       proposalto instal           two radial

                  fences on the west terrace in such a manner                       that the       terrace

                  would      be      divided into approximately three equal                       areas,each

                  served by its own entrance.                The      aim   was     to    achieve    more

                  control         over    supporters,       a    visitingteam          with only a few

                  supporters being allocated one section, with                         the   other       two

                  sections retained by the home supporters.



                  Larger          contingents       of      visiting        supporters           could   be

                  accommodated in two or             all     three      areas     as     their    numbers

                  dictate.         A 1.15 metre gate was proposed at the rear of each

                  fence to connect the areas during a game if adjacent ones are

                  occupied by supporters of the same team.



     (ii)         A    meeting      of    the    Officer        Working     Party was held on 11th

                  September, 1981, to consider the proposed erection of                            radial

                  barriers on the west terrace for crowd control purposes.



                  Whilst there were reservations due to problems with
     (viii)   Correspondence         from Eastwood & Partners           to     South      Yorkshire

              County      Council       (Ref    WE/KH/3563)      dated       26th January, 1982

              replying to the police             observations         with    regard      to   crush

              barriers being up to and through the radial barriers.



              Mr    Eastwood       observed      that if the crush barriers were to be

              removed up to a distance of 1.2m from                   the     radial      barriers,

              there    would       be    a    consequent      loss of calculated spectator

              capacity whichis undesirable from the club's point of                            view.

              However,       from       the point of view of safety, a strip of that

              width without a single crush barrier would be a major hazard.



     (ix)     A    meeting    of        the Officer      Working      Party    and        Sheffield

              Wednesday       Football         Club   was    held on 4th February, 1982 in

              order to       discuss      the     apparent     difference       of     opinion    on

              certain      aspects       of the radial barriers on the west terrace,

              these being the observations of the                  police      in    relation     to

              crush barriers passing adjacent to the new radial barriers.



              It    was    agreed       that,    on    balance, it was preferable from a

              safety point of view to prevent crowd surge by                        the    existing

              barriers       being      extended up to and/or through the new radial

              barriers than to completely prevent                  persons     being       able   to

              climb from one pen to another.



1.12 (i)      A     meeting    of       the    Officer      Working    Party    and       Sheffield

              Wednesday Football Club was held on 23rd                   January,         1985,   in

              order to carry out the winter inspection of the stadium.




                                    - 13 -
The     club   referred        to the practice followed in consultation

with the police of separating home and visiting supporters at

the     rear   of    the    west     stand   by the erection of temporary

barriers.      This had worked well but it was the policy of                        the

police to aim for exclusive use by visiting supporters of the

west stand and terrace.



It was agreed that the club would                 consider        at   some       future

date,     a    scheme      for   permanent     barriers at the rear of the

stand.



Correspondence from Eastwood and Partners to South                        Yorkshire

County    Council       enclosing        sketch    plan     6705/2 (REf.WE/JF),

dated 9th April, 1985 showing two new banks of turnstiles and

various runs of fencing and new gates.                    The considerations of

the Working Party were             requested      at   an    early     date.        The

police had already had a copy sent to them so that they could

have advance notice.



A meeting of the Officer            Working       Party     was    held      on    18th

April,    1985      to discuss the proposals for segregation at the

Leppings Lane end.



The police pointed out that the proposals had                      been      prompted

by    comments      made    by    them    to the club in order to achieve

greater flexibility in the use of the west                   terrace         by    both

home and visiting fans.



The     proposals       were     generally     acceptable         to   the    police

representatives subject to:-
(a)   Additional gates being provided between turnstile 16 and

      the wall of the inner access road.



(b)   the central area of the terrace being divided in half by

      a new radial fence running from the tunnel                    entrance         to

      the    pitch side security fence, with gates erected so as

      to permit        entry    to    be   diverted     to    either         side    as

      appropriate        (the    proposed       new   secondary radial fence

      adjacent to the existing radial fence indicated                        on     the

      plan to be abandoned.)



(c)   the    right hand end of the terrace also to be divided in

      half by a new central radial fence running from back                           to

      front with two gates (the existing radial fence dividing

      the present two terrace areas - neutral                    area    and        home

      supporters - to have a second gate installed).



(d)   the    existing        pitch     perimeter fence to have additional

      exit gates installed - one in the neutral area                         and    one

      in the home supporters area.



      The    Fire      Service saw no objections in principle to the

      proposals subject to a more               detailed      investigation          of

      the means of escape aspects.



      It    was   agreed       that    R   Grimshaw (Fire Service) should

      investigate as a matter of urgency the means                      of    escape

      aspects     of    the     proposals       and subject to satisfactory

      clearance     of    these       matters,    the     outline        proposals

      submitted        would    be     agreed    as     now   amended        by     the

      suggestions       of     South    Yorkshire       Police    and,       to     the

                    - 15 -
       submission         of     the          necessary         detailed       plans      and

       calculations under both Safety of Sports Grounds Act and

       Building Regulations.



Correspondence        from       South        Yorkshire County Fire Service to

South Yorkshire County Council (Ref C2088/AV/IR)                              dated      30th

April,      1985,      indicating             that        the     new    crowd       control

arrangements were considered                  to     be     satisfactory        providing

that     certain     gates       have widths          as        indicated on the plan

attached to the letter and that the gates would be supervised

by either police or club officials.



Correspondence            from     South       Yorkshire          County      Council       to

Eastwood and Partners (Ref DV/AA/583/5) dated 2nd May,                                   1985,

indicating     that       the     proposals          outlined          for crowd control

arrangements         were        generally           acceptable              subject        to

incorporation        of    the     points          referred to in 1.12 (iii) and

(iv) above.



Correspondence from Eastwood and Partners to South Yorkshire

County     Council        (Ref   WE/KH/6205)              dated    8th       May,        1985,

acknowledging         comments           of     Officer           Working       Party     but

requesting     that       further        consideration            be    given       to    the

requirement     for       the second gate in the two radial fences as

it they were meant for use in                  an    emergency          it    would      mean

having     a steward in attendance on each occasion, the expense

of which would hardly be justified.



Correspondence        from       South    Yorkshire          County          Council       to

Eastwood    and Partners (Ref DV/JC/583/5) dated 10th May, 1985

indicating    that        the    two     additional          gates       were       included
primarily at the request of the police who had indicated that

they were    prepared        to   concede    the    request       for    the     two

additional        gates    subject    to all other points raised by the

Officer Working Party are incorporated into the proposals.



Correspondence from South Yorkshire County Council to

Eastwood and Partners (Ref. DV/1ADA/583/5) dated                       18th    July,

1985   noted       that the Chief Executive (South Yorkshire County

Council) had been made aware that               application       for    Building

Regulation/planning             approval    in     respect        of     the     re­

organisation of fences at the Leppings               Lane     end       and    other

matters.



Note   for     file submitted by Station Officer                        indicating

that plans submitted for Building               Regulation     approval         were

different      to    those      discussed between the club and the fire

service.     Attached to the note for            file   is    a     sketch      plan

comparing     the existing arrangements at the Leppings Lane end

of the stadium        with      the   revised    proposals     submitted         for

Building Regulation approval.



Correspondence        from Eastwood and Partners to South Yorkshire

County Council (Ref. WSE/KWP/SEB/6075) dated 25th July,                         1985

enclosing    copies        of   drawings    in respect of segregation of

visiting spectators at Leppings Lane end, these being further

to the preliminary submission in April, 1985.                  (Amongst these

drawings     is     Plan   No.6705/8A      which    shows     a        completely

different layout to that discussed in April, 1985)



A meeting of the Officer Working Party was held on 29th July,

1985 to discuss the detailed plans               submitted    to       the    South
         Yorkshire       County          Council    on    25th           July, 1985.       Subject to

         certain prints detailed in the                   minutes           the     proposals      were

         considered to be acceptable.                    Item (j) of the points required

         that all the new gates be fully supervised                            by     stewards      who

         must be fit, able and properly trained.



(xii)    Correspondence             from Eastwood and Partners to South Yorkshire

         County        Council         (Ref    WE/KH/6705)         dated      1st     August,       1985

         acknowledging            the     comments       of    the        Officer     Working Party

         meeting        of     29th      July.       Item          (a)      asks      for     further

         clarification            of     the     location of a proposed extra security

         gate, claiming that an existing gate in the 2m wide                                 gap     can

         be     used     by       police and would still be available for use for

         spectators in emergency as there are gates into                               the    2m     gap

         from     the        terrace      which    will       be     under the control of the

         police.        With respect to the provision of stewarding for                              all

         the     new gates, item (j), of the minutes of the 29th July, Mr

         Eastwood commented that this would no doubt be taken care                                    of

         by the club.



(xiii)   A    meeting        between       the    Officer Working Party and Sheffield

         Wednesday Football Club was held on 7th August 1985 to                                    carry

         out     the     "summer"        inspection       and in particular to view the

         Leppings Lane end improvements.                      The matter for clarification

         dealt    with in the letter at (xii) above was investigated and

         it was noted that there was an existing gate in                               the    new    2m

         wide    gap     for       use    by     the police.         Again it is stated that

         these    gates        would      still     be    available           for    the     use     of

         spectators          in    an    emergency       as the gates at the top of the

         terrace under the control of police would                           enable        spectators



                                  - 18 -
to   be   directed down the 2m wide gap, although it was agreed

that steps or a longer gate would be required.




                 - 19 -
                                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975



1.        The involvement of the Fire Service in the implementation of the Safety

          of Sports Ground Act, 1975



1.1       The Safety of Sports Ground Act (SSGA) was passed in 1975 following the

          publication         in     1972 of the Report of the Inquiry into Crowd Safety at

          Sports Grounds which                 was   prepared     by     Lord        Wheatley      following        the

          serious        accident         at    Ibrox     Park   Football        Ground       in       1971, when 66

          spectators were killed on a stairway.



          The Home Office issued Guidance to Local Authorities under cover of

          Home Officer Circular 150/1975.                                                                                  Ex



1.2       The Safety of Sports Ground Act gave the Secretary of                                 State      power     to

          require        through      designation orders that safety certificates be issued

          to sports stadia with accommodation for more                           than      10,000        spectators.

          The     intention         was        for the Act to come into force gradually through a

          phased programme of designation orders so as not to place an                                     immediate

          financial burden on the smaller and less well off clubs.



1.3   The        first      order was made in August 1976 and applied to first division
      '

          fo o tb a ll   c lu b s    and         c e rta in   in te rn a tio n a l     g ro u n d s.       S h e ffie ld

      Wednesday's ground was designated in August 1978, although the club was

          not in the first division, because                     of    its     quasi      international           use.

          Second division clubs were designated in August 1979.                                Third and fourth

      division club» and- rugby league clubs were designated in                                        August    1985,

          following the Bradford City Football Club fire.




                                                  - 1 -
In 1976, the Home Office produced a voluntary code called the "Guide to

Safety         at     Sports           Grounds          (Football)",           commonly             known as the Green

Guide.         This gave guidance on measures                              for      improving          the          safety      of

spectators            at     sports          grounds and extended the recommendations of the

Wheatley Report.                   The County Council later contacted                                the        Home      Office

regarding the application of the Green Guide and had been informed that

basically any new work or construction had to be                                             standard^- not                lower

than       that           set out in the Green Guide but that maximum flexibility had

to be maintained in the case of existing structures.



T he f o rm e r S o u th Y o r k s h ir e         C o u n ty C o u n c il,       as th e     e n fo rc in g         a u th o rity ,

delegated             its        powers and duties under the Safety of sports Ground Act

to the Fire Service Committee.                               On 8th        January,          1976,         the       Committee

decided          that        their        functions           should        be      exercised            through Officer

W o rk in g P a r t i e s        fo r th e     fo u r     b o ro u g h     c o u n c il     areas,         c o n s is tin g      of

representatives                   of    the     police,          the       fire      service          and the building

inspectors of the borough councils, with co-ordination being undertaken
     C jJ a jj'd .                                      4*                   U k*    “H i l l s '          te                         c£
by the Department.-ef Administration.                                        <JL*0
                                                                     •'j                   A-*.JUL1ia.          >

In      order         to     avoid        duplication            and division of resources, a primary

authority             was        chosen       for       the    carrying           out       of      inspections,               re­

inspections,                and     making          final      technical            recommendations                  using the

headings given in the contents summary of the                                             Green      Guide          with      some

additions.                 The     primary authority responsible was required to consult

the other authorities concerned before finalising any                                                 recommendations.

It     will          be     seen       that     the      Fire Service were designated the primary

authority for means of escape.                               By virtue of their                  general            experience

as      a fire and emergency service, they were able to give advice on this

subject.             However, the             Fire      Service          did      not       attend         and       have      not

attended football matches as a matter of course.
1.7   It was the practice for all disciplines to report to the Administration

      Department and thereafter for a joint meeting of                        the    Officer      Working

      Party    to    be    held    after     which        the    agreed    recommendations         of all

      disciplines were           amalgamated       into     a    report    by    the     Administration

      Department      and    sent to the club(s).               Copies of all correspondence and

      the minutes of meetings were sent to each member and                          all     arrangements

      for meetings were made by the Administration Department.




1.8   It   was      the   practice for the Officer Working Parties to carry out two

      inspections of the ground each year, commonly                        known    as      "summer"   and

       "winter"      inspections.          It was fire service practice to be represented

      by officers         from    both     Divisional       and    Headquarters          levels   at    all

      meetings        whenever      possible        and    inspections,         this enabled a common

       standard to be applied.



1.9 When the South Yorkshire County Council was abolished on 1st April,

       1986, enforcement in South Yorkshire, passed to the                          four    Metropolitan

      District       Councils,      Rotherham, Barnsley, Doncaster and Sheffield.                       The

      Home Office issued guidance on the new arrangements under cover of Home

      Office      Circular       7/1986.      These       changes    were       effected by the Local         Ex

      Government Act 1985 at which time the Fire Authority assumed the status

      of "interested party" which meant that the local authority was required

      to consult it about the terms and conditions of a                          safety     certificate.

      The Fire Authority also then had a right to authorise officers to carry

      out inspections under Section 11 of the Safety At Sports Grounds Act.

1.10 Prior to the 1st April, 1986, Mr                 D     Vaughan       of— the— Seefcfa— KurkaliiTfe

      jCemrty— -eemiCtr Department             ot Admiiij.SLlaLi.un arranged a joint meeting

      with the officers of the District Councils who                        would      be   taking     over

      responsibility         for    Safety     of     Sports      Grounds       Act matters which was

                                           - 3 -
    a tte n d e d      by o f f ic e r s         fro m   th e     p o lic e   and     fire      s e rv ic e .     The p u rp o se             of

    th e       m e e tin g        w as      to      hand        o v er th e     C o u n ty C o u n c i l 's      file s      and have a

    g e n e ra l d is c u s s io n          on S a fe ty          of     S p o rts     G ro u n d s     m a tte rs .           The       fire

    s e rv ic e       s a id   th a t      th e y   hoped th e          S o u th Y o r k s h ir e C o u n ty C o u n c il G e n e r a l

    S a fe ty       C e rtific a te         w o u ld b e a d o p t e d b y a l l         th e    d is tric ts          because           th is

    w o u ld        h e lp     th e m      s ta n d a rd is e     on one r a th e r th a n            fo u r d iffe re n t          s e ts    of

    c o n d itio n s .




1.11 In    Sheffield               the        Administration                  and     Legal         Department            became             the

    responsible                department.                 In       a    letter        dated          5th       June,        1986, they

    attached a copy of a report which had been placed                                                   before          the         General         ex


    Purposes             panel           on      6th     May, 1986 together with a copy of the panel's

     resolution in relation to that report.                                          Items A and C read as follows



     (a)       th e     b ro ad    o u tlin e s        o f th e     a d m in is tra tiv e       s y s te m   o rg a n is e d        by       th e

               fo rm e r        S o u th       Y o r k s h i r e C o u n ty C o u n c il u n d e r t h e         S a fe ty     of     S p o rts

               G ro u n d s A c t b e n o te d            and a u th o rity          b e g iv e n     fo r      th e    c o n tin u a tio n

               of     such a        sy ste m        fo r th e     tim e b e in g ;




     (c)       The       Head        of        A<te£niatrat><5nand E e g a l ^ D e p e t r t m e n t : be requested to

               draft new satiety certificate condit^efns- in consultation with other

               appropriate authorities for approval by the jaunty Council.



1.12 A     meeting             took        place         on     10th       March,        1987 to deal with the future

     administration of the Council's certification                                                function.             The         general

     feeling            of     the         meting        was that the roles of each authority involved

     should be defined perhaps along the lines of the South Yorkshire County

     Council            system.               This       was described in a letter dated 14th May, 1987                                             Exr

    which enclosed a draft division of responsibilities.                                                        The letter               asked

     for       comments            on the proposals which showed the following fire service

     responsibilities                      fire       precautions,              fire       alarms,           means        of        escape,

                                                         - 4 -
                                                    tl ,,ita cJ U °
                                                             ^ n            1    Jj>
                                                                         comm

     stadium

     the Working           would

     fire

     on the

     figures would



     Comments       w     aptit in a letter dated 7th July,/l9$^, which attached a                                 EX

     copy of/the divisions of responsibilities used by the                   South     Yorkshire

'f   County Council an&^sujefested the system be retained.



                    er, /i986^ a revisedr'edijtion of the Greyn Guid^waS publishe^.

                n Guide itself at Paragraphs 6 to 8 incorporated                 tile approac

      ireviojusly/recomme\q.ded by the Home Office.              v_y




                         MJL MMJ                                       / %$~7.
                                                                                                  (U./ +• (&)

                                        •^v       J&Oi


                                                                                           r .v e ,v > v c* ^ s f l - ~ ,




                                                   ^          ^CL
                                                                                  {-■ 6




                               -4jA           v            C O
                                                                                        liJL

            v-' ^


                                                                                                -/1CJW
                                                                            OA-e. J
                                                                          /t,      y       A -

                                                                                       <
                                                                                                           XXUsPX^CK              /             r~g£             /£CI

                                                                                          -tejg& Z U ~                /ft< y< 0        /^C_^k eJ-^S ' & 0 ^                           ' t f r^ * L
                    J " 4 * * t « -      ^     °   r   -:            A -c/   ' ' / — "A    - « - < / £ / * • * » /g               ~7    V 7          « * .! < % ■• ( 4   c.<t A t / .

                                  <?.■             ^             ?    ^         /«7
       /Vi"




                                  y ^ r                e.;<              £ ^ . ‘
                                                                               /                                                                 ^

                                                                     —       /y— ^                                    ^            /<*~^r                                     Y' r/          ^       ^



                          /           /- .
                          /a^ c- 's+~ *
                                                             /
                                                            '*


'cjLU.      )       i.                             Z                                                                                   x /                          ^           -

   ^                                         C_«a-~*^f e> ^                     </ ^ A<- • ^ / <' </ ttc                          /*^rt^ei>C                              _
        -                                                    ^        /                       \ r ' i r . -> 1n t ii-., ,.,A   /* f l W -   ‘   !> * »        < ^ 4 "V

                      f ^oiS-V <~j ^t-^a                     c 1/ o-^                                                               JjZS- </*—                                ‘=*'d

                         /(s~ •<***-                    £>/'/'•£'                      ^C. ^C^e-e*                        <
                                                                                                                          ~ ^ //*'r * ^0 . °*

                              ^        ^               ^*44*^                <*/   is**-* ^ r**‘                                                           a^jf^y t(c«, yd^


                ^             C+cv~                                                                    ^                                                                      ^

                         /£-zrf—              'dr                                                              isctsr-'*^




       /• / ^
                                                  _ 5 -



2.    History

2.1   The      S o u th     Y o rk s h ire      C o u n ty       C o u n c il        re c e iv e d   an    a p p lic a tio n     fo r a

      G en e ra l S a fe ty       C e rtific a te          in      S e p te m b e r,        1978.         The    c lu b     engaged

      E a stw o o d   and      P a rtn e rs ,    a S h e ffie ld         based          firm    o f c o n s u ltin g   e n g in e e rs

      as th e ir      c o n s u lta n ts .




2.2   InNovember 1978, the draft General Safety Certificate which                                                      had       been

      prepared            by theCounty Council following consultation with the Officer

      Working Parties was                    submitted to               the           Fire      Service         Committee          for

      approval to be used throughout the county.



2.3   On     2nd January, 1979, the Chief Fire Officer .sent a memorandum                                                        to the   Ex

      Chief Executive of                 South        Yorkshire             County             Council       suggesting           that

      officers of            the      working         party          undertake               a comprehensive survey of

      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in                                 unison            rather       than     separately.

      The     Chief         Fire      Officer         suggested             that a copy of the report of each

      department be provided to each                              other         department            involved         to      enable

      problems to            be     discussed           so        that          an      acceptable approach might be

      determined and consolidated                            into      a        single         report      which       should        be

      forwarded           to the club.            The memorandum made several other observations

      regarding the standards necessary.



2.4 (i)               On 17th January, 1979                       the      South           Yorkshire         County         Council

                       received a report prepared by Eastwood and Partners on ground                                                      Ex

                       capacity of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, in                                               connection

                       with their application for a General Safety Certificate.                                                    The

                       report indicated that the Green Guide had been                                            used       as     the

                       basis for             their calculations, although as with probably                                         all

                       existing grounds, it would not be possible to satisfy all the

                                                  -    6     -
recommendations         in the guide and reasonable compromise would

be needed.



paragraph (b) of the              report    dealt    with   the    west     terrace
             U-
(including lower level at the north west corner but excluding

the north west         corner       reinforced      concrete      terrace).       The

report considered that despite the fact that the full area of

the west terrace could accommodate                  about   8,000      spectators,

due    to    the lack of gangways an allowance should be made for

circulation       space      in     order    that    good   packing       could    be

achieved.         It   further suggested that an allowance of 10% be

made for this purpose, resulting in a suggested capacity                          for

the west terrace of 7,200.



Crush       barriers    were to be designed to match the capacity of

7,200 spectators            and    additional       barriers    and      appropriate

strengthening          of   existing        barriers    would     be provided for

where necessary.



Reference is also made to the evacuation time                      for    the   west

terrace,      this     being       about     six    minutes based on the exits

already available and also to the fact that                     some     spectators

will    be 25m from an exit although movement along the terrace

will be easy and quick.              The existing exits were through              the

tunnel and round either side of the west stand.
 A    meeting      of   the    Officer      Working    Party was held on 12th

 February, 1979, the purpose             of   which    was      to    discuss         the

 report     prepared by Eastwood and Partners and to consider the

 views which should be put to the club.



 With regard to the west terrace, it was considered                        that       due

 to    the lack of depth of the terrace, the offer to reduce the

 spectator limit to 7,200 and with a                 discharge       time     of      6.6

 minutes      it    would     have   been     unreasonable to insist on the

 provision of gangways or additional exits.                     There      was      total

 movement         laterally    throughout      the    terrace        and     the three

 entrance/exits from the terrace were well situated.                          At      the

, time,     the    worst      disaster/emergency contemplated was one of

 fire.      As the west stand provided           a    minimum        of    fire       risk

 (because it was constructed in concrete) it was accepted that

 these routes would be available and adequate in an emergency.

 The existing gates in the perimeter fence were discounted for

 means of escape purposes.            At that    time      the       gates       in   the

 perimeter         fence      were   considered       to   be    there        for     the

 convenience of the police for crowd control purposes. ^                                ^



 It   was    noted      however,     that^     subject     to    existing         crush

 barriers     passing       the    tests,     they    would     require       special

 attention in view of the apparent sharp edges and corrosion.
On 2nd April, 1979, a meeting was held                        between    the     Officer

Working      Party         and    the    club    to     discuss     the views of the

Officer Working Party in respect of the report                           submitted    by

Eastwood and Partners.



As     far as the west terrace was concerned, it was agreed that

the club's proposal for additional barriers and reductions in

capacity         to     7,200     without the need for additional gangways

should be implemented.                  The question of the condition of some

of    the existing barriers and the stepping arrangement on the

north west corner exit                  would    be    the     subject    of    detailed

discussions between Dr Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.



A     meeting         of   the    Officer       Working Party and the Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club was held on 18th April,                           1979    during

which       the club accepted that the stepping arrangement on the

north west            corner      exit    should       be    rebuilt.     The    matters

concerning            the crush barriers would be reconsidered after it

was seen which of the crush barriers failed on testing.



On 1st May, 1979, the City of                    Sheffield        Building     Surveyors

wrote       to    South      Yorkshire County Council, and summarised in

the letter, their own requirements                      in    relation    to     matters

discussed         at        recent       meetings.          The   Building      Surveyor

indicated that, subject to the downward slope of                          exit     steps

at    the    north         west    corner       exit    being     corrected      and the

capacity being restricted to that agreed between                          the     police

and    the club, that department considered the west terrace to

be acceptable.
(vii)    On 16th May, 1979, the South Yorkshire                     County    Fire           Service      Ex

         wrote    to    South    Yorkshire       City     Council,       enclosing            plans
                                                                                                          <4-
         numbered 1610/12, 1610/11, 1610/9A, 1610/8A,                        1610/7A,          1610/

         6A,     1610/4A, 1610/2XA, 1610/1XA and a recommendation of work

         schedule to be undertaken.



         With regard to exit routes              from   the     west     and       north          west

         terraces, these were considered to be satisfactory.



         The     provision      of    exit     signs    was    required           in    the       work

         schedule, the siting of which was                indicated          on    the        plans

         There    was    no requirement for such signs on the west terrace

         exits.     This was because they were the ones used                           for    normal

         entrance       and   exit     from what was an open terrace.                    Further,

         none were required for the perimeter fence gates.                             These were

         not      normal exit routes.           To have exit signs for these gates

         could cause greater problems and confusion.



         The schedule also detailed              that     adequate      roads           should      be

         provided       to    ensure    that     speedy       and    direct access can be

         obtained by emergency vehicles to all exterior parts                                of    the

         stadium and that it must be ensured that parked vehicles will

         not obstruct emergency vehicles on these access roads.



(viii)   On the 8th June, 1979, South Yorkshire County Council sent                                   a    Ex

         memorandum      to     the    Chief    Fire    officer, enclosing the work

         schedule forwarded to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club which

         had     been   collated from the detailed comments of the various

         disciplines represented on the Working Party.




                              - 10 -
       (ix)      A meeting of the Officer             Working    Party          and   the   Sheffield

                 Wednesday       Football      Club was held on 12th November 1979 when

                 it was noted that work detailed in                 the        schedule     dated   8th

                 June 1979 had been carried out as far as the west terrace was

                 concerned.



2.5   The General      Safety    Certificate         in   respect     of       Sheffield    Wednesday

      Football   Club    with     plans attached was issued with conditions on 21st

      December, 1979, the conditions being:-



       8(1)      acceptance of existing first aid facilities on an interim

                 basis only



      12(1)      arrangements for emergency lighting in the south stand being

                 only acceptable for the              duration      of     the    existing     battery

                 life.



      14         acceptance of police facilities on an interim basis only.



      30         no    spectators being allowed to use the stadium in conditions

                 of extreme wind and/or snow loadings
                  fl   P(>Lc                **k-t <J- wO*-c


2.6    (i)       On the 14th March, 1980, South Yorkshire County Council                            sent   Ex

                 a    memorandum to the Chief Fire Officer                     stating that despite

                 the fact that the certificate had been issued as recently                            as

                 21st    December,        it   was     felt that         the     Sheffield District

                 Officer Working Party would have to review the situation                           due

                 to     the     pending    FA    Cup      semi-final       between       Arsenal     and

                 Liverpool on 12th April, 1980. Comments                       were   requested      on

                 any    outstanding       matters         for which       the     Fire    Service had

                 primary responsibility.

                                     - 11 -
    (ii)    On the 20th March, 1980, Stn.O.                             sent a    memorandum      to    Ex

            the    Chief Fire Officer from                detailing areas of concern that

            were revised during an             inspection          of   the   ground       on    12th

            March, 1980.          These included



            (a)    training of stewards

            (b)     exit    signs       not   being       of    the     required      standard    as

                    detailed in schedule II of the certificate.



            (c)     non provision of           fire       alarm    systems       as   required     by

                    Schedule II of the certificate



    (iii)   On     the     26th    march,      1980,      the     Chief    Fire officer sent a          Ex

            memorandum to South Yorkshire County Council                          detailing      what

            was set out in the memorandum referred to at 1.6(ii) above.



    (iv)    On the 31st March, 1980, South Yorkshire County Council wrote                               ex

            to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club detailing what                            was    set

            out     in     the    memorandum         to    South      Yorkshire County Council

            referred to at 2L.6(iii) above.                    Additional observations           made
«
            by the Building Surveyor were also included in this letter.



            On     the     3rd    April,      1980     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club                Ex

            acknowledgedreceipt of the letter from South Yorkshire County

            Council        referred      to at i. 6(iv) above.            An explanation as to

            the lack of training of stewards was given stating that                              this

            would    be     undertaken        on completion of the fire alarm system

            which was in hand.             All other matters in the               letter    of    the

            31st    March        were   passed to Dr Eastwood for his professional

            advice.

                                   - 12 -
(vi)      On the 4th and 8th April, 1980, Eastwood & Partners wrote                              to

          South Yorkshire County Council explaining the reasons for non

          provision of exit signs and fire warning system                          and   dealing

          with all matters referred to by the Building Surveyor.



(vii)     A        meeting       of    the    Officer     Working    Party       and   Sheffield

          Wednesday Football Club was                   held   on   10th     April,      1980    to

          discuss          the    areas of       concern recently communicated to the

          club and in view of the FA Cup Semi-final to be held on                           12th

          April, 1980.            The points covered by the letters from Eastwood

             and Partners on 4th and 8th April, were discussed and as                           far

             as    training       of    the      safety   stewards    was concerned it was

             agreed that there was little point                  until     the    fire    warning

             system    had       been completely installed.              It was noted however

             that the Fire Service had given instruction to some stewards.



On the 3rd September, 1980 South Yorkshire County Council wrote to                              the

Chief   Constable      outlining         the     concern of the Chief Executive of the

police policy of locking away supporters inside grounds until such time

as home supporters have cleared the area and suggesting that instead of

being allowed to approach locked gates at the end of a match, the                               away

supporters        should    be held back in a relatively safe place, such as on

the terrace.



Concern was also expressed at modifications                    being made         at   Sheffield

Wednesday Football          Club        at the    request      of the police, without the

knowledge of the Officer Working Party.
               On the 16th          January,       1981,      Eastwood     and     Partners      wrote     to    South   Ex

               Yorkshire           County      Fire        service      confirming       that    the     fire    alarm

               installation and modifications to the public address                              system    had    been

               completed during July 1980.



         2.9   A meeting of the Officer Working Party and Sheffield Wednesday Football                                   Ex

               Club was held on 7th April, 1981 the purpose of which was to review the

               ground        due   to the pending FA cup semi-final to be held on 11th April,

               1981. Consultations between South Yorkshire County Fire Service and the

               police       had    resulted        in   the     production        of an "Emergency Evacuation

               Procedure".         The club undertook to circulate copies of the procedure to

               all stewards who would be on duty for the FA Cup Semi-Final.



               A     copy    of    the procedure           is   produced         dated    12th     May, 1981.      The   gx

               procedure detailed the signal to be                      adopted    to     inform    stewards       and

               police       that     an emergency had arisen and the actions to be followed on .

               hearing further announcements over the public address system.



        2.10   A meeting of the Officer Working Party and Sheffield Wednesday Football                                   Ex

               Club was       held    on     8th     June,      1981.      It    was     noted    that     following

.   •          experiences           at the     FA      Cup     Semi-Final        in   April,     the     club   were

               considering revised arrangements on the terracing in front of the                                 west

               stand        and that the Officer Working Party would be consulted when these

               had substance.



        2.11   (i)            On 2nd September, 1981, Eastwood and Partners wrote to                             South   Ex

                              Yorkshire        County      Council      detailing        the club's proposal to

                               instal two radial fences on the west terrace in such a manner

                              that    the      terrace        would be divided into approximately three

                              equal areas, each served by its own entrance.                        The aim was to

                               achieve      more     control      over supporters, a visiting team with

                                                     - 14 -
       only a few supporters being allocated one section,                  with      the

       other two sections retained by the home supporters.



       Larger     contingents        of     visiting      supporters       could      be

       accommodated in two or         all    three     areas    as   their     numbers

                      A 1.15 metre gate was proposed at the rear of each

       fence to connect the areas during a game if adjacent ones are"

       occupied by supporters of the same team.



(ii)   A    meeting    of   the   Officer     Working     Party was held on 11th           Ex

       September, 1981, to consider the proposed erection of                    radial

       barriers on the west terrace for crowd control purposes.



       Whilst    there were reservations due to problems with opposing

       fans mixing at the rear of the west stand,                the    police      felt

       that     they could cope with any problems of this nature and as

       they felt that increased control on the terrace should result

       from     the     proposals,    the    Officer     Working       Party   saw    no

       objections to their implementation.



       The adequacy and positioning of the gates to be installed                      at

       the rear of the radial barriers was discussed, as was the use

       of the existing gates in the pitch perimeter fence.                     It    was

       agreed    that    Messrs Eastwood and Partners be notified of the

       Officer Working Party's decision which was subject to:-



       a)     further calculations required by the Building                  Authority

              being satisfactory



       b)     the adequacy of headroom in the vicinity of the proposed

              gates at the rear of the terrace            and

                            - 15 -
 c)         the new gates at the rear                                   of      the         terrace          also     being
                                                                                    cJU*oJL                         IZJb
            u n d er p o lic e           c o n tro l.        ^                                    X .
                                            J U ‘ Co-vcL. ^                                                                  - £-*»»■< (oui/S
                                                                                                                                                rv.
,                                   S        ‘~       z      W
11 T4—cn»B- nnrifl3«atood hy - ^ prg.8a.nt-flt ivas—
                                                   gf th s^«?e-^eggi<>e--tltat                                                      «$£
                                                                                           li
 t h e S e ~ ~ g a tea B - w g 1^ ~ i a e - e q f l S t r a n f e 3^ -~ ||ita n n a d •    J U t< 3S>H r t - * h i a —f i m e ,

 tafae -tge r i a g b e g       f a n c e .g a t e s w e r e j a a p r n n n t- a m p j-^ t e d , .f o r           n a ft- f o c
                                                                     ✓/
 m a s ff " e v a c u ' S W o H - ^ i s ^ a ^ f e f e e ^ p i t C h .        T h a-w e r e      seen    as    a ma a n s -~ o f




 On 14th September, 1981, South Yorkshire County Council wrote                                                                     ££,

 to Eastwood & Partners welcoming the increased control on the

 terrace             that         should            result from the proposal to instal two

 radial barriers but pointing                                      out        the          reservations             of     the

 Officer             Working             Party            and      the        conditions                referred to in

 X - 11(ii) above that the approval of the                                                  scheme        was       subject

 to.



 On       14th December, 1981, Eastwood and Partners wrote to South                                                                  Ex

 Yorkshire County Council declaring that work                                                        on      the     radial

 fences           was substantially complete.                                      Whilst this had not been

 previously brought to the attention of                                                    the     Officer         Working

 Party,              there had been three first team home games since the

 fences had been erected and the police had inspected the work

 and were satisfied with the new arrangements.



 On      the         23rd         December,                1981,          the             Chief Executive (South                     Ex

 Yorkshire County Council) sent a memorandum to the Chief Fire

 Officer               requesting                 our confirmation that the radial fences

 and seqnri1~y                             a&g"satisfactory.
(Vi)     On the 8th January,               1982    the     Chief      Fire    Officer      sent    a    Ex

         memorandum         to    the      Chief       Executive (South Yorkshire County

         Council) dated 8th January, 1982 confirming that                            the    radial

         fences were considered to be satisfactory.



(vii)    On the 20th January, 1982, South Yorkshire County Council                                      Ex

         wrote to Eastwood and Partners                    commenting on the fact that

         the    matches          played at the stadium since the installation of

         the barriers confirmed that they appeared to be working                               well

         and     satisfactorily            effected       the    segregation      of       opposing

         groups of fans.              It then went on to note             however,      that      the

         entire        section        of   the     terrace      had yet to be given to one

         group of fans.



         There was also comment from the police                        that    existing        crush

         barriers           extended       up     to    and     completely     through       radial

         barriers at a height of 4'6" or so,                       thus      enabling      fans    to

         easily climb over the radial barrier into adjacent pens.



(viii)   On     26th    January,           1982    Eastwood      & Partners wrote to South              Ex

         Yorkshire County Council replying to the police                          observations

         with    regard          to    crush      barriers being up to and through the

         radial barriers.



         Mr Eastwood observed that if the crush barriers                          were      to    be

         removed       up    to       a distance of 1.2m from the radial barriers,

         there would be a             consequent         loss    of    calculated       spectator

         capacity       which is undesirable from the club's point of view.

         However, from the point of view of safety, a                          strip    of     that

         width without a single crush barrier would be a major hazard.



                                 - 17 -
A    meeting       of    the     Officer    Working        Party       and    Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club was held on                     4th    February,       1982       in

order      to    discuss       the     apparent    difference          of    opinion on

certain aspects of the radial barriers on the                          west    terrace,

these      being    the       observations        of the police in relation to

crush barriers passing adjacent to the new radial barriers.



It was agreed that, on balance,                   it    was    preferable          from    a

safety      point       of view to prevent crowd surge by the existing

barriers being extended up to and/or through the                             new    radial

barriers         than    to    completely       prevent persons being able to

climb from one pen to smother.



A    meeting       of    the     Officer    Working       Party        and     Sheffield

Wednesday         Football       Club    was held on 23rd January, 1985, in

order to carry out the winter inspection of the stadium.



The club referred to the practice                      followed    in       consultation

with the police of separating home and visiting supporters at

the rear of the west              stand    by     the    erection       of     temporary

barriers.         This had worked well but it was the policy of the

police to aim for exclusive use by visiting supporters of the

west stand and terrace.



It   was        agreed    that       the club would consider at some future

date, a scheme for permanent barriers                     at    the     rear       of   the

stand.



On   the 9th April, 1985, Eastwood and Partners wrote to South

Yorkshire        County       Council,     enclosing          sketch    plan       6705/2,

stating     that        the club was anxious to segregate the visiting
                team's supporters as they entered               the    ground       and    also      to

                enable the police to control their exit at the end of a game.

                The scheme involved the construction                of       two     new    banks of

                turnstiles       and   various     runs    of fencing and new gates.                  It

                provided for separate turnstiles for the                     three      sections of

                the west terrace that then existed.



        (iii)   A     meeting    of    the    Officer    Working      Party was held on 18th                Ex

                April, 1985 to discuss the proposals for                     segregation           atthe

                Leppings Lane end.



                The     police    were       already    familiar      with    the proposals and

                indicated that they had            instigated      them      because       of      their

                desire to allow greater flexibility in the use of the terrace

                and stand by both home and away supporters, allowing them                             to

                vary     the neutral area between opposing fans as circumstances

    (           dictated and to achieve such arrangements                    for     ingress        that

                would allow turnstiles to be dedicated to specific areas.                            fcS*

                thts tUfrns-C1163"Wei.e -fifeted— with— counters?— greater                      control
t               oypg— Llio nmubfei. uf spectators euberxiiy eacli area would have.

                r n n it~nrt-



                At the meeting, the police suggested               the       provision        of    two

                further radial fences, one dividing the existing central area

                in half and running from the tunnel                entrance        to   the      pitch

                side     security      fence    with    gates   to permit entry to either

                section as appropriate, the other dividing the existing north

                end    of the terrace in half and running from the front to the

                back of the terrace.




                                      - 19 -
                     In addition, the two new pens created by the provision of the

                     radial        fences were to be provided with additional exit gates

                     through the pitch perimeter fence, the new                                       radial            fence    at

                     the    north        end        of        the    terrace         to      have two gates and the ___

                     existing radial fence to the north side of the tunnel to have

                     a second gate.


                                                      Ms
   c                 The    provision              of jtwa' gate^f in each of the two radial fences

                     to the north of the tunnel was to                                allow       sideways              movement/
Co l[jo
       /     jU                    along-fcfee-1                   nmnygan^y
                      '■ i/
                     occur,1' Lhy norm a l access route to the Terrace— jiaviftg— beca me

                                        f or nn j        i i . i i n ii (I 111 n i i m l i dr r rii m il i l l   1y )    rmrl nlfiiT
           (*• ts>
   ®?r               to allow police access to all parts of the terrace to control

                     any     crowd       disturbances.                   It     was       felt by the fire service

                     however, that only one gate in each fence would be                                                 necessary

                     for means of escape.



                     If     the     above features were implemented, the proposed radial

                     barrier running parallel                        and      2     metres        from       the         existing

                     barrier       at     the        north end of the terrace could be dispensed

                     with as the police                   felt       that       they       would        have       more         than

                     adequate       control              for segregation purposes with the creation

                     of the smaller pens.                      The creation of smaller pens                             was     also

                     seen     by    the      police to be a bonus in that by having smaller

                     sections of crowd, their job in maintaining                                        order           would    be

                     made easier.



                     At the meeting, the proposals outlined above were sketched &n

                     to the drawing and on seeing the resulting layout,                                                 the    main    j Jv ^

                     concern       of     the representatives of the Fire Service were (a)                                             C 7c^/2,

                     whether the external gates and exit                                  routes        created           at    the

                                               -    20    -
                                                                                                                                                 c_©^.

                                                                                                                                        '             -
                                                                                            n
,       f <^j^e_        ^ < 5                (^X\


             l(?      Up C.
                          *»&         V-O^               CC M                              /^e«-^Lr                      _SjotXj£>< A/
              _fdl)t- 1                      ^Lx~*+.-«J*_. '_>.»>•«                      ^U?—      ~C**$-tr~~£- _J^e-fc-                                  i*1

        _____ ti' «          «    c       _«-*.             . M e ci<cX.       •£*e~e~ (< ■                                   0 gwM-X-g^ XL.1;            ^ ^ Q -'    t~<A ^

    _   _    ^                        ^                             JL>**uh     ^hZ-tA.                  •*-

_             ' d P i t . .                 c*/>                         c-«       J*             LL z b             4kz~~                                 i-«-v|

                 __ ..........                                      uJljjL-S   -JU        J ^.huS.                   O^-L.SjT'                  7^ l~~ ^S^.y~ f             J

                      $ CtAS^L-__ -e^»- c ^                     a^g.«- ^ < ~ < y *-a~ ^                                      ~^l            ^Cs^jr'J^ « —<J— »—       C- —

                                                                                                                                    6^0/"             <£jj.


I           ,__/L*\
                   "" ^ S-fjL.
                         J^C*/~f_g                >-1 0 > y ~ 1 *   / 4 S— 1   y     .   <^>-<1      A   t   '   *   *   ©    </^   -       .     ^        *Ik>   Sss*~*~



                 C~* c**>        / c z /“<r                 «--* ~             t£C » <>^

                         ^                              W ^ x:
rear     of     the       stand    would      be     adequate           for the numbers of

spectators in each section of the west stand and terrace, (b)

whether        the    numbers           of   spectators being allowed into each

section        of    the     terrace         could    be      controlled           to    prevent

overcrowding,             and     (c)    what arrangements were to be made to

ensure that the gates in the radial fences would                                   be    readily

available           for    use should lateral movement along the terrace

to alternative exits become necessary.



Items (b) and (c) above were specifically put to                                   the    police

as     they,        along with the club, were responsible for ensuring

that     emergency          evacuation         procedures          were      adequate          and

controlled           and    had     experience        with        the       club of ensuring

correct crowd density packing.                       The Fire Service were assured

by     the     police       that all the gates included in the proposals

for the terrace part of the scheme would be manned by them at

all     times        during       games in order that evacuation procedures

could be initiated should this become necessary.                                   As    far    as

correct density packing was concerned, the police stated that

arrangements that they had with the                        club      were         satisfactory

and     they    felt that the provision of smaller sections on the

terraces would make overall control of the terrace easier.

  [ A/ S z f c - T                                            K         -      ,

With the knowledge that in addition to the polipe'manning all

gates     through          the^jJitch perimeter andhaving good and close

contact with feKe whole terrace,                     feKere       would      be     additional

police jrfanning            all    gate^in the radial fences, that police

controlling the area^fiad direct communication with the police

control       r o o m a n d those mannino^fcfie police control room had

direct vdTsion of the terrapeTon                     closed        circuit         television

tj»e    proposals          wer^accepted in principle subject to closer
i   /    V    S     ii/'j QX)On         examination     of     the   plans,   it    was    found necessary to

                                  indicate that the exit gates behind the west stand needed                      to
             JZ J-S.              be    of a specific width to allow for the number of spectators

                                  that had been calculated would use them and to                  specify      that

                                  the     gates    would     be supervised by either the police or club

                                  officials.       With regard to the terracing arrangements, it was

                                  felt that the proposal for the new radial fence at the tunnel

                                  position had little effect on           the      existing    situation,       the

                                  capacities,       travel     distances and exit arrangements from the

                                  two new central pens did not change.                In   fact    a    new     gate

                                  through     the    pitch     perimeter fence was to be provided.              The

                                  new radial fence at the north end of the terrace did actually

                                  slightly        increase the travel distance to the normal route of

                                  exit i.e. the way onto the terrace               otherwise    there     was     no

                                  change.



                      (b\         It was not thought necessary to sign any exit routes because:

                              ^   (A.p) the principle ingress/egress route would be that already

                        iJL                   liar to users, and
                 -p                                                    hi
                /Fence gates would be manned >imt-umhr-t.h* rsaafcjsoJ— of police or stewards

                  on the spot.



QC-I The        gates     through the perimeter fence were considered to be e^g^nt4al, this

        being reflected by the request for two additional gates in the newly                             created

        pens.       The   use          of the gates was under the direct control of the police and

        was to allow their access into the terrace should any disturbance                              arise    and

                                                      - 22 -
to   relieve    any local build up of pressure at the front of the pens or allow

any person becoming ill or overcome to be removed by that route.                       The police,

who-'-'Tiaa-— CSftteoi— crf''"-EKe— gateer^   had always been happy that the gates were

adequate for these purposes.



                                                             whole of the jaest stand          and      ,

                                                             preventing ingreqa.ia to-the

                                                 fchan           calculated— foe— ±»— eaoa

                         Bund

                                                      providing a smooth




gates /'through                                                                 ould

                                                                 I^i-wag— always— felt        iJiafc-
                                 ©
sheaTSL any situation a^ise that necessitated total evacuation of any
        /t<ts                            fLs/c£*«.o_
section^, ejcac«ffClon would in the first oase be by way of the normal w^y^" on

to   the terrace i.e. the tunnel and around each end of the stand.                      Should any

of these routes pf^jrft be obstructed for any reason, the gates in the radial

fences                                  would be used as directed by the police ugiJSg""''~»i               t£

tefce pubM-e- addroeo eyefeem. ^                  ^      ^   A         ^          ^                         ^



                                                             numbers       of    spectators    was

                     unne




The minutes record that the proposals were generally acceptable to the police

representatives subject to:-
    ----
Additional    gates      being    provided between turnstile 16 and the wall of

the inner access road.



             (b)   the central area of the terrace being divided in half by

                   a    new    radial fence running from the tunnel entrance to

                   the pitch side security fence, with gates erected so                                     as

                   to    permit       entry       to        be   diverted         to    either       side as

                   appropriate (the proposed                     new    secondary           radial       fence

                   adjacent       to    the existing radial fence indicated on the

                   plan to be abandoned.)



             (c)   the right hand end of the terrace also to be divided                                     in

                   half       by a new central radial fence running from back to

                   front with two gates (the existing radial fence dividing

                   the    present           two    terrace areas - neutral area and home

                   supporters - to have a second gate installed).



             (d)   the existing pitch perimeter fence                             to    have     additional

                   exit       gates     installed - one in the neutral area and one

                   in the home supporters area.



                   The Fire Service saw no objections in principle                                   to    the

                   proposals          subject          to    a more detailed investigation of

                   the means of escape aspects.



                   It was agreed that              R        Grimshaw        (Fire       Service)         should

                   investigate          as    a matter of urgency the means of escape

                   aspects of the proposals                      and    subject        to    satisfactory

                   clearance           of    these          matters,        the    outline         proposals

                   submitted       would          be    agreed         as    now       amended      by     the

                   suggestions          of    South          Yorkshire        Police        and,     to    the
/                     submission        of    the         necessary     detailed             plans          and

                    calculations under both Safety of Sports Grounds Act and

                    Building Regulations.



    (^v)      On the 30th April, 1985, South Yorkshire County Fire                                     Service     Ex

              wrote    to South Yorkshire County Council                      indicating that the

              new      crowd control          arrangements           were considered                   to    be

              satisfactory       providing           that     certain      gates    have widths as

              indicated on the plan attached to the                     letter      and           that      the

              gates would be supervised by either police or club officials.



    (v)<      On the 2nd May, 1985, South Yorkshire County Council wrote to                                        Ex

              Eastwood and Partners                 indicating that the proposals outlined

              for      crowd control          arrangements
                                                 were generally acceptable
                                                         fa <*L
              subject to ineeeporation »f the points referred ,_-fc©— in— 2r±2

              7 H r r (a) to (d) and (IV) above. ^                                      'v        4-

                             7 Z 1

    (vi)| /   On the 8th may, 1985,                 Eastwood and Partners wrote to South                           Ex

              Yorkshire County Council                 acknowledging comments of Officer

              Working       Party       but    requesting that further consideration be

              given to the requirement for                   the     second    gate          in    the      two

              radial       fences       as it they were meant for use in an emergency

              it    would      mean      having       a    steward    in    attendance             on       each

              occasion, the expense of which would hardly be justified.



    (vii)/I   On    10th    May, 1985,             South Yorkshire County Council wrote to                         Ex

              Eastwood and Partners                 indicating     that     the     two       additional

              gates     were     included          primarily at the request of the police

              who had indicated that they                   were   prepared        to     concede           the

              request      for   the         two     additional gates subject to all other



                                    -   25 -
             points raised by the Officer Working Party                                       are      incorporated

             into the proposals.



v>ti)        On 18th July, 1985 South Yorkshire County Council wrote to

  <}         Eastwood and Partners                     noting that the Chief Executive (South

             Yorkshire           County         Council)             had       been        made        aware             that

             application             for      Building             Regulation/planning                 approval               in

             respect of the re-organisation of fences at the Leppings Lane

             end and other matters.


                                                          yd/k
                                                                                                                                              n
(pef         On       the       19th    July,        1985 a not a— fog'f-
                                                                        ilo wag aubmiLLtjil by

             .Station nffirpr                        ■Ladiaafei-
                                                               aa             that      plans ^ submitted^ for

             B u ild in g        R e g u la tio n          ap p ro v al        w ere      d iffe re n t        to      th o se

             d is c u s s e d   b e tw e e n t h e   c lu b     and th e       fire     se rv ic e .      i c t t a C h e c T ’t o

             tsh a     n o te — f o r      file       is    a    s k e tc n   p la n   c o m p a rin g t h y     ex lu tin g

             ai?sa n y y m S n L a aL t h e       L e p p i n g s L a n e e n d O f t h e 7 s L a d iu in w i t h t h e                   *

                            F r7 ir ^ nr1T r r’” 1'"■"i 1 111,11                          K B ^ ila r ln n a p firn v -a l- j J, q



                                                                                                                                      )?i!cu,A£e<
             On       the 25th July, 1985, Eastwood and Partners wrote to South                                                         Ex

             Yorkshire County Council                           enclosing          copies        of    drawings                in

             respect            of     segregation              of    visiting spectators at Leppings                                  -t3~   .
             Lane end, these being further to the                                      preliminary          submission

             in       April,         1985.        Amongst these drawings is Plan No.67Q5/8A

             which showed a revised layout and which abandoned                                              the        means

             whereby            separate turnstiles would be used for each sector of

             the terrace.The proposed new wall between turnstile 17 and
                                                               clct-of         .
           the rear of the west stand was shown as having a jgate fer {*+"
                                                                       cc> (m,jLa> o£-JjrS~
           personnel access.^ Plan No. 6705/17 showed the proposed new ^
                                                                                   ■%
           pen arrangements for the west terrace.                                         /                                          nr* /<f
         ec**/'em.      d J s e.c-                                           X         m *k



        oI           ylj&sts               /^tJ- t.                                ? " ^3
                                        - 26 -
(xi)< )    A meeting of the Officer Working Party was held on 29th July,                                ex

           1985 to discuss the detailed plans                 submitted        to     the    South

           Yorkshire      County     Council      on    25th     July, 1985.          Subject to

           certain prints detailed in the               minutes      the     proposals           were

           considered        to be acceptable.
                                          Item (i) made reference to the
                                              /lo-       wol .
           need for a new perimeter fence gateA for security access and

           emergency       egress    purposes.         Item (j) of the points required

           that all the new gates be fully supervised                     by     stewards         who

           must be fit, able and properly trained.



(xii)()    On    1st     August,     1985,   Eastwood and Partners wrote to South

           Yorkshire County Council acknowledging the                      comments         of    the

           Officer       Working     Party   meeting of 29th July.                Item (a) asks

           for further clarification of the location of a proposed extra

           security       gate, claiming that an existing gate in the 2m wide

           gap can be used by police and would still                    be       available        for

           use     for    spectators in emergency as there are gates into the

           2m gap from the terrace which will be under                      the       control      of

           the     police.       With respect to the provision of stewarding for

           all the new gates, item (j), of the minutes of the 29th July,

           Mr    Eastwood commented that this would no doubt be taken care

           of by the club.



(xiii)     A meeting between the Officer               Working      Party      and     Sheffield        Ex

X^ I I/I   Wednesday      Football Club was held on 7th August 1985 to carry

           out the "summer" inspection and in                 particular         to    view       the

           Leppings Lane end improvements.                  The matter for clarification
                                                        /
           dealt with in the letter at (xii4) above was investigated                              and

           it    was     noted     that there was an existing gate in the new 2m

           wide gap for use by the police.                  Again    it     is      stated       that

           these       gates     would    still    be       available      for      the     use    of

                                 - 27 -
           spectators in an emergency as the gates at    the   top   of   the

           terrace   under   the control of police would enable spectators

           to be directed down the 2m wide gap, although it    was    agreed

           that steps or a longer gate would be required.



RG/AS/DG

26.05.89




                             - 28 -
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE

                     SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

                            HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD



The South Yorkshire         County     Council      received      an    application           for    a

General     Safety    Certificate       in     September,      1978.         The    club engaged

Eastwood and Partners, a Sheffield based firm of                       consulting         engineers

as their consultants.



In    November   1978, the draft General Safety Certificate which had been

prepared by the County Council following consultation with the                               Officer

Working     Parties     was     submitted      to    the   Fire      Service       Committee for

approval to be used throughout the county.



On 2nd January, 1979, the Chief Fire Officer                   sent      a     memorandum        (ref

FP19/2/4/HEW/JMB)          to   the   Chief     Executive      of South Yorkshire County

Council suggesting that officers               of    the   working       party          undertake     a

comprehensive        survey     of    Sheffield      Wednesday Football Club in unison

rather than separately.          The Chief Fire Officer suggested that                       a   copy

of    the   report of each department be provided to each other department

involved to enable problems to            be       discussed      so    that       an    acceptable

approach    might     be    determined       and     consolidated into a single report

which should be forwarded to the club.                  The    memorandum          made      several

other observations regarding the standards necessary.



(i)           On 17th      January,     1979        the South Yorkshire County Council

            received a report (Ref. WE/KH/1610) prepared by Eastwood                                and

            Partners       on   ground capacity of Sheffield Wednesday Football

            Club, in connection with            their      application         for       a   General

            Safety     Certificate.          The    report     indicated        that the Green

            Guide had been used as            the    basis     for     their       calculations,
       although      as with probably all existing grounds, it would not

       be possible to satisfy all the recommendations in                           the    guide

       and reasonable compromise would be needed.



(ii)   Paragraph       (b)    of     the    report    dealt     with the west terrace

       (including lower level at the north west corner).                           The report

       considered      that        despite    the fact that the full area of the

       west terrace could accommodate about 8,000 spectators, due to

       the    lack    of     gangways        an    allowance       should    be     made    for

       circulation         space     in    order     that     good   packing        could    be

       achieved.        It    further suggested that an allowance of 10% be

       made for this purpose, resulting in a suggested capacity                             for

       the west terrace of 7,200.



       Crush       barriers    were to be designed to match the capacity of

       7,200 spectators            and     additional       barriers    and       appropriate

       strengthening          of    existing       barriers     would       be provided for

       where necessary.



       Reference is also made to the evacuation time                         for    the    west

       terrace,      this     being        about    six     minutes based on the exits

       already available and also to the fact that                      some       spectators

       will    be 25m from an exit although movement along the terrace

       will be easy and quick



       Note Paragraph 15.4 of the Green Guide refers to reduction of

              available       standing       area when the width and positioning

              of    gangways       does     not    meet     with     recommendations         of

              Paragraph 75.1 of the Green Guide.
(iii)   A     meeting          of    the     Officer       Working        Party was held on 12th

        February, 1979, the purpose                     of    which        was   to   discuss       the

        report        prepared by Eastwood and Partners and to consider the

        views which should be put to the club.



        With regard to the west terrace, it was considered                                  that    due

        to      the lack of depth of the terrace, the offer to reduce the

            spectator limit to 7,200 and with a                      discharge        time    of    6.6

        minutes           it    would        have    been    unreasonable to insist on the

            provision of gangways or additional exits.



            It was noted however that, subject to existing crush barriers

            passing       the       tests,     they would require special attention in

            view of the apparent sharp edges and corrosion.



(iv)        A further meeting of the Officer Working Party                            was    held    on

            30th    March,          1979, in order to review the position since the

            meeting gif the 12th February, 1979                      as    difficulty        had   been

            experienced         in     arranging       a     meeting       with the club, due to

            amongstpother things,^adverse weather.
        (

            Since the meeting of 12th February, the                         County      Council     had

        contacted          the       Home     office regarding the application of the

        Green Guide and had been informed                       that        basically,       any    new

        work or reconstruction had to be to a standard not lower than

        that set out in the Green Guide but that maximum                                flexibility
                                                                                                 —.
        had to be maintained in the case of existing structures.



        The        Fire    Service         had      contacted    four       other brigades with

        designated             grounds       and     only       in        one    case       had     the

        recommendations of the guide been strictly adhered to.
                   In   addition       to the condition of the crush barriers referred

                   to at the meeting of 12th February, attention                    was    drawn      by

                   the Building Authority to the poor condition in places of the

                   terracing and the stepping arrangement of the                     steps      on   the

                   north west corner.



           (v)     On   2nd    April,     1979, a meeting was held between the Officer

                   Working Party and the           club    to   discuss      the    views       of   the

                   Officer      Working     Party in respect of the report submitted by

                   Eastwood and Partners.



                   As far as the west terrace was concerned, it was agreed                           that

                   the club's proposal for additional barriers and reductions in

Ik   i4^/Cv-v      capacity to 7,200 without the need             for       additional       gangways

                   should be implemented.           The question of the condition of some

                   of the existing barriers and the stepping arrangement on                           the

                   north      west     corner     exit would    be      the subject of detailed

                   discussions between Dr Eastwood and the Building Surveyor.



           (vi)    A meeting of the Officer          Working     Party       and    the    Sheffield

                   Wednesday         Football     Club was held on 18th April, 1979 during

                   which the club accepted that the stepping arrangement on                          the

                   north      west    corner      exit should    be          rebuilt. The matters

                   concerning the crush barriers would be reconsidered after                           it

                   was seen which of the crush barriers failed on testing.



           (vii)   In   correspondence dated 1st May, 1979, (Ref. BR/JNS/SC) from

                   City of      Sheffield       Building   Surveyors        to     South   Yorkshire

                   County     Council,     which     summarised       the    Building Surveyor's

                   requirements in        relation    to    matters      discussed         at    recent
meetings.        The   Building Surveyor indicated that, subject to

the downward slope of exit steps at                 the    north     west       corner

exit     being    corrected      and   the capacity being restricted to

that agreed between the police and the club, that                         department

considered the west terrace to be acceptable.



In     correspondence dated 16th May, 1979, (Ref C2088/FP19/2/1/

FMB/VP) from South Yorkshire County                 Fire    Service        to     South

Yorkshire City Council, enclosed were plans numbered 1610/12,

1610/11, 1610/9A, 1610/8A, 1610/7A, 1610/6A,                    1610/4A,          1610/

2XA,     1610/1XA      and   a   recommendation of work schedule to be

undertaken.



With regard to exit routes             from     the    west    and    north        west

terraces, these were considered to be satisfactory.



The     provision      of    exit    signs    was     required       in    the     work

schedule, the siting of which was                indicated      on    the       plans.

There     was     no requirement for such signs on the west terrace

exits.



The schedule also detailed             that   adequate        roads       should    be

provided     to    ensure     that     speedy    and      direct access can be

obtained by emergency vehicles to all exterior parts                         of    the

stadium and that it must be ensured that parked vehicles will

not obstruct emergency vehicles on these access roads.
      (ix)       Memorandum from South Yorkshire County council to Chief                 Fire

                 officer,      dated 8th June, 1979 (Ref. DV/BB/583) enclosing the

                 work schedule forwarded to Sheffield Wednesday Football                 Club

                 which   had     been   collated   from the detailed comments of the

                 various disciplines represented on the Working Party.



      (x)        A meeting of the Officer      Working    Party      and   the   Sheffield

                 Wednesday      Football   Club was held on 12th November 1979 when

                 it was noted that work detailed in          the    schedule     dated    8th

                 June 1979 had been carried out as far as the west terrace was

                 concerned.



.5    The General     Safety    Certificate   in   respect     of    Sheffield    Wednesday

      Football   Club    was    issued with conditions on 21st December, 1979, the

      conditions being



      8(1)       acceptance of existing first aid facilities on an interim

                 basis only



     12(1)       arrangements for emergency lighting in the south stand being

                 only acceptable for the       duration   of       the   existing   battery

                 life.



     14          acceptance of police facilities on an interim basis only.



     30          no   spectators being allowed to use the stadium in conditions

                 of extreme wind and/or snow loadings
Memorandum to Chief Fire Officer from South Yorkshire                                 County

Council (Ref DV/MB/583/5) dated 14th March, 1980 stating that

despite the fact that the               certificate          had       been     issued       as

recently       as      21st    December,       it was felt that the Sheffield

District Officer Working               Party        would    have       to    review        the

situation       due     to     the    pending        FA    Cup     semi-final between

Arsenal and Liverpool on 12th                  April,       1980.         Comments         were

requested       on      any    outstanding          matters      for      which the Fire

Service had primary responsibility.



Memorandum to Chief Fire               Officer        from       Stn.O.                     (Ref

FP19/2/4A) dated              20th march, 1980, detailed areas of concern

that were revised during an inspection of the ground on                                     12th

March, 1980.           These included:-



(a)     training of stewards

(b)     exit     signs        not    being     of    the     required         standard        as

        detailed in schedule II of the certificate.



(c)     non provision of             fire    alarm        systems      as     required        by

        Schedule II of the certificate



Memorandum          to South Yorkshire County Council from Chief Fire

Officer        (Ref.     FP19/2/4/HEW/JMB)            dated       26th       march,        1980,

incorporating            the        features    detailed          in    the     memorandum

referred to at 1.6(ii) above.



Correspondence to              Sheffield     Wednesday           Football       Club       from

South    Yorkshire            County Council (Ref.DV/MH/583/5) dated 31st

march,     1980        incorporating         the     features       detailed          in    the
        memorandum       to    South Yorkshire County Council referred to at

        1.6(iii) above.          Additional observations made by the Building

        Surveyor were also included in this letter.



(v)     Correspondence          from    Sheffield       Wednesday     Football      Club to

        South Yorkshire County Council (Ref. EE/CB) dated 3rd                       April,

        1980     acknowledging         receipt of letter referred to at 1.6(iv)

        above.    An explanation as to the lack of training of stewards

        was    given that this would be undertaken on completion of the

        fire alarm system which was in hand.                  All    other      matters    in

        the     letter    of the 31st March were passed to Dr Eastwood for

        his professional advice.



(vi)    Correspondence from Eastwood and Partners to South                        Yorkshire

        County     Council       (Ref    WE/KH/1610)         dated 4th April, 1980 and

        8th April, 1980 explaining the reasons for non                       provision     of

        exit     signs     and    fire       warning     system     and dealing with all

        matters referred to by the Building Surveyor.



(vii)   A     meeting    of     the    Officer     Working       Party    and     Sheffield

        Wednesday        Football       Club    was    held   on     10th April, 1980 to

        discuss the areas of concern                  recently    communicated      to    the

        club     and in view of the FA Cup Semi-final to be held on 12th

        April, 1980.          The points covered by the letters from Eastwood

        and    Partners on 4th and 8th April, were discussed and as far

        as training of the             safety     stewards    was    concerned      it    was

        agreed    that        there    was      little point until the fire warning

        system had been completely installed.                    It was   noted     however

        that the Fire Service had given instruction to some stewards.
         1.7   Correspondence            from    South Yorkshire County Council to Chief Constable

               (Ref FAM/DV/MB/583) dated 3rd September, 1980 outlined the                               concern      of

               the     Chief      Executive       of   the police policy of locking away supporters

               inside grounds until such time as home supporters have cleared the area

               and     suggesting        that instead of being allowed to approach locked gates

               at the end of a match, the away supporters should be                           held      back    in    a

               relatively safe place, such as on the terrace.



               Concern      was     also        expressed    at modifications being made at Sheffield

               Wednesday Football Club at the                    request    of    the    police,     without      the

               knowledge of the Officer Working Party.



         1.8   Correspondence            from     Eastwood       and   Partners to South Yorkshire County

               Fire Service (Ref. AJC/CW/2401) dated 16th                         January,     1981,     confirming

               that     the       fire    alarm     installation          and    modifications       to the public

               address system had been completed during July 1980.



    w    1-9   A meeting of the Officer Working Party and Sheffield Wednesday Football

               Club was held on 7th April, 1981 the purpose of which was to review the

               ground due to the pending FA cup semi-final to be held on                                11th   April,

               1981.        Following       consultations          between       South   Yorkshire County Fire

               Service and the police had resulted in the production of an                                "Emergency

               Evacuation          Procedure".         The club undertook to circulate copies of the

               procedure to all stewards who would be on duty for                            the   FA    Cup    Semi-

               Final .



               A     copy    of    the     procedure        is    filed    anddated 12th May, 1981. The
                                                                                                   -
               procedure detailed the signal to be                     adopted to inform stewards and

______         police       that    an emergency had arisen and the actions to be followed on
                                    V



               hearing further announcements over the public address system.
                 1.10 A meeting of the Officer Working Party/and Sheffield Wednesday Football

                       Club   was    held    on    8th   June,     1981. \ It       was     noted       that following

                       experiences      at   the    FA   Cup     Semi-Final\      in   April,      the       club     were
       /
                       considering  revised arrangements on the/ terracing in front of the west
 ^           w     ,                                            \
                       stand and that the Officer Working Party (would be consulted when these

                       had substance.
                                £)ejMllwoh w J ItwOj
                                4Ac^^bv\.<0.     [^Ic^Svv^r                               eticA    Cqv^oIcAaJ

                 1.11 (i)           Correspondence       from Eastwood and Partners to South Yorkshire

                                    County     Council     (Ref.WE/JAS/PB?3563)            dated       2nd    September,

                                    1981,    detailing     the     club's       proposal      to instal two radial

                                    fences on the west terrace in such a manner that the                            terrace
     * > * !$ * •» *
                                    would    be    divided into approximately three equal areas, each

                                    served by its own entrance.             The     aim    was     to    achieve      more
 s VV aa oo' ____
(s                                  control       over   supporters,       a    visiting      team with only a few
  fiO C&AA
                                    supporters being allocated one section, with                       the    other     two
O c & 6CC0
                                    sections retained by the home supporters.


  V0K\ a ^ 1^
                                    Larger        contingents      of      visiting         supporters          could    be
     4jL2A
                                    accommodated in two or          all     three      areas      as    their       numbers

     {¥                             dictate.       A 1.15 metre gate was proposed at the rear of each

                                    fence to connect the areas during a game if adjacent ones are

                                    occupied by supporters of the same team.



                                    A   meeting     of   the     Officer       Working     Party was held on 11th

                                    September, 1981, to consider the proposed erection of                            radial

                                    barriers on the west terrace for crowd control purposes.



                                    Whilst there were reservations due to problems with
     (viii)   Correspondence         from Eastwood & Partners               to    South      Yorkshire

              County      Council       (Ref       WE/KH/3563)      dated       26th January, 1982

              replying to the police                observations         with    regard      to   crush

              barriers being up to and through the radial barriers.



              Mr    Eastwood       observed         that if the crush barriers were to be

              removed up to a distance of 1.2m from                       the    radial      barriers,

              there    would       be    a    consequent         loss of calculated spectator

              capacity whichis undesirable from the club's point                             of   view.

              However,       from       the point of view of safety, a strip of that

              width without a single crush barrier would be a major hazard.



     (ix)     A    meeting    of        the Officer        Working       Party and           Sheffield

              Wednesday       Football         Club      was    held on 4th February, 1982 in

              order to       discuss         the    apparent      difference       of     opinion    on

              certain      aspects       of the radial barriers on the west terrace,

              these being the observations of the                    police       in    relation     to

              crush barriers passing adjacent to the new radial barriers.



              It    was    agreed       that,       on   balance, it was preferable from a

              safety point of view to prevent crowd surge by                           the    existing

              barriers       being      extended up to and/or through the new radial

              barriers than to completely prevent                    persons      being       able   to

              climb from one pen to another.



1.12 (i)      A     meeting    of       the    Officer         Working    Party    and       Sheffield

              Wednesday Football Club was held on 23rd                      January,         1985,   in

              order to carry out the winter inspection of the stadium.




                                    - 13 -
The     club    referred       to the practice followed in consultation

with the police of separating home and visiting supporters at

the     rear    of    the    west    stand    by the erection of temporary

barriers.       This had worked well but it was the policy of                        the

police to aim for exclusive use by visiting supporters of the

west stand and terrace.



It was agreed that the club would                  consider    at       some       future

date,     a    scheme       for   permanent     barriers at the rear of the

stand.



Correspondence from Eastwood and Partners to South                         Yorkshire

County     Council      enclosing         sketch    plan     6705/2 (REf.WE/JF),

dated 9th April, 1985 showing two new banks of turnstiles and

various runs of fencing and new gates.                  The considerations of

the Working Party were              requested      at   an    early      date.        The

police had already had a copy sent to them so that they could

have advance notice.



A meeting of the Officer             Working       Party     was    held       on    18th

April,        1985   to discuss the proposals for segregation at the

Leppings Lane end.



The police pointed out that the proposals had                       been      prompted

by    comments       made    by    them    to the club in order to achieve

greater flexibility in the use of the west                    terrace         by    both

home and visiting fans.



The     proposals       were      generally     acceptable         to   the     police

representatives subject to:-
(a)   Additional gates being provided between turnstile 16 and

      the wall of the inner access road.



(b)   the central area of the terrace being divided in half by

      a new radial fence running from the tunnel                     entrance         to

      the    pitch side security fence, with gates erected so as

      to permit        entry    to     be    diverted      to   either        side    as

      appropriate        (the    proposed       new    secondary radial fence

      adjacent to the existing radial fence indicated                         on     the

      plan to be abandoned.)



(c)   the   right hand end of the terrace also to be divided in

      half by a new central radial fence running from back                            to

      front with two gates (the existing radial fence dividing

      the present two terrace areas - neutral                     area    and        home

      supporters - to have a second gate installed).



(d)   the   existing      pitch        perimeter fence to have additional

      exit gates installed - one in the neutral area                       and       one

      in the home supporters area.



      The    Fire      Service saw no objections in principle to the

      proposals subject to a more               detailed        investigation         of

      the means of escape aspects.



      It    was   agreed        that    R    Grimshaw (Fire Service) should

      investigate as a matter of urgency the means                       of    escape

      aspects     of    the     proposals       and subject to satisfactory

      clearance     of       these     matters,      the   outline        proposals

      submitted        would     be         agreed    as now    amended       by     the

      suggestions       of      South       Yorkshire Police       and,       to     the

                    - 15 -
               submission         of      the     necessary             detailed       plans      and

               calculations under both Safety of Sports Grounds Act and

               Building Regulations.



(iv)    Correspondence        from       South    Yorkshire County Fire Service to

        South Yorkshire County Council (Ref C2088/AV/IR)                              dated      30th

        April,      1985,      indicating             that       the     new     crowd      control

        arrangements were considered                  to    be        satisfactory      providing

        that     certain     gates       have    widths          as     indicated on the plan

        attached to the letter and that the gates would be supervised

        by either police or club officials.



(v)     Correspondence            from     South       Yorkshire         County       Council       to

        Eastwood and Partners (Ref DV/AA/583/5) dated 2nd May,                                   1985,

        indicating     that       the     proposals          outlined         for crowd control

        arrangements         were        generally           acceptable              subject        to

        incorporation        of    the     points          referred to in 1.12 (iii) and

        (iv) above.



(vi)    Correspondence from Eastwood and Partners to South Yorkshire

        County     Council        (Ref    WE/KH/6205)            dated     8th       May,        1985,

        acknowledging         comments           of     Officer          Working        Party      but

        requesting     that       further        consideration           be     given       to     the

        requirement     for       the second gate in the two radial fences as

        it they were meant for use in                  an    emergency          it    would      mean

        having     a steward in attendance on each occasion, the expense

        of which would hardly be justified.



(vii)   Correspondence       from        South    Yorkshire            County        Council       to

        Eastwood    and Partners (Ref DV/JC/583/5) dated 10th May, 1985

        indicating    that        the    two     additional            gates     were       included

                            - 16 -
            primarily at the request of the police who had indicated that

            they were    prepared        to   concede   the     request       for    the    two

            additional        gates   subject    to all other points raised by the

            Officer Working Party are incorporated into the proposals.



(viii)      Correspondence from South Yorkshire County Council to

            Eastwood and Partners (Ref. DV/1ADA/583/5) dated                       18th    July,

            1985   noted      that the Chief Executive (South Yorkshire County

            Council) had been made aware that              application        for    Building

            Regulat ion/planning           approval     in     respect        of     the     re­

            organisation of fences at the Leppings               Lane     end       and    other

            matters.



     (ix)   Note   for     file submitted by Station Officer                        indicating

            that plans submitted for Building              Regulation      approval         were

            different     to     those     discussed between the club and the fire

            service.     Attached to the note for            file   is    a     sketch      plan

            comparing     the existing arrangements at the Leppings Lane end

            of the stadium        with     the   revised     proposals     submitted         for

            Building Regulation approval.



     (x)    Correspondence        from Eastwood and Partners to South Yorkshire

            County Council (Ref. WSE/KWP/SEB/6075) dated 25th July,                         1985

            enclosing    copies       of   drawings     in respect of segregation of

            visiting spectators at Leppings Lane end, these being further

            to the preliminary submission in April, 1985.                     (Amongst these

            drawings     is    Plan   NO.6705/8A      which     shows     a        completely

            different layout to that discussed in April, 1985)



     (xi)   A meeting of the Officer Working Party was held on 29th July,

            1985 to discuss the detailed plans               submitted    to       the     South

                                - 17 -
Yorkshire       County        Council     on    25th       July, 1985.        Subject to

certain prints detailed in the                  minutes         the     proposals        were

considered to be acceptable.                   Item (j) of the points required

that all the new gates be fully supervised                            by   stewards       who

must be fit, able and properly trained.



Correspondence           from Eastwood and Partners to South Yorkshire

County        Council        (Ref    WE/KH/6705)         dated     1st     August,        1985

acknowledging           the    comments        of    the       Officer     Working Party

meeting       of     29th      July.      Item           (a)     asks      for      further

clarification           of     the     location of a proposed extra security

gate, claiming that an existing gate in the 2m wide                                gap     can

be     used     by      police and would still be available for use for

spectators in emergency as there are gates into                             the     2m     gap

from     the       terrace      which    will       be     under the control of the

police.       With respect to the provision of stewarding for                              all

the     new gates, item (j), of the minutes of the 29th July, Mr

Eastwood commented that this would no doubt be taken care                                   of

by the club.



A    meeting       between      the     Officer Working Party and Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club was held on 7th August 1985 to                                  carry

out     the     "summer"       inspection       and in particular to view the

Leppings Lane end improvements.                     The matter for clarification

dealt    with in the letter at (xii) above was investigated and

it was noted that there was an existing gate in                             the     new    2m

wide    gap     for      use    by     the police.         Again it is stated that

these     gates      would      still     be    available          for     the    use      of

spectators         in    an    emergency       as the gates at the top of the

terrace under the control of police would                         enable         spectators
to   be   directed down the 2m wide gap, although it was agreed

that steps or a longer gate would be required.




                - 19 -
                                                              I I S©



                                                                                               9th April, 15
                                C 20 o S / 32f f l / 2 i 3
                                                                                                     ‘5-
                                                  Station O f f i c e s


                                          ,fr~

        Eear Sir,

        c , ’^      o f S o n r» " r- ^ m d A c t»J 3 ^

                         We ^ ° ^         ?oot'ba11 C~—




                                                                          i^-the,event ^f-..a-,ire         ^
' . r   ^procedureheader, "

         yours faithfully,




           Tilvisjnnal CQSg?xider




             a a a O M      V e d n e s d a y S W t t a l l C lu b ,
             Hillsborough StaAiua,
             Penistone Boad,
             Sheffield,
             S6 1SW.



                 2dcs.
All employees should receive instruction and training regarding
the action to he taken, which is appropriate to their responsibilities
ir. the event of a fire.

The instruction and training should be given by a competent person
as soon as possible after employment commences and should provide
for the following:


1.    The action to be taken upon discovering a fire.

2.    The action 'to be taken upon hearing the pre-detexmined *                ''
      emergency signal.

5. The raising of the alarm, including the location of the
     . fire alarm call points.

4 . The correct method of calling the Tire Service (if it is
      part of an employees responsibility).

5. •The/location and use of fire fighting equipment.

6 .— The knowledge, of-escape/routes.•           -.u;wa *•a C”..u*-a    •
                                                                        .

7 . The appreciation of the importance of fire resisting doors
     ;and of the need to cl.ose all doors within the vacinity of
      the fire.

8 . The evacuation of the ground-(this includes re-assuring
       the public and escorting them to unaffected routes).
         •.                      *              •                      V

The instruction and training should be repeated before idi© football
season -commences end at least once in the middle of the season. _
                                     •                                     i
After the   initial instruction and training as indicated in (b) above,
exercises   could be combined with the instruction, such as hairing a
simulated   evacuation drill with the assumption that one of the escape
routes is   not available.

A stiecifiod parson should be made responsible for organising staff
training and the sane person, or one other, nominated to co-ordinate
the actions of the staff in the event of a fire. Effective arrange­
ments should be made for a nominated deputy or deputies to carry out
the above duties.



                                                                       Cont/d ..
                                        . - 2 -
•v



     , Coat/d «•«




       (e)   A record of the training and Instruction given and exercises held
             should he entered in a log hook to include the following details


             1.   Date of instruction or exercise.

             2. Duration of instruction or exercise.

             3.   llame of person giving the instruction.

             4.   Name of persons receiving the instruction.

             =    Nature of the instruction or exercise.


        Should you require any assistance on any of these points, do not hesitate
        to contact the Fire Service*
       A C T I O S       T O   B E    T A X E S   I N   T H E   E V E N T




(a)     0:1 DISCOTSHY 0? A ?I53

        1 . coand the alarn by breaking tha naarast break glass call point.

        2. Tackle the firs with the appropriate extinguisher if 3sie to
           do so.

        3. Close doors within the isaediata vacinity of tha fire.

              Liaae ;;i;h the ?olice to see if it in necaanary to -evacuate the
              who la or part of the .ground.

               Tf 2VACTJATIC5 15          report to your pra-detar-niaed
               position and assist tha public to leave the- ;vi'-in. ?n
               orderly manner.

        6.     At no tiaa mention tha word3, •Sira* or 'Bomb1. P-aaaabar,
               if you don't panic, neither will the crowd.

        i• Upon 'completion of the evacuation of your section, “report' "
           to tha aaaaably araa which ia
           2nd report to                    (parson in ovarall char^a)
           who will inturn report to tho Pira Service and any other
           ralavant eaer^ency service which say be in attendance.


(b )   CN -IZAZ?ir.TG T S            SICT.MS

        Tha action 3hould take the fora of two stages:


        S T A C 3 OITE

        (i)      You ahould hear a codad signal (this ’rsould be tha playing of a
                 tuna such as tin ’Ihrae Blind Mica’)* --/La will indie ato
                • that thara is a fire or aiailar Gaargsnc,;- in tha ground, ana
                 tharo is a pos3iV.lity that an evacuation of tha whole or
                 part of tha groan- .^ay be necessary.

        (ii)     Stand by your pra— ■.>;erainad position .and oa prepared for stage
                 two. Chi3 ia whan ovacuation■of tha whole or part of tha
                 grotm.! ia necessary.


                                                                        Ccnt/d .
Cont/d ...




STAGS TOO

(i)    You should hear a further coded signal over the loudspeaker
       system followed "by .an announcement asking the publio to
       leava the whole or part of the ground.

(ii)   C arry   out the evacuation procedure as mentioned.
                       SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL C LU^^ r —

                             HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM

                                 .   Its /
                        EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE


 The following notes of guidance are prepared and issued to assist all
 official stewards and others in a position of responsibility at the
'Eillsborough Stadium on the action to be taken and procedures to be followed
 in the event of the possibility of evacuation of the stadium during the
 playing of a game when spectators are present. The notes axe not intended to
 be a comprehensive list of all the action necessary, but are for personal
 issue to each steward and for retention by the steward for immediate ref­
 erence all the time hs/she is on duty at the stadium.

  It is appreciated that the reasons evacuation may become necessary are many
  and varied, but the most obvious are fires or information that explosive/
| incendiary devices have been placed somewhere within the stadium/ground.
  That information may be received or discovered either by members of the staff
  at the stadium, or by telephone to the stadium- police, local or national
  newspapers.

_JT.IS STRESSED THAT WHENEVER SUCH INFORMATION IS RECEIVED-THE RESPONSIBILITY
".FOR. THE DECISION TO EVACUATE ALL* OR PART OF THE GROUND RESTS WITH THE SENIOR -
 MANAGEMENT OF THE CLUB. (The senior police officer on duty will be in a
 position to advise as to whether the ’bomb call' is likely to be genuine or
  not).

 Whenever such information becomes known, a message will be relayed to the
 police officer on duty in the KP. A. Commentary Box" at the ground, who, on
 instructions from the- senior police officer, and irrespective of whether
 the match is in progress or not, will cause the record ’THREE BLIND MICE* to
 be played over the loudspeaker system.

 The playing of that record will indicate to everyone present at the ground, > *
 other than spectators, that a possible emergency situation exists.

 N.B.   As part of the regular pre-match brief of referees and linesmen and
        both teams, this information should be passed to then so that the
        game officials are also aware of the possibility of an interruption in
        play and the significance of the playing of the record.

 On hearing that record all club stewards will make their way to their des­
 ignated duty points on gangways/gates/exits, etc. Those on exit gates will
 open the gates and remain at that point. During this period senior
 officials will consider the nature of the emergency alleged and will decide
 to evacuate all/part of the stadium; Once that decision has been taken, but
 not until, the senior police officer on duty will cause a spoken message to
 be relayed over the ?,P. A. System" which will have the effect of:-

 (1)    Stopping the game ana removing players from the field of play;

 (2)    Informing the spectators/officials of the prccise nature of the
        emergency and its location if known, and requesting all or specified
        sections of the public to leave their seats and make their way out of
        the ground by the nearest normal exit route unless specifically directed
         to do otherwise by means of the     A. System".         y
    IT IS STRESSED THAT NO EVACUATION WILL TAKE PLACE EXCEPT El EXTREflE
    EMERGENCY AND ALTHOUGH THE PREPARATORY WARNING RECORD 'THREE BLIND MICE'
    MAY BE PLAYED, THERE IS EVERY POSSIBILITY THAT INITIAL ENQUIRIES* WILL
    ESTABLISH THE PERPETRATION OF A HOAX, ETC., AND 114 THAT CASE, INSTEAD OF
    A SPOKEN MESSAGE TO EVACUATE, THE FACT THAT THE EJIERGENCY HAS PASSED
    WILL BE INDICATED BY THE PLAYING OF THE RECORD - 'TEDDY BEARS PICNIC'.
    ON HEARING THIS 'ALL CLEAR’ STEWARDS ON EXIT GATES AND GANGWAYS WILL *
    REMAIN ON STAND-BY AT THAT POINT FOR FIVE MINUTES BEFORE CLOSING THE GATES
    AND RESUMING THEIR NORMAL DUTY POSITIONS.

    In the event of any steward/club official discovering a fire or receiving
    information that an emergency situation exists within the ground, he will
    immediately -

      (i) Notify the Club Secretary by telephone;

    (ii) Inform any police officer.

(iii) He nust also, on discovering a fire, activate thefire alarm            system
      by means of a ‘Break Glass' call point.

    The activation of the call point will not immediately sound any form of
—                             j.ndi cate•-&y^3 ~fgfa-h—          ffiolioc^'ctc^fcd ~i
    control- point .the..location-'of the emergency.' The ’police':’controller“•can -
    then deploy manpower to investigate tha cause.

    In the event of discovery of fire by a steward, he should take additional
    action in accordance with tha following points

    (A)    Sound the alarm by breaking the nearest break glass call point;

    (B)   Tackle the fire with the appropriate extinguisher if safe to do so;

    (C)   Close doors within tha immediate vicinity of the fire;

    (D)   At no time mention the words 'Fire' or 'Bomb'.       Remember, if you
           don't panic, neither will the crowd?

(E)       Upon completion of the evacuation of your section, renort to tha
           assembly area (which has been specified by the Club) and report to
           the person in overall charge, who will, in turn, report tc the Fire
           Service and any other relevant emergency service which may be in
          attendance.

ALL STEWARDS MUST FAMILIARISE THEMSELVES WITH THE LOCATION OF:-

(a)       Fire Alarm 'Break Glass' call points;

(b)       Location of the Fire Fighting Equipment;

(c)       Knowledge of all escape routps at their sector of the ground.
stad ium                            . b ereplaced until 1992 became Ved-
mJI3U?I^etVCfVrVS t "She^ld -Mlowng£lm. worthofimprovements
                                      t0Insteadthe^omidfwiliaskth,first
 stadiumwonareprieve.             .
 'Thp club’s engineers are to noia
 urgenttalkswithjown Hallsurveyors
 &bn0nf o¥tfeTo^hellt!ndthbu“ dtf
!councillors have accepted there isno Hfe U over the year.. Witto— ?P«
 immediatedanger. 7               a
' s      p       i s        s           ,ei n £ | « s ^

                                                       The consulting eng-i
                                                    eer £or the club, D r. hi
                                                    EastwooQ, said.^ \>
                                                    think we know wna. c
               ■'r••■                               councilwillaskf°r,¥^
                                                    do not see any_problea
                                                     Itwould be quite sdsu:
                                                     for anybody to wor
                                                     about s tru c tu ra l safety
                                                     Hillsborough-There is
                                                      dangeratall.”             ..
                                                        Itisbelievedchetilt
                                                      the roofwascausedDyt
                                                      I>ruil;;ngcu timers
                                                    • « *":e r 1. >v«. > v u i
                                                    !Eastwood bftuev..s
                                                    :hasbeennomovement
                                                     ■decades.
                                                     ’                         .
                                                          The roof also has
                                                      i passnationalsafetvbp.
                                                       imposed for resisi
                                                       weight of sr.ow ^ ....
                                                       force of strong w
                                                       Engineers are confic
                                                    ■ the stand issafe on t
                                                    ■ counts, especially af>
                                                     'withstanding guj”
                                                      •*rnoreth«n~6mph in.1
                                                     - \ footballmatchwour
                                                        dually im p o s s ib le
                                                           'nds of more 1
                                                             Wednesday has a
                                                           .r0Ved any fire ns
                                                            ctring wooden stec
                                                            stlandinstallingsr.
                                                            detors.
            Tlut     IT^KI              Xd ?    Or     CofZKi^h-fcrirv

                         SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

                               HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM
                                                                  ,So. u .^ ‘2_

                           TiwrnRTiBHCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE


The following notes of guidance are prepared and issued to assist all official
stewards and others in a position of responsibility at the Hillsborough Stadium
on the action to be taken and procedures to be followed in the event of the
possibility of evacuation of the stadium during the playing of a game when
spectators are present. The notes are not intended to be a comprehensive list
of all the action necessary, but are for personel issue to each steward and for
retention by the steward for immediate reference all the time he/she is on duty
at the stadium.
It is appreciated that the reasons evacuation may become necessary are many and
varied, but the most obvious are fires or information that explosive/incendiary
devices have been placed somewhere within the stadium/ground. That information may
be received or discovered either by members of the staff at the stadium, or by
telephone to the stadium, police, local or national newspapers.

IT IS STRESSED THAT WHENEVER SUCH INFORMATION IS RECEIVED THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
DECISION TO EVACUATE AT.T. OR PART OP THE GROUND RESTS WITH THE SENIOR MANAGEMENT OP
rpTTTn CLUB. (The senior police officer on duty will be in a position to advise as to
whether the ‘bomb call* is likely to be genuine or not).

Whenever such information becomes known, a message will be relayed to the police
officer on duty in the "PA Commentary Box" at the ground, who, on instructions from
the senior police officer, and irrespective of whether the match is in progress or
not, will cause the following spoken message "WILL ER DEREK KNIGHT REPORT TO THE
SECRETARY®S OFFICE" to be relayed over the PA system.

The playing of     messac^- will indicate to everyone present at the ground, other
than spectators, that r.possible emergency situation exits.

NB:   As part of the regular pre-match brief of referees and linesmen and both teams,
      this information should be passed to them so that the game officials are also^
      aware of the possibility of an interruption in play and the significance of the
      spoken message.

On hearing the message all club stewards will make their way to their designated
duty points on gangways/gates/exits, etc. Those on exit gates will open the gates
and remain at that point. During this period senior officials will consider the^
nature of the emergency alleged and will decide to evacuate all/part of the stadium.
Once that decision has been taken, but not until, the senior police officer on duty
will cause a spoken message to be relayed over the "PA System" which will have the
effect of:

(1) Stopping the game and removing players from the field of play
(2) Informing the spectators/officials of the precise nature of the emergency and
    its location if known, and requesting all or specified sections of the public
    to leave their seats and make their way out of the ground by the nearest norm
    exit route unless specifically directed to do otherwise by means of the PA
    System" .
IT IS STRESSED THAT NO EVACUATION WILL TAKE PLACE EXCEED TO-EXTREME EMERGENCY
AND ALTHOUGH THE PEEPARATORY WABNING f'WILL ME KNIGHT ETCy      ' MAY BE PLAYED,
THERE IS EVERY POSSIBILITY THAT INITIAL ENQUIRIES WILL ESTABLISH THE PERPET-
EATION OP A HOAX, ETC, AND IN THAT CASE, INSTEAD OP A SPOKEN MESSAGE TO EVACUATE,
THE PACT THAT THE EMERGENCY HAS PASSED WILL BE INDICATED BY THE FOLLOWING SPOKEN
MESSAGE "MR DEREK- KNIGHT NEED NOT NOW ATTEND THE SECRETARY'S OEFICE".
ON HEARING THIS 'ALL CLEAR' STEWARDS ON EXIT GATES AND GANGWAYS WILL REMAIN ON
STAND-BY AT I'ffA'P POINT POE 5 MINUTES BEFORE CLOSING THE GATES AND BESOMING THEIE
NORMAL DUTY POSITIONS.

In the event of any steward/club official discovering a fire or receiving
information that an emergency situation exists -within the ground, he -will
immediately -
          (i) Notify the Club Secretary by telephone
         (ii) Inform any police officer
         (iii) He must also, on discovering a fire, activate the fire alarm system
               by means of a ’Break Glass' call point

The activation of the call point will not immediately sound any form of audible
alarm but will indicate by light signal in the police staffed control point the
location of the emergency,, The police controller can then deploy manpower to
investigate the cause.

In the event of discovery of fire by a steward, he should take additional action
in accordance with the following points:
(A) Sound the alarm by breaking the nearest break glass call point
(B) Tackle the fire with the appropriate extinguisher if safe to do so
(C) Close doors within the immediate vicinity of the fire
(D) At no time mention the words 'Eire1or 'Bomb1. Remember, if you don't panic,
    neither will the crowd
(e ) Upon completion of the evacuation of your section, report to the assembly
     area (which has been specified by the Club) and report to the person in
     overall charge, who will, in turn, report to the Pire Service and any other
     relevant emergency service which may be in attendances,

AT.t ,   STEWARDS MUST FAMILIARISE THEMSELVES WITH THE LOCATION OP:

(a) Pire Alarm 'Break Glass' call points
(b) Location of the Pire Fighting Equipment
(c) Knowledge of all escape routes at their sector of the ground.
                            FOR LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES

1   .   Duties of Stewards booklet - Officers Working   Party   minutes   13.11.85
        refers - copy

2   .   Mr Meadows - Evacuation Procedure - copy

3.      Note for fileQ        20.07.87

<*
(&kJC*cAto *vA                                                   x\
Cv       pc/Ci                                I
                               C_ u /Z.A.& M




              /TO*
             <I r3/' ^sf../.
                   ^^-     '"}
                             '
              j ,-j f .TLT.J   j, I   V

   $<£.       »*a                     s

                                          A


                                                  rf5?

                                                         mjrv




               iS&ia siiL Lis4 s ^ i



                  A ©                                    fff®1
  || IjTIT lV f^ip S
     V\fTl       t >3El
           S A fZ T Y   or     SPOP.TS GROUNDS A:.~D D U T IE S                      OF STEWARDS




           1.           The     prime        responsibility                    for    the a r r a n g e m e n t     of affairs        at

                        sports         grounds         lies       with         the    cl ub.       To    that      end    they   should

                        ensure          that stewards               are        suitably qualified.


                        Qualifications:

                        Stewards           should


                        a)           Be    trained          and     instructed              to deal       with      any

                                     eaergencies             relating            to f i r e       or    evacuation.


                        b)           3e g i v e n   writteninstruction                      about       the      action

                                     to b e     taken        in    cases        of     emergency,           including

                                     arjrangenients           for        calling          the    emergency          services.


                        c)           Receive        practical             instruction              and tra i n i n g

                                     appropriate             to    their responsibility.


                        d)       .Should n o t be                 employed           as a s t e w a r d        unless

                                     *o    instructed             a nd    trained,          and
                                                                                                         ,                                       f
                                                                         2>-                            -~i 'v
                        e)           Be a d e q u a t e     In r.uraber, p h y s i c a l l y             and mentally                            ^

                                     capable        of perf o r m i n g          their duties,                 effectively

                                     deployed,          efficiently              supervised             an d     readily

                                     identifiable.


                                     NBi     Stewards          should           n o t be     less       than      18 y e a r s

                                     or m o r e     than      60 y e a r s       o f a ge        and    should       wear

                                     distinctive            dress         such       as    fluorescent            Jackets

                                     suitably          inscribed           f r o n t a n d b a ck.



         2.             On    t he    occasion         of     each match              stewards          should      attend       a pre-match

i   ViuCtijL H^l'-ibriefing                and be      made        fully        aware       of    their        responsibilities            and

                        the    location           of   metr.be.-s o f St.                 Johns    Ambulance          and    police    in
        y /\ .
                  . t he       arc*        for which          they        are    responsible.
Stewards         should        be      Si                   ir.rojfr.---t           ne       £ round       in                       ,,^

accordance          with       a d e t a i l e d p re -f lrr imj ed              xsh edu le- a g r e e d

between         the p o l i c e        a n d tr.anagen.ent.            Tneir        numbers          and        location                    .r

s h o u l d not be          less       than     the    ir.ininiur., s t a t e d         in    the s a f e t y                       ’

certificate.                Their       dudes         c.ay be* d i v i d e d        into        four isain

categories:                                                                                                     l


a)        Controlling             or    directing         Be.uscrs          cf    tr,e p u b l i c                              ,    1 f ■'

          who    are    entering             or l e a v i n g    the    grouna.
                                                                                                                            Id'-'
                                                                                                                            1           ^


b)        Patrolling           tne      ground        to d e a l      with       any

          emergencies.                 Eg:    raising       alarms,

          extinguishing                fires     etc.                                                                  j. ..        ..j

c)        Manning       entrances,              exits      and       other       strategic

          points,       particularly               exit     doors       and       gates

          which     are n o t          continuously             open whilst              the

          ground       is    in u s e .

d)        Undertaking             specific         duties        relating           to

          emergencies             and       evacuation          procedures.



Emergency         Procedures:

Th e    importance           of     the      provision of             formal        emergency              procedures

at     each ground           ca i\ n o t b e       over-eraphasired.                     Joint       consultation

in t h i s r e s p e c t       s h ould be         taken        between          th e    p o l i c e t the          management

of     t he g r o u n d ,    fire,          ambulance       and       other       services.                It     is

essential         that       stewards           and    their         supervisors              are    fully          aware

of t he p a r t        they       have       to p l a y   in     the    plajis w h i c h            ar e    produced,

a nd    that     they ha v e           ready     access         to    loud       hailers         to f a c i l i t a t e

co n u n un ic ati on w i t h          the    crowd.


Management          should          ensure       that w r i t t e n         instructions               detailing

the     action      to b e        taken       in t he     event        of    an     emergency              ar e     served

o n a ll     stewards,            and       that staff          and    stewards              receive        practical

instruction          and      training           appropriate            to       their responsibilities

in t he      event      of    an       emergency.


Bodies       such    as      t ne      fire    service,          the    police           an d    St.       Johns       Ambulance

Brigade       have      expressed             a willingness             to a s s i s t          in s u c h        training           (      '
                                                                                                                                            f
and clubs         are       urged       to    take     full     advantage               of    the    offer.
                                                                                                                               ♦   (   "




   Exercises          for     staff          <cid b t e w a r d s      should         be    carried        out

   regularly          to    ensure           the    smooth        operation of               the    proce d u r e s '

   for d e a l i n g       v-ith a n         emergency.              A record          should       be     kept

   containing          details           of      the     rraining          an d     instruction            given         and

   exercises          held,        and      should        include          the     following         matters:-


   *)       Date       and       time       of     the    instruction or                   exercise.


  b)        Duration.                                                                                     ■4*
  c)        Name       of     the       person          giving       the    instruction.                   -J>-


  d)        Hajnes      of       t he    persons          receiving             the    instruction.                -u-




  *)        liature         of     instruction             or exercise.



  Control        of    stewards             should        be   from a central                point        containing

  efficient           seans        t o comraunicate               with stewards              at     key    points

  identified           in    discussions                between management                   and     the police.



  Chief S t e w a r d s :

  Clubs     should          appoint          a Chief Steward responsible                            for co-ordinating

  t he   duties       of     stewards            a nd    t o be      immediately             available            fo r

  discussions          vith        the       senior       police        officer present                   concerning any
  p r o b l e m in    the     ground.



  Specific       Duties          of Stewards

  Specific       duties          to     be u n d e r t a k e n       by stow a r d s         include;


-.a)      Preventing             overcrowding,                 ensuring            that c rowd

           linits          in v a r i o u s        parts       of tne g r o u n d           are    complied

           with       and     that       gangways          and       exits        are k e p t      clear.


 b)       Preventing,               so      f a r as p o s s i b l e ,          standing      on     s«ats,

           and    the       climbing             of f e n c e s      a nd o t h e r     structures.

           Where       by     virtue          of    the    scale        o f the        incident

           stewards           are       unable       to    comply          with       this   requirement,

           they       should          without dslay report                        the m a t t e r    to the

          nearest           police          officer,           or,    if n o p o l i c e          officer         i«

          present,            to      the    Chief Steward                 or    designated          club

          official .
                                                      - -
                                                        4


  c)      The     i n v e s t i g a t i o n and        1otntificatIon of                    any

          inciden t' o r          occurrence            reporting             their        findings

          to p o l i c e     o r ranajjentnt                in a c c o r d a n c e     with

          instructions                given      at    the p r e - m a t c h        briefing.


 d)      Being     aware         of    the      location of             fi re     fighting

          equipment           in the          area    fo r w h i c h         they     are

          responsible             a nd b e i n g      capable           of    effectively

          operating          the sam e.


 e)      Being     fully         conversant           with        the    methods           an d

          signals       used          to    indicate         an    emergency           situation

          which     s h o u l d have been               previously              set    down        in

          writing       and       served         on   them.


• f)     Being      capable            of r e c o g n i s i n g p o t e n t i a l         fire

     - ■ ' hazards      and       suspect packages.                      Such       findings

          to be     reported               to the n e a r e s t p o l i c e           officer

          o r in h i s      absence            t he   s e n i o r s t e w a r d or

          designated            club official.


 g)      Except in          an e m e r g e n c y      stewards           should        not

          leave     their        place o f duty               without           the    consent

          o f the     senior          steward         or s e n i o r p o lice           officer

          present who            should,          i f it      is c o n s i d e r e d        necessary,

          arrange       for      a replacement.


 h)      All   *xit     gates         s h o u l d be m a n n e d while                the    ground

         is u s e d    by       the p u b l i c ,      a nd b e        capable        of     being

         opened       i m m e d i a t e l y , from          inside,          by   anyone          in an

         emergency.


i)       Reporting         to     the C h i e f S t e w a r d           any da m a g e       or     defect

         likely       to c a u s e         injury     or d anger             to p e r s o n s      in

         attendance.


j)       In t he    event         o f an       emergency          or     incident           the    senior

         police     officer present                   wi ll       take       command        an d    all

         stewards        should            promptly      comply          with       any     instructions

         given by       h i m or by            any p o l i c e      officer           acting        on h i s

         behalf.
*
                                                     -     i    -




      T r s 1n l n f


      Training          of s t e w a r d s    should       be       completed     prior         to the

      start o f         the    s e e son     to a s t a n d a r d      acceptable          to    the

     police,           fire    service        and    L o ca l       Authority.


     Refresher           training       should        bo       g i v e n by   a competent

     Person      during         the    months       of Octo b e r        and January.


     Stewards          should     be    supplied           with      a handout      detailing

     thei r r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s     in g e n e r a l      terras as     set o u t
    above.



    The a b o v e       H st    of duties           is b y       no means      exhaustive
    and c l u b        management          should     liaise          c l o s e l y vith

    appropriate            senior      police        and       fire    service     officers

    to a r r i v e      at a    final        version       that       take*    account          of
    lo ca l   factors.
                      S H E F F IE L D   W EDNESDAY        F C O iS A L ,   *




                              I N S T R U C T IO N    TO   STEW ARDS




Stewards must at all times wear their official waistcoat on dutyC'

Stewards must report for duty no later than l h hours be£:;-re kick-off time.
Any Steward reporting for duty after this time cannot be guaranteed a job.
This provision may be subject to amendment in the event of major fixtures
whereupon prior notice will be given.

Whilst every endeavour will be' made to allocate the same job throughout
the season, you will be ejected to carry out any alternative duty as
directed by the Chief Steward or his deputy, or an official of the Club.

Duties at specific locations:

 (a)    Exit gates - to be manned at all tiires throughout the match and
        opened at the specified time to allow general exit and in the
        event of an' emergency.

 (b)    Car park (south stand). Stewards must ensure that the one way^
        system operates, the free passage is maintained for motor vehicles
        and supervise car parking.

• (c)   .Stsxyds» Steviacds.-jx** Tussponsil»lc. ensv>riG«j 55pev-vctt.Oj.at oxt i**.- .      .
        correct seats (-as shown on tickets}. Where .this-,is .cot-.the-.case,,
        they have a responsibility in the first instance for requesting
        them to do so and only if there is a refusal should they
        contact the Police for assistance. Stewards are also responsible
        for ensuring that gangways and exits ar>;‘kept .clear .-••

 General Duties:

 (a)    Preventing, so far s.*-' possible, standing on seats, and the climomg
         of fences and other structures. Where by virtue of the scale of the
         incident Stewards are unable to corrply with this requirement,
         they should without delay report the matter to the nearest Police
         Officer, or, if no Police Officer is present, to the Chief Steward
         or designated club official.

 (b)    Where more than one Steward                  is on duty at the same gangway, one
        Steward -is to remain at the                 bottom of ,the steps until at least
         10 minutes after kick-off,                  or.until any 'rush' is over, to ensure
        that the spectator 'uses the                 correct gangway and to remove any
        ticket stubs.

 (c)    No gangway Steward is to sit down until at least 15 minutes after
        kick-off, and then only if there is a vacant seat on the end of
        a row in the immediate vicinity of the gangway - all other Stewards
        must sit as close to their allocated position as possible at tfieend
        of a row. No more than two Stewards may sit together.

 (d)    Stewards are reminded that they should remain on duty until the final
        whistle and until their area is clear. The practise of Stewards
        leaving their positions before the final whistle will not be tolerated.
        Only in exceptional circumstances (and with the permission of the Chief
        Steward) will a Steward be allowed to leave early. Except in an
        emergency Stewards should not' leave their place of duty without consent
        of the Chief Steward or senior Police Officer present who should, if
        it is considered necessary, arrange for a replacement.
      (e)    No Steward is to become involved with crowd misbehaviour. This is a
             matter for the Police - AND THE POLICE ONLY. Their assistance
             must be sought on all such occasions, and Stewards are required
              soley to identify persons who are breaking, or who are likely to
             break ground regulations. If Police assistance.is refused, take a
              note of the Officer's number and report immediately to the Chief
       *,.   Steward or his deputy. CO NOT GET INVOLVED.                        *

      (f)    Stewards do not have a responsibility for maintaining public order
             but should be’prepared to identify persons to Police Officers who
              are either creating a disturbance or whose presence is likely to
              create a disturbance - this covers a wide'range of activities
              contrary to ground regulations.                       -v

      (g)    At the end of the match Stewards are responsible for ensuring
              the safe exit of supporters, and where designated, assisting the
              Police in preventing pitch invasions.

      (h)    Reporting to the Chief Steward any damage or defect likely to
             .cause injury or danger to persons in attendance.

      (i)    In the event of an emergency or incident the senior Police Officer
              present will take command.       -

6.      Being aware of the location of fire .fighting and medical equipment in the
    .., area.for, which4:hey^arer,xespo.nsibIe ..and, beiag capable of, effectively .,., ,--- .. ^
v.' , operating j:he;,same._,;.JSKiiliarise yourself--with 'all aspects of. tbe-Ground
        Regulations.

7.    EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE                                  •..i

      All Stewards must be aware of the following procedure:

      In the event, of an emergency situation arising in the ground (ie fire or
      tomb call) which require evacuation of all or-part of the ground, •'die
      following procedure will be followed

      (a)    Police Control Room will pass the following message,
             11 The attendance of Mr Meadows is urgently required at Police
             * Control -' This will be over the PA system and will indicate           .
              to Police Officers and Stewards that emergency evacuation
              procedures are in force. Stewards will take up positions at
              their exits and gates.

      (b)    In the event of an emergency evacuation being necessary, an oral
             message will be passed by the Police Officer in charge giving
             specific instructions as to action to be taken by the public.

      (c)    In the event of an all clear situation, the following message will
             be passed, j 'Mr Meadows is no longer required at Police Control.'

Be on the alert to recognise potential fire hazards and suspect packages. Such
findings to be reported to the nearest Police Officer or in his absence the
Chief Steward or designated club official.

Remember that you are paid to help the spectator to enjoy a game of Football.

Any continued disregard of the above rules could lead to the withdrawal of your pass.
                                                                      FS 853

                              FIRE SERVICE DEPARTMENT                          •x. ^
                                   NOTE FOR FILS


      NAME? ...

      ADDRESS;




      SUBJECT;



/ f     7-                      'dui?               **                ^    **




                  C a U ^ m ,      ^         ' ^ M O t t 4 y               /**>


                  U c U                            te^ue*         a ^xM   ^


                  ^       S u f* * *     •


                  ^-€y^tc^f       '/ciXt&e.




                                                               DATE
         INSPECTING OFFICER ...

         FURTHER ACTION IF ANY;
No gang w ay stew ard is to-sit dow n until at least 15 minutes         EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE
after kick-off, an d then only if there is a v acant s e a t on the
end of a row in th e im m ediate vicinity of th e g angw ay - all       All Match Day Staff m u st be aw are of th e following procedure:
o ther stew ard s m u st sit a s close to their allocated position as
possible at th e end of a row. No m ore than tw o stew ards             In the event of an em erg ency situation arising in th e g rou nd {is.
m ay sit together.                                                      fire or b o m b call) which require evacuation of all o r part of the
                                                                        ground, the following procedure will be followed
In th e period leading up to half-time and at th e end of the
m atch it is imperative th a t no o n e stan d s in th e gangw ays          a) Police Control Room will p a ss th e following m e ssa g e
w atching the match.                                                        'T h e atten d an ce of Mr. M eadow s is urgently required at
                                                                            Police Control". This will be over th e P .A . S ystem and wili
Be aw are of th e location of fire fighting and medical equip­              indicate to Police Officers and S tew ards tha t em ergency
m e n t in th e area which they are responsible and being capa­             evacuation p rocedures are in force. S tew a rd s will take ud
ble of effectively operating th e sam e. Familiarise yourself               positions at their exits and gates, and th e g ates will be
with all asp ects of the G round Regulations.                               opened.                                              »

                                                                            b) In th e event of an em ergency evacuation being necessary,
                                                                            an oral m e ssa g e will bs p assed by the Police Officer i?
                                                                            charge giving specific instructions as to action to b e tax en bv
                                                                            the public.
      c) In th e event of an all clear situation th e f o l l Q v v i n g m e ssag e
      will be p a ss e d “Mr. M eadow s is no longer required at Police
      Control".
 Be on th e alert to recognise potential fire ^ « rdS a n d susp ect
 SSSfS f S £K & ?U 5SK tfJW l-cM .
 Official.




ft
                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE

                              HILLSBOROUGH D IS A S T E R
            O PERATION A L EQUIPM ENT IN ATTENDANCE A T THE IN C ID E N T

            REPO RT BY A S S IS T A N T C H IE F F IR E O F F IC E R A .D . HORNSBY



The policy in the South Yorkshire County Fire Service is that all
operational fire appliances carry the same firefighting equipment which
is located in the same position on each appliance.     A list of the
appliances in attendance at the incident is attached (see Appendix A)f
together with an inventory of the rescue equipment carried on the
Emergency Tender (see Appendix B ).

1.   R e s u s c ita tio n   E q u ip m e n t

     Each appliance carries a Brook Airway and an Oxygen Resuscitator
     with two oxygen cylinders.

      There are two types of Oxygen Resuscitator on appliances

      (a)    Motivus         -     ) details of which appliance carries which
      (b)    Maxaman         -     ) resuscitator as detailed on Appendix A.

      The reason that two types of resuscitator are maintained within
      the Brigade is that the Motivus set is no longer produced and has
      been superseded by the Maxaman set.

      The resuscitators work on the principle of a controlled flow of
      oxygen being supplied to the patient which will ventilate the
      patients lungs if he/she is not breathing or assist if he/she has
      difficulty in breathing.

      The only difference between the two resuscitators is :

      (a)    Maxaman - ceases to supply oxygen once the patient breathes
             on their own.

      (b)    Motivus- continues the oxygen flow after the patient
             breatheson their own and the oxygen is released to open air
             by a trip valve.

     Each set operates on a rotary scale which is suitably variable
     from child to adult settings. The duration of the sets varies
     from 20 to 40 minutes per cylinder.

     Each set is subject to a weekly standard test which consists of
     checking the contents of the oxygen cylinder to ensure that the
     cylinder is at least 75% full. The set is also checked to ensure
     that the cycling changes on the adult and child settings.

2.   F a ilu re   o f R e s u s c ita to r

     At the incident resuscitator set no. 1297 which was carried on
     Stocksbridge 2 appliance did not function properly.

     As part of the Brigade procedure the resuscitator was impounded
     and an investigation was carried out by the Brigade Equipment
     Officer as to the reason for the failure (see Appendix C).
3.         S p e c ia lis t R e s u s c ita to rs

           Enquiries have been carried out to determine if resuscitation
           equipment suitable for dealing with crush injuries is available,
           but to date we have no knowledge of such equipment.

4.         R e s c u e E q u ip m e n t

           Most operational                 firefighting        equipment can be utilised for
           rescue purposes                  and a list          of such equipment is attached
           (Appendix D).

           Equipment which could have proven useful in removing the                              barrier
           fencing in such an emergency is as follows :

B o lt C u tte r s

These are approximately 3 feet in length, similar in operation to a
pair of scissors and are capable of cutting through metal rods.

H y d ra u lic R e sc u e S e t

Consists of various pieces of equipment suitable                               for    spreading      and
forcing apart obstacles up to 8 ton in weight.

Air T o o l s

Air operated pneumatic                          zip      gun   suitable   for cutting through metal
sheeting and rivets.

Air operated pneumatic saw for cutting through                             metal     sheeting,     bolts
and rods.

T i r f o r E q u ip m e n t

Equipment which works on the winch principle of pulling of lifting
obstacles up to 2 ton (5 ton on ET) in weight utilising slings and
chains.

T h e r m a l C u t t i n g E q u ip m e n t

This equipment is carried on all Emergency Tenders and is capable of
cutting through all ferrous metals of unlimited thickness even under
water. It operates by a special cable being burnt at high temperatures
as a result of oxygen being fed into it. There is sufficient equipment
per Emergency Tender for 6-10 minutes duration.

H u r s t C u t t i n g / S p r e a d i n g E q u ip m e n t

A petrol driven engine provides hydraulic power through hydraulic hoses
to either -

(1 )      C u tte r s

          Providing a cutting force of 15 ton in the optimum position.                              Not
          suitable for hardened or tensile steel.
(2)   Spreaders

      Providing a spreading distance of 24" with a force of 3.60 ton
      and a pulling distance of 24" with a force of 2.55 ton.




A.D. Hornsby
Assistant Chief Fire Officer.


26th May, 1989
                                                   APPENDIX



RESUSCITATORS CARRIED ON APPLIANCES ATTENDING HILLSBOROUGH
INCIDENT

RIVELIN ONE WRL              MAXAMAN

CENTRAL ONE WRL               MOTIVUS
CENTRAL TWO WRL               MOTIVUS
CENTRAL FIVE ET               MOTIVUS

RINGINGLOW ONE WRL            MAXAMAN

DARNALL ONE WRL               MOTIVUS
DARNALL TWO ET                MOTIVUS

BARNSLEY FIVE ET              MOTIVUS

STOCKSBRIDGE ONE WRL          MAXAMAN
STOCKSBRIDGE TWO WRL          MAXAMAN

MANSFIELD ROAD ONE WRL        MAXAMAN

LOWEDGES ONE WRL              MOTIVUS
                                                               APPENDIX 'B'


                              EMERGENCY TENDER

                              RESCUE EQUIPMENT


1 HURST POWER UNIT                      WEDGE DOOR OPENER
2 SETS OF CHAINS
600MM HANDSAW                           6 HACKSAW BLADES
SMALL BOLT CROPPERS                     MOLE GRIPS
PERSUADER                               ADJUSTABLE SPANNER
2 PICKS                                 PAD SAW
2 HELVES                                INSULATED SIDE SNIPS
1 LARGE AXE                             INSULATED PLIERS
SMALL CROW BAR                          STANLEY KNIFE
2 SMALL AXES                            PHILIPS SCREW DRIVER
SLEDGE HAMMER                           INSULATED SCREW DRIVER
LARGE CROW BAR
LARGE BOLT CROPPERS                      TIRFOR 'T16' AND HANDLE
1 X 5 TONNE TIFOR STRAP                  2 X 2 TONNE TIRFOR STRAP
4 'D' SHACKLES                           2 'D' SHACKLES
TIRFOR 'T30' AND HANDLE                  DRAG HOOK
TIRFOR CABLE                             TIRFOR CABLE
1 X 2M CHAIN SLING                       1 CHAIN SLING
SET HURST SPREADERS                      1 SNATCH BLOCK
SET HURST CUTTERS                        1 PEDAL CUTTER
*HEARTH KIT
ZIP GUN COMP
CENGAR SAW COMP                          CARPENTERS TOOL KIT
CUTTING FRAME AND 2 CYLS                 3 WOOD CHISELS
RELEASE KNIFE AND SHEATH                 3 AUGER BITS
40 TONNE JACK AND HANDLE BRACE
HEARTH KIT*                              WOODEN MALLET
CARPENTER'S TOOL KIT                     KEYHOLE SAW
                                         FLAT SCREWDRIVER 10"
FLOORBOARD SAW                           FLAT SCREWDRIVER 6"
MULTI PURPOSE SAW AND BLADE              PHILIPS SCREWDRIVER
CLAW HAMMER                              JUNIOR HACKSAW
LUMP HAMMER                              TINSNIPS
HACKSAW AND BLADE                        1 PARAGUARD STRETCHER
STILSON WRENCH                           1 THERMAL CAMERA AND BOX
LARGE SCREW DRIVER                       1 CARRYING SEAT
BOLSTER CHISEL                           1 CARRYING SHEET
2 COLD CHISELS                           1 BODY SHEET
WRECKER BAR                              1 15M GP LINE
                                         1 30M GP LINE
                                         1 70M GP LINE AND SLING
                                                                            APPENDIX 'C'



          HILLSBOROUGH IN C ID E N T .   MAXAMAN R ESU SC IT A T O R F A IL U R E



At approximately 0915 hours on Tuesday, 18th April, 1989, I received a
telephone call from West Division Headquarters stating that they were
holding Maxaman Resuscitator, Serial No.1297 which had been impounded
after failing to work at the Hillsborough incident. This resuscitator is
normally carried on Stocksbridge 2 appliance. It was reported that the
resuscitator was delivering an oxygen flow comparable with the control
knob being in the "child" setting and would not adjust.

The set was collected from West Division Headquarters and brought to the
Technical Services Office at Command Headquarters. On examination it was
confirmed that the set was working as described.

The end cap of the control knob was removed and it was discovered that the
control knob retaining nut had worked loose allowing the knob to turn on
the spindle without turning the spindle itself which wouldadjust the
flow.   The control knob was set in its correct position and the nut made
finger tight. This allowed the set to function correctly and adjustments
to the flow rate between "child" and "adult" to be made. The set was then
transported to the Brigade Training Centre to be placed on the test lung
to ensure the correct tidal volume of oxygen was flowing at maximum and
minimum settings. Once this was confirmed, the control knob nut was fully
tightened and the set returned to West Division Headquarters to be put
back into service.

Part of the Brigade weekly test on resuscitators is to start it cycling
and adjust the control knob to its extreme settingsto ensure that the
flow rate does adjust. It is possible that this nut was slightly loose at
the time of the last weekly test but not loose enough to show a
malfunction. Further vibration due to being carried on the appliance may
then have loosened the nut to the extent of not operating the spindle at
it's next use.

Records show that this resuscitator was last tested on 10th                   April,   1989,
and was working satisfactorily.
                                                       APPENDIX


RESCUE EQUIPMENT CARRIED ON WATER LADDERS


ZIP GUN    complete with 2 panel cutters and 2 chisel blades

CENGAR SAW complete with spare blades

CUTTING FRAME AND 2 CYLINDERS

1 FLEXIFORCE KIT (ram and accessories)

HEARTH KIT consisting of:-

Lump hammer                Pliers
Claw hammer                Tin snips
6 hacksaw blades           Insulated screwdriver
Stanley knife              Phillips screwdriver
Pad saw                    Side snips
10 inch screwdriver        Bolster chisel
6 inch screwdriver         6 jnr hacksaw blades
Stilsons                   5 spanners
1 adjustable spanner       GP saw spare blade
Cold chisel (2)
Wrecker bar
Mole grips
Junior hacksaw
Hacksaw
Floorboard saw
Bolt cutters
Wedge door opener


PICK AND HELVE

SLEDGE HAMMER

LARGE AXE

CROW BAR

SIRROM DOOR HAMMER

1 TIRFOR COMPLETE

30M GP LINE

15M GP LINE

40M LOWERING LINE

SLING

2 HAND AXES AND POUCHES

QUICK RELEASE KNIFE IN SHEAF
                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE



                A S S IS T A N T C H IE F F IR E O F F IC E R A . D . HORNSBY, M I F i r e E




O p in io n a s t o i f t h e F i r e S e r v ic e      had     been        c a lle d   to   th e   in c id e n t
e a r l i e r c o u ld t h e y h a v e b e e n o f m o re a s s i s t a n c e




At whatever stage the Fire Service had been called in attendance we
carry sufficient equipment on each and every appliance to be able to
cut and remove the perimeter fence quickly. In addition we carry
equipment with which we can pull the fence down. Over and above that
on the Emergency Tender we carry more heavy duty equipment which would
also perform the same function.




A .D . H o r n s b y
A s s is ta n t C h ie f F ir e O f f ic e r .
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE

                           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
            OPERATIONAL EQUIPMENT IN ATTENDANCE AT THE INCIDENT

            REPORT BY ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICER A.D. HORNSBY


The policy in the South Yorkshire County   Fire Service is that     all
operational fire appliances carry the same firefighting equipment which
is located in the same position on eachappliance.     A list    of the
appliances in attendance at the incident is attached (see Appendix A),
together with an inventory of the rescue equipment carried on the
Emergency Tender (see Appendix B).

1.    Resuscitation Equipment

      Each appliance carries a Brook Airway and an Oxygen Resuscitator
      with two oxygen cylinders.

      There are two types of Oxygen Resuscitator on appliances

      (a)    Motivus   -   ) details of which appliance carries which
      (b)    Maxaman   -   ) resuscitator as detailed on Appendix A.

      The reason that two types of resuscitator are maintained within
      the Brigade is that the Motivus set is no longer produced and has
      been superseded by the Maxaman set.

      The resuscitators work on the principle of a controlled flow of
      oxygen being supplied to the patient which will ventilate     the
      patients lungs if he/she is not breathing or assist if he/she has
      difficulty in breathing.

      The only difference between the two resuscitators is :

      (a)    Maxaman - ceases to supply oxygen once the patient breathes
             on their own.

      (b)   Motivus - continues the oxygen flow after the patient
            breathes on their own and the oxygen is released to open air
            by a trip valve.

     Each set operates on a rotary scale which is suitably variable
     from child to adult settings. The duration of the sets varies
     from 20 to 40 minutes per cylinder.

     Each set is subject to a weekly standard test which consists of
     checking the contents of the oxygen cylinder to ensure that the
     cylinder is at least 75% full. The set is also checked to ensure
     that the cycling changes on the adult and child settings.

2.   Failure of Resuscitator

     At the incident resuscitator set no. 1297 which was carried on
     Stocksbridge 2 appliance did not function properly.

     As part of the Brigade procedure the resuscitator was impounded
     and an investigation was carried out by the Brigade Equipment
     Officer as to the reason for the failure (see Appendix C).
3.    Specialist Resuscitators

      Enquiries have been carried out to determine if resuscitation
      equipment suitable for dealing with crush injuries is available,
      but to date we have no knowledge of such equipment.

4.    Rescue Equipment

      Most operational   firefighting    equipment can be utilised for
      rescue purposes    and a list      of such equipment is attached
      (Appendix D).

      Equipment which could have proven useful in removing the            barrier
      fencing in such an emergency is as follows :

Bolt Cutters

These are approximately 3 feet in length, similar in operation to a
pair of scissors and are capable of cutting through metal rods.

Hydraulic Rescue Set

Consists of various pieces of equipment suitable        for     spreading     and
forcing apart obstacles up to 8 ton in weight.

Air Tools

Air operated pneumatic      zip   gun   suitable   for cutting through metal
sheeting and rivets.

Air operated pneumatic saw for cutting through      metal     sheeting,     bolts
and rods.

Tirfor Equipment

Equipment which works on the winch principle of pulling of lifting
obstacles up to 2 ton (5 ton on ET) in weight utilising slings and
chains.

Thermal Cutting Equipment

This equipment is carried on all Emergency Tenders and is capable of
cutting through all ferrous metals of unlimited thickness even under
water. It operates by a special cable being burnt at high temperatures
as a result of oxygen being fed into it. There is sufficient equipment
per Emergency Tender for 6-10 minutes duration.

Hurst Cutting/Spreading Equipment

A petrol driven engine provides hydraulic power through hydraulic hoses
to either -

(1)   Cutters

      Providing a cutting force of 15 ton in the optimum position.           Not
      suitable for hardened or tensile steel.
(2)   Spreaders

      Providing a spreading distance of 24" with a force of 3.60 ton
      and a pulling distance of 24" with a force of 2.55 ton.




A.D. Hornsby
Assistant Chief Fire Officer.


26th May, 1989
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                      For the attention of         Your
  To      Chief Fire Officer                                       Ref.

                                      Please contact               Our
 From     FCO                                                      Ref.
                                      Tel.


          Major Accident - Hillsborough Football Ground            Date   25.05.1989
Subject


          Sir,

          I am 56 years old, married. I am employed by       the    South   Yorkshire
          County Fire Service as a Fire Control Officer.

          On Saturday the 15th April, 1989 I was the Officer in Charge of White
          Watch Control and had overall responsibility for dealing with the
          Hillsborough incident and any other emergency that occurred during
          that day from 0900 to 1800 hours.

          I was in the Control Room when the call was received from the police
          requesting the attendance of the Fire Service with cutting gear as a
          result of persons being trapped.

          I agreed with the decision made by Temporary Senior Control Operator
                  _ that due to information received from the police control
          room, the incident needed a special attendance.    At this point an
          initial attendance of 6 pumping appliances, one emergency tender and
          one control unit was sent to the incident. Subsequent to this, one
          further emergency tender was mobilised because it carries cutting gear
          and we thought it may be of assistance.

          As Officer in Charge I was unable to detach myself and take an overall
          view of the situation, the reason being there was only five operators
          and myself on duty that day. I was fully employed making sure that
          all incidents were dealt with also appliances were moved to different
          fire stations on standby to provide fire cover should it be needed for
          any incident.

          During the Hillsborough incident there were a great number of calls
          from the press which I had to deal with as Officer in Charge. One of
          my other duties was to immediately inform senior officers and duty
          officers of the incident at Hillsborough.

          Officers were informed to attend in accordance with the set       procedure
          laid down in Chief Fire Officer's Memorandum No. 16.

          The procedure details the rank of officer which needs to attend
          according to the number of appliances sent to incident.

          The following list of officers were informed.

                 ADO    Robjohns           CFO   Wright
                 DO     Lockwood           ACO   Seaman
                 SDO    Smoothey           ACO   Hornsby
                 StnO                      DO    Hildreth
                 ADO    Green
                 DO     Binnington
The officer in charge of Central Fire Station, ADO Mulcrone,         was   in
attendance in Control dealing with operational requirements.

Temporary PFCO Clarke who was officer in charge of Control was
informed of the incident at her home address. PFCO Clarke attended
Control due to the nature of the incident and number of appliances
attending.

From the start of the Hillsborough incident to the time the stop
message was received from the CFO at 1724 hours Fire Service Control
dealt with 13 fire calls and 4 repeat fire calls.

We also received three calls from British Telecom giving us further
details on previous emergency calls where the callers had cleared down
before giving address details.

At the time   of the reported incident at Hillsborough Football Ground
we were also dealing with a house fire at 45 Gatty Road, Shiregreen,
Sheffield, where an elderly lady died as a result of the fire.

One of my essential duties was to instruct Fire Control Operators to
mobilise pumping appliances to various Fire Stations in the Sheffield
area which have emptied as a result of them being in attendance at
Hillsborough.   These pumps are required to provide cover in the event
being required to attend other incidents.

A number of pumps were brought into various fire stations to provide
adequate cover.    Sixteen pumps from fire stations in South Yorkshire
County Fire Service and one pump from Derbyshire Fire Service.

As a result of these moves we did not encounter any difficulties in
mobilising   to any other incidents we received whilst      the Hillsborough
incident was ongoing. All watch members were totally committed in
dealing with incidents and before we could verify address details a
radio message was received from Rivelin station's pump stating "all to
attend Leppings Lane entrance". This information was passed to all
appliances and officers en route to the incident.

This was the   only   further   address   details   Fire   Service   Control
received.




            FCO
                                                   APPENDIX



RESUSCITATORS CARRIED ON APPLIANCES ATTENDING HILLSBOROUGH
INCIDENT

RIVELIN ONE WRL              MAXAMAN

CENTRAL ONE WRL              MOTIVUS
CENTRAL TWO WRL              MOTIVUS
CENTRAL FIVE ET              MOTIVUS

RINGINGLOW ONE WRL           MAXAMAN

DARNALL ONE WRL               MOTIVUS
DARNALL TWO ET                MOTIVUS

BARNSLEY FIVE ET              MOTIVUS
             i

STOCKSBRIDGE ONE WRL          MAXAMAN
STOCKSBRIDGE TWO WRL          MAXAMAN

MANSFIELD ROAD ONE WRL        MAXAMAN

LOWEDGES ONE WRL              MOTIVUS
                                                               APPENDIX


                              EMERGENCY TEMPER

                              RESCUE EQUIPMENT


1 HURST POWER UNIT                      WEDGE DOOR OPENER
2 SETS OF CHAINS
600MM HANDSAW                           6 HACKSAW BLADES
SMALL BOLT CROPPERS                     MOLE GRIPS
PERSUADER                               ADJUSTABLE SPANNER
2 PICKS                                 PAD SAW
2 HELVES                                INSULATED SIDE SNIPS
1 LARGE AXE                             INSULATED PLIERS
SMALL CROW BAR                          STANLEY KNIFE
2 SMALL AXES                            PHILIPS SCREW DRIVER
SLEDGE HAMMER                           INSULATED SCREW DRIVER
LARGE CROW BAR
LARGE BOLT CROPPERS                      TIRFOR 'T16' AND HANDLE
1 X 5 TONNE TIFOR STRAP                  2 X 2 TONNE TIRFOR STRAP
4 'D' SHACKLES                           2 'D' SHACKLES
TIRFOR 'T30' AND HANDLE                  DRAG HOOK
TIRFOR CABLE                             TIRFOR CABLE
1 X 2M CHAIN SLING                       1 CHAIN SLING
SET HURST SPREADERS                      1 SNATCH BLOCK
SET HURST CUTTERS                        1 PEDAL CUTTER
*HEARTH KIT
ZIP GUN COMP
CENGAR SAW COMP                          CARPENTERS TOOL KIT
CUTTING FRAME AND 2 CYLS                 3 WOOD CHISELS
RELEASE KNIFE AND SHEATH                 3 AUGER BITS
40 TONNE JACK AND HANDLE BRACE
HEARTH KIT*                             WOODEN MALLET
CARPENTER'S TOOL KIT                    KEYHOLE SAW
                                        FLAT SCREWDRIVER 10"
FLOORBOARD SAW                          FLAT SCREWDRIVER 6"
MULTI PURPOSE SAW AND BLADE             PHILIPS SCREWDRIVER
CLAW HAMMER                             JUNIOR HACKSAW
LUMP HAMMER                             TINSNIPS
HACKSAW AND BLADE                       1 PARAGUARD STRETCHER
STILSON WRENCH                          1 THERMAL CAMERA AND BOX
LARGE SCREW DRIVER                      1 CARRYING SEAT
BOLSTER CHISEL                          1 CARRYING SHEET
2 COLD CHISELS                          1 BODY SHEET
WRECKER BAR                             1 15M GP LINE
                                        1 30M GP LINE
                                        1 70M GP LINE AND SLING
                                                                               APPENDIX 'C'



          HILLSBOROUGH IN C ID E N T .   MAXAMAN R E S P S C IT A T O R F A IL U R E



At approximately 0915 hours on Tuesday, 18th April, 1989, I received a
telephone call from West Division Headquarters stating that they were
holding Maxaman Resuscitator, Serial No.1297 which had been impounded
after failing to work at the Hillsborough incident. This resuscitator is
normally carried on Stocksbridge 2 appliance. It was reported that the
resuscitator was delivering an oxygen flow comparable with the control
knob being in the "child" setting and would not adjust.

The set was collected from West Division Headquarters and brought to the
Technical Services Office at Command Headquarters. On examination it was
confirmed that the set was working as described.

The end cap of the control knob was removed and it was discovered that the
control knob retaining nut had worked loose allowing the knob to turn on
the spindle without turning the spindle itself which      would adjust the
flow.     The control knob was set in its correct position and the nut made
finger tight. This allowed the set to function correctly and adjustments
to the flow rate between "child" and "adult" to be made. The set was then
transported to the Brigade Training Centre to be placed on the test lung
to ensure the correct tidal volume of oxygen was flowing at maximum and
miniimrai settings. Once this was confirmed, the control knob nut was fully
tightened and the set returned to West Division Headquarters to be put
back into service.

Part of the Brigade weekly test on resuscitators    is tostartit cycling
and adjust the control knob to its extreme settingsto ensure that the
flow rate does adjust. It is possible that this nut was slightly loose at
the time of the last weekly test but not loose enough to show a
malfunction. Further vibration due to being carried on the appliance may
then have loosened the nut to the extent of not operating the spindle at
it's next use.

Records show that this resuscitator was last tested on 10th                      April,   1989,
and was working satisfactorily.
                                                       APPENDIX


RESCUE EQUIPMENT CARRIED ON WATER LADDERS


ZIP GUN    complete with 2 panel cutters and 2 chisel blades

CENGAR SAW complete with spare blades

CUTTING FRAME AND 2 CYLINDERS

1 ft,e x x f o r c e KIT (ram and accessories)

HEARTH KIT consisting of:-

Lump hammer                   Pliers
Claw hammer                   Tin snips
6 hacksaw blades              Insulated screwdriver
Stanley knife                 Phillips screwdriver
Pad saw                       Side snips
10 inch screwdriver           Bolster chisel
6 inch screwdriver            6 jnr hacksaw blades
Stilsons                      5 spanners
1 adjustable spanner          GP saw spare blade
Cold chisel (2)
Wrecker bar
Mole grips
Junior hacksaw
Hacksaw
Floorboard saw
Bolt cutters
Wedge door opener


PICK AND HELVE

SLEDGE HAMMER

LARGE AXE

CROW BAR

SIRROM DOOR HAMMER

1 TIRFOR COMPLETE

30M GP LINE

15M GP LINE

40M LOWERING LINE

SLING

2 HAND AXES AND POUCHES

QUICK RELEASE KNIFE IN SHEAF
                  SOOTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE



          ASSISTANT CHIEF FIRE OFFICER A. D. HORNSBY, MIFireE



Opinion as to if the Fire Service had been called       to   the   incident
earlier could they have been of more assistance




At whatever stage the Fire Service had been called in attendance we
carry sufficient equipment on each and every appliance to be able to
cut and remove the perimeter fence quickly. In addition we carry
equipment with which we can pull the fence down. Over and above that
on the Emergency Tender we carry more heavy duty equipment which would
also perform the same function.




A.D. Hornsby
Assistant Chief Fire Officer.
                   SOOTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE



INCIDENT:   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC, HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD, SOOTH YORKS
            LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST - 15TH APRIL, 1989

REPORT OF CHIEF FIRE OFFICER H.E. WRIGHT, QFSM, MIFireE, FBIM


A brief factual report of the events which involved personnel of the
South Yorkshire County Fire Service is submitted, as requested, for
your information.


1.    Time of call was 1514 hours from Police Control     and   the   County
      Fire Service reacted to the information -

      " There's been a major accident at Hillsborough Football Ground
      where the semi-final is. The crowds have forced their way in -
      they've broken fences and the gate down. I don't know exactly
      what it is but there are people trapped. ”

2.    Appliances attending
                                                  Time           Time in
                                                 Mobile         Attendance

      Water Tender Ladder    -   Rivelin          1517            1522
      Water Tender Ladder    -   Central          1517            1522
      Water Tender Ladder    -   Central          1517            1522
      Water Tender Ladder    -   Ringinglow       1517            1527
      Water Tender Ladder    -   Darnall          1517            1526
      Water Tender Ladder    -   Darnall          1517            1526
      Emergency Tender       -   Central          1517            1524
      Control Unit           -   Mexborough       1519            1608

3.    Actions of crews on arrival.

3.1   Rivelin WrT - StnO Swain in Charge

      Attended the Leppings Lane side of ground and encountered       severe
      congestion that prevented immediate access to the ground.

      An immediate request for the use of a resuscitator on a casualty
      in the rear of an ambulance was answered.

      Rivelin 1 was made Contact Point in Leppings Lane for the incident
      with StnO Swain OiC.

      A request for resuscitation equipment inside the ground was
      received from a Police Officer. In view of this a "Make Pumps 10
      for resuscitators" message was sent. Crew members were despatched
      into the ground in an effort to make contact with Senior Police
      Officers, and ascertain the extent of the incident.
3.2   Central WrT 1 and 2 - StnO Fletcher and S u b O i n      Charge

      Attended at the Riverside Entrance off Penistone Road at the rear
      of the South Stand. The crews were not met or directed by the
      Police so the officers made their way onto the pitch to the area
      immediately in front of the West Stand where they found many
      casualties on the pitch who needed first aid treatment. No
      rescues as such needed to be undertaken but it was obvious that
      bodies and casualties needed to be attended to.

      The crew members were then directed to perform mouth to mouth
      resuscitation and first aid. Two resuscitators were used by the
      crews.

      A casualty receiving area was set up at the rear of the West Stand
      by so directing T/stnO      and casualties were moved from the
      pitch to this area by crews, police and spectators.

      Approximately 20-30 persons were moved to this area. The obvious
      dead being located in a holding area at the rear of the West Stand
      and   the   injured removed by ambulance to hospital.        Later
      information received by StnO Fletcher told him to evacuate
      casualties to the Gymnasium at the rear of the North Stand.

      The crews of Central 1 and 2 were joined and assisted by those
      from Darnall 1 and 2, Ringinglow 1 and the Emergency Tender from
      Central.

      When the pitch had been cleared of casualties all crews were
      directed to the Gymnasium and carried out further assistance.

3.3   Central Emergency Tender - LFm Housley in Charge

      Attended at Penistone Road but could not gain access to the ground
      because of height restriction for the appliance. Proceeded to
      Leppings Lane and the Contact Point.

      The crew then proceeded as directed into the ground via the North
      Stand and onto the pitch with a resuscitator treating casualties
      both on the pitch and later in the Gymnasium.

3.4   Ringinglow WrT- StnO        in Charge

      Attended at Leppings Lane entrance.

      The crew then proceeded as directed into the ground with a
      resuscitator and gave assistance to casualties on the pitch in
      front of the West Terrace together with the crews from Central 1
      and 2 and Darnall 1 and 2. When the pitch had been cleared of
      casualties the crew was directed to the Gymnasium.

3.5   Darnall WrT 1 and 2 - T/StnO        and SubO ]______ in Charge

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance.  Crews entered the ground as
      directed and gained access to the pitch via the West Terrace
      rendering assistance to casualties with two resuscitators and




                                     2.
mouth to mouth resuscitation. Working with other crews casualties
were removed initially to the casualty receiving area which T/StnO
      had been directed to establish at the rear of the West Stand
and subsequently to the gymnasium.

On instructions from ADO Robjohns, SubO             and his crew
undertook a circuit of the pitch to ascertain if any further
injured people needed assistance and get them to the Gymnasium for
treatment.   All crews were eventually located in the Gymnasium
rendering assistance to casualties.

The "make up" message from StnO Swain was received in County       Fire
Service Control at 1528 by Brigade radio.

Additional appliances attending

                                                Time       Time in
                                               Mobile    Attendance

Water Tender Ladder   -   Mansfield Road          1529      1534
Water Tender Ladder   -   Lowedges                1529      1544
Water Tender Ladder   -   Stocksbridge            1530      1539
Water Tender Ladder   -   Stocksbridge            1532      1541
Emergency Tender      -   Barnsley                1522      1537

Actions of crews on arrival.

Mansfield Road Wrt - StnO             in Charge

Attended Leppings Lane entrance. As directed the crew proceeded
to the pitch giving assistance to casualties using a resuscitator
to injured persons on the pitch and later at the Gymnasium to
which they had been redirected.

StnO         Jorganised the removal of casualties by ambulance from
the Gymnasium.

Stocksbridge WrT 1 and 2 - StnO            and SubO      in Charge

Attended at Leppings Lane entrance.       As directed both crews
proceeded to the pitch and were redirected to the Gymnasium where
they rendered resuscitation, first aid and were used for the
transferring of injured persons by ambulance to hospital.

Lowedges WrT - SubO           in Charge

Attended Leppings Lane entrance. As directed the crew proceeded
to the pitch where some resuscitation was given before further
proceeding to the Gymnasium with a resuscitator. In liaison with
the Assistant Divisional Officer in that area the crew undertook
further first aid and resuscitation work in addition to which they
were involved in the transfer of casualties to hospital via
ambulances.

Barnsley Emergency Tender - LFm             in Charge

Attended Leppings Lane entrance. The crew entered the ground as
directed and administered resuscitation with a resuscitator to a
casualty on the pitch before assisting in the movement of injured
people at the Gymnasium.
                             3.
6.5   Control Unit: Mexborough - LFm        in Charge

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. On arrival the crew contacted
      the Senior Officer in attendance (DO III) by fireground radio and
      were instructed set up Control Point. A DO I attended and took up
      the duties of Control Officer.

      Liaison with the Police at their Control Box in the ground           was
      transferred from a DO III to an Assistant Divisional Officer.

      An advance control point was eventually set up in the Gymnasium
      with a Senior Divisional Officer in Charge and an Assistant
      Divisional Officer assisting him.

7.    Senior Officers attending

7.1   Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns - in attendance 1529 hours.

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. Confirmed Rivelin WrT as contact
      point with StnO Swain in Charge and proceeded into the ground.

      Unable to make contact with any senior Police Officer on the pitch
      he liaised with StnOs Fletcher and        ]and having been assured
      that all casualties on the pitch had received attention he
      proceeded to the Gymnasium to co-ordinate crews and equipment at
      this casualty receiving point. Contact by fireground radio with
      DO Lockwood who had arrived was obtained and further provision of
      personnel and equipment was requested at the Gymnasium to assist
      in the first aid treatment of casualties and their transfer to
      ambulances.

7.2   Divisional Officer Lockwood - in attendance 1547 hours.

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. Informed StnO Swain to assemble
      all available crews and resuscitation equipment at the contact
      point to await further instructions.    DO Lockwood entered the
      ground via the West Stand tunnel, contacted StnO Fletcher on the
      pitch, was briefed and then set up direct liaison with the Police
      at the Control Box situated adjacent to the South Stand. From
      this point movement of personnel and equipment were co-ordinated
      until the arrival of the Control Unit at which time he was
      relieved by an Assistant Divisional Officer to enable him to make
      a report on the full situation.

7.3   Additional   Senior   Officers attended as        follows   before   the
      situation was considered to be controlled.

        (i)   Chief Fire Officer.
       (ii)   Assistant Chief Fire Officer Hornsby,
      (iii)   Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman,
       (iv)   Senior Divisional Officer Smoothey.
        (v)   T/Divisional Officer I Hildreth.
       (vi)   T/Assistant Divisional Officer Green.

All but four WrT appliances and crews were released from 1651 hours,
the remainder being retained in case of further incidents and very
heavy traffic in that area of Sheffield due to spectators leaving the
ground.

                                       4.
All appliances were released     from   Hillsborough   at   1720 hours and
returned to their bases.

A map of the area of the ground is included for clarification purposes.
                                                                                 ADO.
                                                                                 DO.
                                                                                     RivfcJin-1        D a r n o ll 'l
                                               H o ld tn a     ar&a                  Ritiijinglow* D a r n u l l - 2
                                               f o r   fa T a lih tZ S               L aw ^.icuS - I   C a iit'r a i - S    .
                                                                                 tvtansfiKld feJ-l 5fejck,sbndyw . ■ I
                                                                                 •Sl'aek'sbrtckj* " 2       fiarnsl&y ~ S

                                 In if/a l   c a s u a lty
                                 r a c a iv in q   a raa




                                                                                                                                Qnc.
                                                                         P c lie i   I
                                                                         First"Aid'
                                                                         Reom j          '




SCALE      DR AW N      TRACED      C H EC K ED
 |‘.IZ50    M .C .B .     H.D.
                                                                          Site Pl a n

Sheffield Wednesday FC. Hillsborough,
Pehistone Road,
Sheffield ,
South Yorkshire . 5S I5W
   SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                     COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                                                       C. 2 0 8 6
                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SBRVICE



 INCIDENT - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND, SHEFFIELD - 15TH APRIL, 1989

    REPORT O F C H IE F F I R E O F F IC E R H . E . W RIG H T, Q FSM , M I F i r e B ,   F B IH




Whilst at my home at Bawtry Road, Doncaster at about 1545 hours on
Saturday, 15th April, 1989,       I received a telephone call from Fire
Service Control informing me of an incident at the Hillsborough
Football   Ground, Sheffield     to which cutting equipment had been
requested with reports of fatalities and injuries to spectators. I was
informed that ten pumping appliances and two emergency tenders were in
attendance and the control unit had been mobilised.    Assistant Chief
Fire Officers Hornsby and Seaman had been mobilised but were not yet in
attendance, the senior officer in charge being Assistant Divisional
Officer Robjohns at that time.

Information from the incident was limited and as I expected an
Assistant Chief Fire Officer to arrive there in a relatively short
period of time I requested the next message.

No further information about the incident was received so I decided to
travel to Sheffield to make myself more available to attend the
incident should the need arise, booking mobile at 1554 hours.

The messages about the incident heard on the County Fire Service radio
scheme were sufficient for me to realise that a serious incident
existed at the Hillsborough football ground and I proceeded there
arriving at 1612 hours.

On arrival I was directed to an area behind the South Stand of the
stadium where I parked my car and was met by Temporary Station Officer
       who provided a very brief outline of the situation and advised me
o f t h e location of the County Fire Service Control Unit in Leppings
Lane to which we both walked.

At the Control Unit I met Assistant Chief Fire Officers Hornsby and
Seaman, and Divisional Officers Hildreth and Lockwood and was advised
of the situation which was that many casualties had been dealt with
both on the pitch and at the gymnasium and these included fatalities.
At that time County Fire Service personnel were in the gymnasium
assisting with casualties or standing by at their appliances awaiting
further instructions. Contact had been established with the senior
Police Officers at their control point in the ground and Temporary
Assistant Divisional Officer Green had been positioned outside that
control point for liaison purposes and was in contact with the County
Fire Service Control Unit by radio.

Assistant Chief Fire Officer Hornsby advised me that he had contacted
the Senior Police Officer at their control point who had advised him
that no further action by the County Fire Service to that already being
undertaken was required.     I was also advised of the comments heard
regarding the possibility of crowd disturbance if the announcement was
made which abandoned the match.
I took over control of the Fire Service activities at this incident at
1618 hours. I considered the need for detailed information from the
Police as to requirements of the County Fire Service and the situation
as it existed at that time and instructed Assistant Chief Fire Officer
Seaman and Divisional Officer Lockwood to make personal contact with
the Senior Police Officer for that purpose.      A radio message was
received from Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman advising me that no
further requirement of the County Fire Service was needed, the pitch
and terrace were clear of casualties and that he was proceeding onto
the terrace area where the accident occurred.

The spectators had during this time been leaving the stadium at the
Leppings Lane end, a number of which made congratulatory remarks to the
personnel situated there.

As the crowd cleared somewhat I instructed Assistant Chief Fire Officer
Hornsby and another officer to personally check the situation at the
gymnasium where casualties were still being dealt with.

Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman and Divisional Officer Lockwood
then returned to the Control Unit and provided information relating to
the situation on the West Terrace and I decided to view this myself
with Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman.

I decided to visit the Police Control Point at the stadium and whilst
en route received an up to date     report from AssistantChief Fire
Officer Hornsby regarding the      situation in thegymnasium   with a
suggestion that we reduce the number of appliances and crews at the
ground.

Upon my arrival at the Police Control Point I observed Assistant Chief
Constable Jackson on the telephone and Chief Superintendents Mole and
Duckenfield all of who I knew together with other officers. I spoke to
Chief Superintendent Mole and advised him that I proposed to reduce the
number of crews at the ground to four unless the Police required the
retention of more. No objections to this reduction were made and
thanks were expressed for our attendance. An instruction was given by
radio for all but four pumping appliances to return to their relative
bases.

I proceeded to the gymnasium where I met Assistant Chief Fire Officer
Hornsby, Divisional Officer Lockwood, Assistant Divisional Officer
Robjohns and Station Officer Swain. The senior Police Officer was no
readily apparent to me and no other Fire Service presence was evident.
As I could only see fatal casualties being collected in this area I
instructed Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns to make contact with
the Senior Police Officer at this location to see if there was a need
for a fire Service presence and to advise me of the result of this
enquiry by radio.      I then proceeded to return to the Control Unit
stopping at the West Terrace to again look at the area in which the
incident had occurred.

Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns advised me that no presence was
required at the gymnasium and I instructed him to return to the Control
Unit.
Whilst: at the Control Unit I was advised by an officer in charge of an
appliance that Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns car had sustained
damage due to supporters leaving the ground walking over it. I
inspected this with ADO Robjohns and noted damage to most surfaces of
the paintwork.

Instructions were given for all appliances to return to their bases at
1724 hours after sending a "Stop” message to Fire Service Control.




Chief Fire Officer.




Command Headquarters,
Wellington Street,
Sheffield SI 3F6

HEW/MS

23rd May, 1989
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                       For the attention of    Your
  To
          Chief Fire Officer                                   Ref.

                                       Please contact          Our
 From     LFCOp
                                       Tel.                    Ref.


Subject   Major Accident - Hillsborough Football Ground        Date   24.05.1989



          Sir,

          I was on duty on Saturday, 15th April, 1989 as Temporary Senior Fire
          Control Operator and was responsible for mobilising duties at the time
          of call for the Hillsborough Football Ground.

          I monitored a call which Fire Control Operator S. Davies was taking
          from the Police, they were asking for the cutting gear straight away
          to a major accident at the Hillsborough Football Ground, the operator
          asked several times for a road, but they were unable to give one, at
          this time I asked the operator to ask the Police if it was Penistone
          Road, which they confirmed.

          Fire Control Operator Davies tried to find out why the cutting gear
          was required, and eventually a male caller came onto the line and
          stated that they did not know exactly what was involved except people
          were believed to be trapped.

          I asked Fire Control Operator Davies to type the address details
          "Penistone Road, Hillsborough" on her screen format in an attempt to
          get the computer to display a list of the nearest           available
          appliances.   There was not a match in the computer for this address,
          but there was an option for Penistone Road, Owlerton.    I told the
          operator to select this option as I knew it to be the correct
          district, and a list of the nearest available appliances          was
          immediately displayed.

          The mobilising details for Penistone Road, Owlerton did not indicate
          that the Football Ground was a special risk, and this prompted me to
          make a further search of the data base to see if a special risk
          existed.

          I asked Fire Control Operator Davies to enter "Wednesday Football
          Ground" on the premise line in an attempt to retrieve a better address
          and back up details from the computer, but no options were displayed.

          As I monitored the conversation between the Police Control and Fire
          Control Operator Davies, although the information being passed was not
          adequate for our needs, it was obvious that they were unable to give
          us any more precise details.

          There is not any special attendance recommended for this type of
          incident, I therefore relied on my instinct and instructed Fire
          Control Operator Davies to mobilise six pumps, one emergency tender,
          and the control unit at 1516 hours.
I had initially given consideration to the number of emergency tenders
which may be required to attend, but I delayed in mobilising the
second emergency tender until I had re-assessed the situation.      At
1521 hours I gave instructions for a second emergency tender to be
mobilised from Barnsley Station knowing it was equipped with cutting
gear.

At   1527 hours a message from the first pumping appliance in
attendance, Rivelin 1, was received in Control requesting "make pumps
ten for resuscitation equipment" and I mobilised a further four pumps
to attend.

No further address details for Hillsborough Football Ground were
obtained by the Fire Service Control until receipt of a message from
Rivelin Station pump at 1529 hours requesting "all appliances to
attend at the Leppings Lane entrance". These instructions were given
by radio to all officers and appliances who were still mobile to the
incident.

ADO Mulcrone came into the Control Room during the ongoing incident
and was arranging for further oxygen cylinders to be available should
they be required at the Football Ground. I assisted him in contacting
B.O.C. Brinsworth, liaising with the control unit, and confirming with
the appliances on return to station if they required replacement
cylinders.

At all times I monitored the movements of all the appliances which
were   proceeding to the Hillsborough Football Ground, and when
necessary monitored all other incoming emergency calls which were
being handled whilst this incident was ongoing.

I also worked in liaison with Fire Control Officer            who was
the Officer in Charge of Control on that day, to make sure that
pumping appliances were brought into station areas which were denuded
of cover.

This kept me fully employed until the night watch came on duty at 1800
hours, and I was able to be relieved of my duties.




Leading Fire Control Operator
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                      For the attention of        Your
  To      Chief Fire Officer                                      Ref.


          FCOp 1984, Davies, S.E.     Please contact              Our
 From
                                      Tel.                        Ref.


Subject   Major Accident - Hillsborough Football Ground           Date   24.05.1989



          Sir,

          I am 38 years of age, single and I am employed by the South Yorkshire
          County Fire Service as a Fire Control Operator. My duties include
          accepting incoming telephone calls from other emergency services and
          the   general   public, recording such calls and despatching the
          appropriate fire appliance in respect of the incident in question.  I
          then maintain radio contact with the despatched appliances throughout
          the duration of the incident.

          At 1512 hours, Saturday, 15th April, 1989 I was on duty in the Control
          Room, situated at Fire Service Headquarters, Wellington Street,
          Sheffield. I was at that time in telephone contact with Police Force
          Control situated at Police Headquarters, Snig Hill, Sheffield and
          passing to them information in respect of appliances having been
          despatched to a house fire, where there was a possibility of an
          elderly lady trapped in the house, situated at Gatty Road, Shiregreen,
          Sheffield.   This subsequently resulted in the death of the elderly
          lady. Whilst in conversation with the Police Force Control at 1513
          the following conversation took place :

          Police            Can we have cutting         gear for Hillsborough please
                            straight away.

          Fire Control      Just a minute, right what's the address?

          Police            Cutting equipment for Hillsborough      football   ground
                            straight away.

          Fire Control      Hillsborough football ground?

          Police           Yes, Hillsborough football ground.

          Fire Control     What road is that on, do you know?

          Police           There has been a major accident, all the ambulances
                           are up there.

          Fire Control     What road is it on?

          Police           I have no idea, Hillsborough football ground.

          Fire Control     What road is it on, do you know?

          Police           "Hillsborough football ground, what road is it on?"
                           (this was said to someone in Police Force Control) -
                           "Penistone Road" (to Fire Control)
Fire Control     Penistone Road.

Police           Penistone Road O.K.

Fire Control     Penistone Road,    just   a   minute    -   what's   exactly
                 involved?

Police            It's football,    a   big    match,   Liverpool     v    Notts
                  Forest.

Fire Control     Yes, but why do you want us, you said it was an             RTA
                 (Road Traffic Accident).

Police           No, no, no, major incident inside the ground.

Fire Control     Major   incident   inside, do you know exactly what it
                 is?

Police            No I don't, they want all the cutting gear.

Fire Control      For what, do you know?

Police            Hang on a sec.

Police            (Male voice) - Hello.

Fire Control      Hello, now you want some cutting gear, what             exactly
                  is it for?

Police            There has been a major accident at Hillsborough
                  football ground where the semi-final is, the crowds
                  have forced their way in, they have broken fences
                  and gates down, I don't know exactly what it is but
                  there are people trapped.

Fire Control      Right, O.K. leave it with us.

The above conversation was simultaneously recorded on audio tape at
the Fire Control and the tape has been preserved and can be produced
in evidence if so required.

I did not know what street Hillsborough Football Ground was on and I
needed to ascertain the name of the street and district before I could
attempt to get the computer to display a list of the nearest available
pumping and special appliances. This is why I kept asking the Police
Force Control for further information as to the location.

During the conversation between myself and Police Force Control,
temporary Senior Fire Control Operator            who was monitoring
the call, suggested that it could be located on Penistone Road and the
Police confirmed this. I also knew that before a decision could be
made as to the type and number of appliances required to attend I
would have to know why the Fire Service were needed and what was
involved.

Police Force Control were asking for cutting gear and I needed to know
why. I kept on asking questions so that I could ascertain what type
of emergency situation we were required to attend.
The pre-determined attendance for Penistone Road, Owlerton is 2
pumping appliances. Due to the unusual nature of the incident I did
not feel qualified to decide what attendance should be made. I waited
for specific instructions which were given to me by temporary Senior
Fire Control Operator               and I was instructed to mobilise 6
pumping appliances, one emergency tender and the control unit.       I
immediately acted on these instructions.

The appliances were immediately despatched and the first appliance was
recorded arriving at the scene at 1522 hours.    Together with other
Fire Control Operators I then subsequently maintained contact with all
appliances and officers at the scene of the incident together with
other ongoing incidents until the end of my watch at 1800 hours.




S.E. Davies, 1984 - White Watch.
DCFO Hewitt

AGO Seaman
                                      205


Hillsborough Inquiry - Interviews of Officers by              20.06.89
West Midlands Police



At 1445 hours on 20th June, 1989, I received a telephone call from
Chief Inspector Ross of the West Midlands Police.          He said that
although they had interviewed the firemen and junior officers who
attended the Hillsborough incident, they had overlooked the interviews
of the middle and senior management which they are required to do for
the Coroner.

The following is the list of personnel still to be interviews

               Rank              Name           Location

              ICO              Seaman           CHQ
               loo             Hornsby          CHQ
               DO              Hildreth         CHQ
               T/ADO           Green            CHQ
               ADO             Robjohn          CHQ (Training Centre)
               Stn.O.                           CHQ
               SDO             Smoothey         North Div. HQ
               DO              Lockwood         West Div. HQ (Retired)
               Stn.O.          Fletcher         Central
               Sub.O.                           Central
               L.Fm.            Housley         Central
               Stn.O.           Swain           Rivelin
               Stn.O.          r                Ringinglow
               Sub.O.                  1        Lowedges
               T/Stn.O.       [       r         Darnall
               Sub.O.                           Darnall
               Fm.                              Darnall
               Stn.O.                           Mansfield Road

I have arranged      to   be interviewed at about 1100 hours on Wednesday,
21st June, 1989.




Assistant Chief Fire Officer
   ^{eS*.       /                  4                <s*x_ ^£1
y ^ p < ^c * A ^€ t/ <£p                   S * fs Z ^ r                  sck~.
                                                          j /               »s%+
       £■»'***• ■      «&.««■•*


                    * ' '^ k t i < ( i » ^ / t y i e / V ^      cSUMS.

                           *?$h
                                                                                   v?■;v•:•.
           -W       ^4,’                  '
                                   .yUL**
             t--^                               ■';^*d:.A:«:n*r;y'e'S'':■
                                                                        :>' ^          -5v-r
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


INCIDENT - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND - 1STE APRIL, 1989

REPORT OF ACO A. HORNSBY


At approximately 1530 hours I received a telephone call from FCO
in Fire Service Control. He informed me that they had a "Major Incident"
in progress at Hillsborough Football Ground involving a large number of
fatalities and casualties.     I informed FCO         that I would attend
the incident.

On arrival at Hillsborough I was directed by the Police towards the
Leppings Lane entrance and I parked my car at the rear of a fire
appliance 100 yards from the Control Unit. I ascertained from the Sub
Officer in charge of the appliance that the Control Unit was in
attendance at Leppings Lane but he had seen the OiC, DO Lockwood, proceed
towards the Gymnasium where most of the casualties were. I handed my
tally to the Sub Officer and asked him to take it to the Control Unit for
me and to inform them that I was proceeding to the Gymnasium. Stn.O.
       accompanied me to the Gymnasium (the crowd at this time were
impatient and I noticed several scuffles with the police).

On arrival at the Gymnasium I contacted ADO Robjohns and he briefed me
that there were approximately 50 fatalities and 70 seriously injured
persons in the Gymnasium and to the best of his knowledge all casualties
had been removed from the terraces, etc. He could not at that time tell
me how the incident had occurred.        I walked round the inside of the
Gymnasium and met Stn.O. Fletcher. I ascertained that all Fire Service
personnel were all right and were standing by to assist in first aid
treatment. I contacted DCAO Hopkins who was organising casualty handling
in the Gymnasium and I asked if there was any additional services he
required from the Fire Service. He replied that the Fire Service had
done a grand job and that no additional services were required. I
contacted ADO Robjohns and instructed him to remain at the Gymnasium as
OiC of the Advanced Control Point and that the Fire Service Crews were to
stay there with him.

Accompanied by Stn.O.        I went to the Police Station in the grounds
to ascertain any further details of how the incident occurred and I was
informed that three barriers had given way in one corner of the "Kop".

I telephoned Fire Service Control from the Police Station and informed
them that there were possibly 70 fatalities and 30 seriously injured and
that the information was to be passed on to the Chief Fire Officer.
                                                                        v
I then proceeded to the Control Unit and informed Fire Service Control
and all personnel on the fireground that I had taken over as OiC of the
incident. I then proceeded to the Police Control Viewing Gallery to
establish a contact with the Senior Police Officer. An Inspector was in
charge of the Police Control and he informed me that ACC Jackson was OiC
of the incident and he was located in the middle of the football pitch.
I asked if there were any further casualties requiring Fire Service
assistance, to which he replied "No", and I also asked if he required any
additional Fire Service assistance, to which he also replied "No".



                                  - 1 -
Whilst: discussing the incident in general a telephone message waa
received in the Police Control from a Club Official requesting that a
carefully worded message be transmitted over the Public Tannoy System
informing the crowd that the match had been abandoned. The senior Police
Officer refused to transmit that message unless authorised by ACC
Jackson. He stated that there had been a lot of skirmishes and with the
current atmosphere he was afraid a riot might ensue.

I left one officer, ADO Green (with fireground radio), at the Police
Control Viewing Gallery and instructed him to act as Liaison Officer.  I
returned to the Control Unit and issued instructions to all Fire Service
Personnel to either:-

         1.   Report to the Gymnasium and remain there.
         2.   Report to the Control Unit.
         3.   Remain seated on their appliances.

I instructed SDO Smoothey to report to the Gymnasium and   to ensure en
route that any Fire Service personnel he saw were          informed of my
instructions.

The Chief Fire Officer arrived and I informed him of the situation
although at that time I was still unsure of how the incident occurred.
The CFO took over as OiC of the incident.

Iremained   on the Control Unit until the crowd hadadequately dispersed
and   then I accompanied the Brigade Photographer to the "Kop end" where
the injuries had been sustained and then we proceeded to the Gymnasium.
I ascertained from the DCAO, Mr. Hopkins, that no further immediate
assistance was required of the Fire Service personnel and then contacted
the CFO suggesting that, with the exception of 4 appliances and the
Control Unit, all other appliances be returned to base.

The CFO arrived at the Gymnasium and informed me that he had reduced
appliances as suggested. The CFO was briefed by ADO Robjohns and Stn.O.
Fletcher.

I was instructed by the CFO to contact the Senior Police Officer to see
if they required any further assistance from the Fire Service - ACC
Jackson was contacted and he informed me that our services were no longer
required.




A.D. Hornsby,
Assistant Chief Fire Officer.



AH/JMT

17th April, 1989.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                     For the attention of         Your
  To      Chief Fire Officer                                      Ref.

                                                                  Our
                                                                            019/1/1/
          Div. Officer Hildreth      Please contact
 From
                                                                  Ref.
                                                                            SAH/DG
                                     Tel.     265


Subject   Major Incident Hillsborough Football Ground             Date      20.04.89
          15th April, 1989



          On the 15th April, 1989, at 1527 hrs. whilst on stand-by at my home
          address, I received a telephone call from Fire Service Control
          informing me of a major incident at Hillsborough Football Ground.   Six
          pumps, two emergency tenders and the Control Unit had been mobilised to
          the incident, the precise details of which were unknown.     I was to
          attend the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground. I confirmed my
          intention to attend.

          Whilst en route, I was requested, by    radio,    to   take    charge   of   the
          Control Unit on my arrival.

          I arrived in Leppings Lane at 1558 hrs at which time there was very
          little traffic or pedestrian obstruction. I was advised by a police
          constable to park in a side street as they were expecting trouble from
          spectators when they left the ground. I was unaware that the game was
          being abandoned or the extent of the incident at this time.

          On proceeding down Leppings Lane, I met ADO Green who accompanied me to
          the Control Unit. On entering the Control Unit I made contact with
          L.Fml         I enquired who was in overall charge from the Police and
          had contact been made with them.         He replied in the negative but
          informed me that Divisional Officer Lockwood was in charge of the Fire
          Service and that he and ADO Robjohn were in radio contact. ACO Hornsby
          was also in attendance and had gone to the gymnasium to rendezvous with
          Divisional Officer Lockwood. It was obvious the Control Unit was not
          in contact with the officer in charge of the police and that we had at
          that time no direct lines of communication with them.

          ADO Green was instructedto take a fireground radio, proceed to the
          police control box, establish a communication link      and   obtain
          information regarding the extent of the incident.

          At about this time, Assistant Chief Officer Hornsby entered the Control
          Unit having done a survey of the incident and briefed me regarding the
          extent of the incident, the approximate number of casualties and their
          locations.

          I was engaged throughout the incident in the Control Unit.         At no     time
          was any police presence available at the Control Unit.
There were no problems experienced by the Control Unit in providing the
command post for this incident. I attach a copy of the plan drawn in
the Control Unit, and a list of the messages sent, officers and
appliances attending as recorded in the Control Unit.




S A Hildreth
Divisional Officer
                                                      PLAN OF INCIDENT ON CONTROL UNIT

                                              HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND 15TH APRIL, 1989




                                           Pc. O T s T o t r e   Q o k t s t


                        £g£i O iH K K
        Fofi. fATAH"i£<           x
    S-.l>.Q_S-bABCSXM.W -Is-------------
^     M > 0   g .O % )O H r ) •

                      -----------




                                                                                                 C 3 3 '^OOfA.
                                                                                                            K b o C ^Q.C5rA .

                                                                     1    ^ __
                                                          v/vl



                                                                                          Qas.va % & Z Z \ & L CouiaRs^s
                                                                                        >£-- ^ A C , ^ - - ^ e r A < ^ 'r'''C>—
                                                                                        VLc.*X7\ii>J>h-jc,    ^<u_x




                                                     1                         X
                     x-rp^-^c^s — \sf\w
                                                                                   \ C o a -T io v   Q tA y ~
OFFICERS

CFO Wright
ACFO Hornsby
ACFO Seaman
SDO Smoothy
DO Hildreth
DO Lockwood
ADO Robjohn
ADO Green
Stn.O

Duty Mechanic




APPLIANCES

Central

Darnall

Rivelin

Ringinglow

Barnsley

Lowedges

Mansfield Road

Stocksbridge

Control Unit
1517   Control Unit mobilised

1548   In attendance

1557   Control Unit now Control Point, DO Hildreth Control Officer

1605   ACFO Hornsby OiC incident

1606   ACFO Seaman at incident

1615   From ACFO Seaman ~ one crash barrier near to retaining
       wall behind the goals on the terracing off the West Stand
       collapsed.

1618   CFO Wright in attendance

1625   Info message from ACFO Hornsby at Hillsborough Football
       ground, numerous casualties - Fire Service assisting police
       and ambulance services.

164b   From ACFO Hornsby - make all but four appliances available
       only Central 1 and 2 Rivelin 1 and Ringinglow 1 to remain at
       incident.

1650   From ADO Robjohn to Control - contact DO Binningto.1 at home
       rendezvous with CFO and ACFO at West Division Headquarters as
       soon as possible.

1658   From Brigade Control inform CFO to contact ADO Mulcrone at
       West Division Headquarters by land line. CFO informed.

1724   Stop message from CFO Wright at Sheffield         Wednesday's
       Football Ground.   Numerous casualties.    Fire   Service no
       longer required. Brigade Control informed.

1725   Incident closed all pumps and officers returning to base.
          SO U TH YORKSHIRE C O U N TY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref                                               -------                                                                                 . Division
                                                                                                                          /
              j a IU
          Date..                              a _ ......                                                                                                          . Station




SUBJECT




  si                                                                                                                                                 K            lL      M                1
               f a n ty~Ca*t( V S~fa.at+*A** *                                                           t*y^of             f
                                                                                                                            5 Ujt              sr<
               ( js v lj              ’           'i~ * $ J -C j A oC C . V                                           La . o f

                   /^L-           Lnn 1^0j J J                                                               J^a--   'kLs.-- <?,.<<*.***1                  &d~„,
                   /S
                   f^.*,v t   VfrtC T - e 7                                           L los J                   <?C           7ti~v
                                                                                                                               1 la /f&VAjL.         Juu.
                                                                                                                                                     JuuAtsI b s 1 / 0
                                                                                         V f c C jU .£ C ( i e J i *?!<
                                                                                                                      t »A                                            J* * . £   _

                                              K                                                                                                             'y 'U *
                   y W t^ n aV-CfH
                               *t/L                                      a * /'




                   L
                   tgVL

                   m
                                  ±

                                                        . h      k   l
                                                                             LA-




                                                                                  V
                                                                                                   ft
                                                                                             f tnncL.
                                                                                      f l \a - a - o l
                                                                                                                 la
                                                                                                                 'ho +
                                                                                                                     f kL S
                                                                                                                      /
                                                                                                                             -L l
                                                                                                                          J -fdL.c((«M~
                                                                                                                                ~ J-           .€•- < r *   ju v i
                                                                                                                                                                                 w*.'>

                                                                                                                                           ~h        + L \             rtj±
                                                                                                                                                         -/St- c(c a
                                          )> duel jzZ                                       <*M*4 06                      'Itsx JL         - t lijh            <*~bi>/ t <*4<e f
                                          Uv
                                                  Arx-&.e~ci'&<J                               ~/o                                   o-/~ €.ck             <rJJ
                                                                         O        .                              adtl--- tlL^L.—                         K.&\A !cl.C, •
                    Q         .       -L
                    l<3±^s l L
                    U A t '* -                                                                ■L-I*a             'T-hx.         z    !( ^UUS!                         Q T
                                                                                                                                                              C-wA-g t v S’




                                      ,
                                          .   0    .

                                                       1MO, ^
                                                                         <3 / Oh-
                                                                                U           d i.

                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                       *<7^4.4 S'/it*.
                                                                                                                                       f        <£-0                     r
                                                                                                                                                                      UA&'A,
                                                                                                                                       Su/adt*,
                     Ol ^ $ J2^wl
                     'U lc y f~
                                          Jt* * i

                                                       & t/
                                                       C   ^h-^XA-



                                                   C*~l i-j4 .6 v jy          Cow      i+ h J .
                                                                                                   C v A ^ ty -S                       ’
                                                                                                                                       -d
                                                                                                                                                              is L .
                                                                                                                                                     €,0^U*-S> 'ty'Mt/f
                                                                                                                                                            + L        l
                                                                                                                                                                                         r
                    rA. &(****«                                      ■J c jf~  '■bLjL.    CcM~ftic>f~                                                                                 &f
                   -/s >                  -4 m a * » l                                   Ljzyd.+ «              c f ~ Jet1±                L     ■/U4 4.

                   -rC^t^ ef~/Tn**iAcf                                       ^m Xd .                                                                                   ¥

               7                                                               /xrc 4.*                                                ;4
                   Vn ia                          ■f-U.
                                                  rU.                    fcfoA'bt
                                                                         /fjty                                                                 J3L               Le
                                    rf                     c f   7   ^>txZ                                                                 Co>*^<Trx4/rk<A„

                                                            -f                                                   S jt r-t/'tKsr J                    L      iJ        L          j-

                    ££        f/)                   C " / iz s 'f b s S - --------- ? -'-* 7"                   j>c*- /i'C-a-                        <yyt        /     IT
                              -o— 4               -C ^f(                          P i'h c L
                                                                                                                                                                                      CR-FS-Ot-
                                                                             t
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref..                                                                                                           . Division


          Date........................                                                                                                 .. Station




SUBJECT
              h i0                       b-l                               cA/-s w v t                 /
                                                                                                       f                      ....<e,ja

             A                                             <L                 /aukxT                       S-ea. /<SJtd               .i'bjt'
                              s                                                                                 w-V*~-4          of
                     cx,~(~         Q i^ra-yUvvo/               /g i>»l/                                                               ra^uJLa.

                                                           __________ i~ e                              __

                     VUGW                                                     <J
                                                                              rj            . ?< f"/?r -»
                                                                                                       'f.c-r /- Vn m/oV:_^-
                                                                                                                        , s.       ___
                                                                         •£a&SL&\           / C* » v W l               c^M. To

                     £> / A>C__                                                                        /a C *s~hi c i             * 0 ^              »
                     / T-~-l^TcLst/'                                                                'ud        nv* JL            oJ- H^J-

                     S                     J-*t
                                                                                    Scb***                     CcC$ LA-is                        t           r

                                                                                                                                    6v*.£?* K.^yf J?

                     JhA.rf~'ir&n cul                 tj      ^t<77^         + L,.                  /wtct'                            U b r - d ---
                                                             w -y -g -                                 ~f~lkJ ^ ' n e t                 'fluL_____

                              'su* vt a.St UA~i.              aJ-           t-L*.                f g - . , S ~h-                      ILrzKjyf                    .
                 i       t        .'h                                                                               &~tsLC>f              $u4-S Cf 7<a./fc*-

                     ty fl^         Lt,                       tc            *< *i   •   C   'fckr-3                           Qj~t K/-f
                     4~(~a-            i y-fcL
                                                                           ...rfcfjQ-          yjC       .f.                                <9
                                                                                             s-U           Xa        J-          'M cloU L .I

                                          -o~j>         ~h>        'hLor________________________________________________________.
                                                                                       L c 4.       Coydjrd
                         UA^JUyl               / "7[T                     ^€.c(              a. /~ . V^'^-a.              (^e-*C~/\rt- / / T o X

                                  jC           cf
                               J                        yut^vi        LaA                          ^ £t*£ *AA*>

                             Lo,//-                                       _____ /-~CJ^t                    ■/-t-g-g.
                                                                                                       fjlrxM-cJL                Z7jt.W c n * * u / <L

                             l\J                               JL,^L 'Hit-tJ 'fLa-                             Art / ’€•&■/ 7 l o K                      L
                 -tsdsi                           J                                                                                                  t-y«

                     ±Ll.                S-CU4 (. cnA                                                                     o           ~X2                    ________


                                               ± 4 l.                                                                  Pn
                                                                                                                                        KA xJE
                                       J U      aij-
                         'H*        0-Js<r .±_SS
                         ,-ir-_____{*1,       as /<•-£-(>(. r f                               <*       ,jSyf> (hf'                       C—£/-

                     f-U
                     jdjL           sQ-'fax, (~* L-<t*+C4.
                                    ^                                    S A y^ -C ^ .                                                  TZUt
                                                                                                                                      t /
                      apyLef             u-^vS          4 ^ U              4- U s f ~                 4~L-A-*j                         nsto-'h
                      l-Ovito.r-
                                                    2
                                          _/2.ja /(c «8                      (cV^                  y t r W g f g>i
                                                                                                                                                         CR-FS-Ot
                                                                             3
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref..                                                                                                           .Division


          Date         ...............                                                                                                 .. Station




SUBJECT
                               iVTTi
                                                         !> V t                Oks!                j CC-L.


                 jLa d .   i             T'f        VxTKA               v/                  fCf
                                                                                             k.— . ±SJ.^dCnrj^d„                       a-s     fLfL.y!'
                           /                                 C^Za< S               PM.        'b^c.                   I'Q-h ^wtv«>jb.J
                                                                                                                        I
             «v*p-c/«o
                                                                                                            .CJtaL                         —tc^ A.

                                                                                                             U                     JLa{.QOf....

                 '/VlAJL+SI                                                                                      'b^A .

                 'f U              s                                                                  ~*L SL'&.STi
                                                                                          t.V C^cZf~ p4?
                                                                                      C av,            oO -dLA.'f'
                                                                                                         -**.

                   c r                     f </wf             *LK~e.<J____~ /g >                  c < ? -     'o /- v ( ** v f

                  *lt46-treats1J h ^ t Z                                                                      I                                     T
                                              u     .                     To
                                                                  cg-vt-1 !C»~c/t0-                         i_

                    Cn A ± i* r (                                              T        ~     t
                                                                                        X                           C            ^ /       Q L+
                                    Z^<yf                /            -s-e. a^<j-ejz iu < /.                  C M          Q J~LLc Jit-       tA H

                   CL                (sst~S                             '-rk^at o'            A              -y-^.fiJ&
                                                                                                                  ! i j& l/j& fo f. c*S~f~

                   C           J    'h       ^ i         /?<               j     :0 .                                             /k i
                  1/0 ll*. Co-^c4~v^r /                           ^        7^
                                         Myat^S                       >*JZ-v^t
                                                        vx,   L                                        r L + Z f                   *tL $

                                         C-*~t -&                                                     ty~*tC C^t                 &-P   +-Cjl

                                                                                                               &
                                                                                                       r

                                                                             M ) C £wc? 0J .                         0       *     t-ffi



                                                                       U-S-                 'hS.tQ^ V




                                                                                                                                                        CR-FS-01£
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                      For the attention of    Your
  To
                                                              Ref.
          Chief Fire Officer

          Do Lockwood D. 48           Please contact          Our    06/2/2
 From
          West Division               Tel.                    Ref.   DL/MR


Subject   Incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium    Date
          on the 15th April 1989                                      17.4.89



          On Saturday the 15th April 1989 at 1522 hours. I was informed of
          major incident requiring cutting gears at the Hillsborough Football
          Stadium and that six pumps and Emergency Tender had been mobilised.
          I booked mobile to the incident at 1524 hours.

          En route, I heard a make pumps 10 message for resuscitation equipment
          on the radio.

          My initial approach to the Stadium was via Penistone Road and I
          encountered some traffic congestion at this side of the stadium.
          Further radio messages informed me that appliances should attend the
          Leppings Lane* entrance.

          I proceeded to this area and met StnO Swain at the contact point. He
          informed me that crews were inside the stadium and ADO Robjohns was
          requesting additional resuscitation equipment. I instructed StnO
          Swain to assemble all crews and equipment not already committed into
          the stadium at the contact point and to maintain contact with me by
          fireground radio.

          I then proceeded into the stadium via the centre tunnel of the West
          Stand. I was then confronted by a scene of several hundred
          spectators and police on the football pitch.

          No Fire Service Personnel were evident to me and I later realised
          that this was because they were down at ground level attending to
          casualties and therefore screened from any view by standing
          spectators.

          I then proceeded down onto the pitch and eventually located StnO
          Fletcher who informed me of the situation as he knew it at that
          stage. That was, that some casualties had been taken out to the
          Lepping Lane entrance, but the majority had been and were been taken
          to the gymnasium at the Penistone Road entrance. First aid and
          resuscitation was being administered by crews on the pitch.

          I could find no Senior Police Officer present on the pitch so I made
          my way up to the Police Control Box. When I arrived at the Control
          Box I could see the whole of the ground, and a number of casualties
          being dealt with by Fire Service Personnel. When I entered the
          Police Box,I identified myself and asked who was the Senior Officer
          in charge. I was told the assistant Chief Constable but they did not
          know where he was. I also asked if a senior officer of the Ambulance
          Service wa£ available and was told that they did not know.
No police officer present came forward and identified himself or gave
me any information on the situation and I was virtually ignored as
they busied themselves on the telephones and radio.

ADO Robjohns then contacted me by radio stating that he needed men
and equipment in the gymnasium. This I arranged with StnO Swain by
radio at the contact point and then continued to co-ordinate movement
of men and equipment from the vantage point at the Police Control
Box.

When the Fire Service Control Unit arrived I requested an officer
with a fireground radio to relieve me at the Control Box so that I
could report to the Control Unit in person.

I was relieved by T/ADO Green. On arrival at the Control Unit.   I
briefed ACO Hornsby <fjt the incident at that stage.




DO x *o c k w o o c l u .   4a
West Division
             SOUTH Y O R K S H IR E C O U N T Y FI RE SERVICE


             Headquarters Ref      ................................                                   .............................. Division

                                   ..........                                                                                 .S ta tio n



SUBJECT




HiUZ&C&uod

  SMS
              /.tyGfy Ci.f yS'-V^Z                             h'»1 4X£!?dLn,/ifa                         />■/' <%»*/ A £V*U>.




             <2 /        /6 a                 .& > L                        f     /S/9c’r S & a S          s&jz


                                                         /£>              /%^C&                     /^v^T
                            ..Uf                       ^>ccz^c i c£c*<-~-J Gt^ur-e
                                                                           A*t^/'           <-£•    <3. /<g8^ Z/*^<s
                                                                                                                  <Y~

                          &C'S rtA ^g'c^gn-v.                               ,- bjZ^j-e^e.—



                                L^L
                                                                          -&j2.   P<?tx<zj*                 /L^tZe
                    //                                                X

                         '&tzZ¥/                        J-nC^/y^-1^/ <n& O n £ M & & J U                                    A32'6uj *&<zS
             J& &£-                        &e/£*ze^                         ,^=?                    . f                    sezi


                                                                                                    ~7//4Z><o                    £/P
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                       For the attention of   Your
  To
          Chief Fire Officer                                  Ref.


          T/ADO GREEN                  Please contact          Our    016/2/1
 From
          WEST DIVISION                Tel.                    Ref.   BG/DG


Subject   INCIDENT AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND,    Date
          15TH APRIL 1989.                                            18.4.89


          On Saturday the 15th April 1989 at 1542 hours, by exchange telephone
          at my home address, I was instructed by Fire Service Control to
          attend a major incident at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, and to
          enter the ground from Leppings Lane.

          1 then proceeded to the Stadium and arrived at 1603 hours. On
          arrival 1 reported to the Fire Service Control Unit and was
          instructed by Divisional Officer Hildreth to go to the Police Control
          Point, which was situated in the stadium, and take a radio hand set
          and act as liaison officer between Fire Service Control Unit and the
          Police Control Point. 1 then went straight to the Police Control
          Point to standby. Whilst 1 was in attendance at the Police Control
          Point until the end of the incident no messages were required to be
          sent between the two units. 1 laft the incident at 1726 hours and
          proceeded to my home address.




          T/ADO GREEN B 610
          COMMAND HEADQUARTERS.
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref..
                                                                                                 ^/a t 7^___                                          Division


          Date. J   & 1 & / 2 5 L . __________....                                                                                     v................. Station




SUBJECT
               O
               tfSouhtA^Jeuf                                                     ifAA^l /?n*1l/<
                                                                                               :2 z
                                               fcA fu                                                                                                u i r r,

  si
              U
              V-g
                                   *£    -
                                                           CjAr/JhoU d —                           I
                                                                                                  t/i                             M              f /M
                                                                                                                                                                          'i z




              (MviGt
                                 >cul( V S~fd,dt *aa+a


                            Loo L + J J
                                              sura &u.c,J
                                                           y^dLLuL(l
                                                                             *
                                                                                  sn (if ^6
                                                                       (Mjulxf-Uc^rJ
                                                                                    '£>
                                                                                        " "’/


                                                                                                 4*.L l
                                                                                                          '                   S

                                                                                                                              «A<<~
                                                                                                                                   /   K

                                                                                                                                    Awidd h. /« M
                                                                                                                              e <a$-<A 'f~' < c t~
                /s       ZC l
                         c
                                                                                                               /t/ 7
                                                                                                               ' /asf&A.
                                                                                                                                       p
                                                                                                                                       Ju*t*nb-£
                                                                                                                                       /<-«•u a JZ. Jo_
  M                       SotA^f^                                                            a-
                                                                                                              <nst
                                                                                                                  gyl^A-

                                                                                                                                             f&Ud. 4*», £

                                                                                                                              22
                                                                                                                                                                    .

              j& A           f j

                  M ,                        7 h Co(         aJOh /Tftt-C                         i_ ±                        K^~f~3t-Cl<nA«<                   UV&.S

              4U                                                                                  f             2.                                    - f c s j. _

                Soy« 4              _. ~*r
                                       ^ v t~ £ £ Cc       r <n-T
                                                              a^ i a                             i±    £rl                ~h           +1* c             iv /;Zf
                                   La.      Iir - h - c i ***** v                                                    -fib/               ^VLoflO


                         o^U v                o jtF s
                                                                       O H » lg     z
                                                                                    i                 *U* i
                                                                                                  g ^ A
                                                                                                               wg.

                                                                                                                                       'Tzt      a-bp




     h>
                -g-t/f

                                 ru n                  (JjZ<J                ~f~o                                                        r   <rv*.

     $
                    X                                                                                                ^   €gc                     - -__-t *”
               ^ V fu g .   it          c              ^     . cfiyg*uX                      £t ~h                   f'LjL                        /gt.C I
                    9     - T
                                               //g          f ^ f L&%A4.cJ                       -vut -g,                                        C iA ^ 'v S ’

                  UrQJ^4-                    u*st
                                               l/L   C < ClJl / .                            eS'~f~CoC>(-                                    e»-v< ^     (
                             ^   .0          b ^ .a    /    jj o l t y * *                            3             ' T 4 0JUL* S ^ U t
                                                                                         n            \             " 7
                              ',-h o ^ c ^ (                                    _// TJccJT&A.
                                                               ~s/'-£ £ jU. 5 z'-      c J J i fj                             <£L.& •***•VP hA'SKu
                                                                                    S ' b .O                         S l/* t£ n              /
                                                                                                                                                                           r
                                 <A~* i ds-u-t
                    Gl $.S &**+* (r'l'*L                    st. i/_                                            <p   k c   {

                                                                                          -h h J .                             / I/           /H- ________
                                                                                                                                                  £ jz
                r A                                                                                                                                        6-<A jp(

               4?. .                    a*»< f         QtA**        rc*yA~f~<\ c"f~ t^rt'f'C                                      <it4 4-
                                                           'f-a c h d
                                                                                 J-eJ                         je*/\ 7o                 'b

               \/ia                   'tU.                 'CJv                                                               _ct
                                                                                                                          C                 v T n -v V




                    k   j: IO .J-L
                                 *. C ’74&x‘/ g v S ____________
                                   4 -U .K                   o ;-h c L
                                                                                             J~jg. r < r e ^ f

                                                                                                   Tl j l _ e _
                                                                                             ..J20r_
                                                                                             J
                                                                                                                                  M am s 1 c lJ S ^ c r-

                                                                                                                                    <yvt            /•   7X
                                                                                                                                                                        CR-FS-01
                                                                                          2
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref..                                                                                                                                        . Division


          Date..................... ...                                                                                                                             ..Station




SUBJECT
              Ai o                                      Jju~v~L-e-JZ           pcXAS                                                                         4 .\n J ^ d

              4h             ^     a      .                  J            L            IgjhxT,                            -/-fa I                             .
                                                              ( t ± .c cux,%JL,                                                     w-tA-6                  ^/aw-'W
                       4~                                           lo.\rrt^L                                                                           jf s -      rat£-u.ci.H
                                                                                                                                                                              /7T-e
                                                                                                                                                                                 a i

                             d 'd             4^

                  yueP>/
                                                                                                            / g<oww1                       cn-\. Ip                'b'-Q.
                                                                                                                      L ic c u h J
                 /
                    i; i i           —              (t                                                                                                       .TyCff

                             ( j >, ■f'zLsJ-                  W ~(                                 _.       —    ±<J            'U A -JL                                      --       - «   --------------



                  S )~I^X-gt."iA t>-wt                      <x.^.         z     r     x            :                   •,/                 fit-T ~ I d U f - s t a *
                 ' ^ ’k a j b                      wo^S .         ^UaaJ/ ___                                                C6C*'**~o^.f T'-e-S

                                              ~i                      ovo /                        iQ                                    b ^ .'Q p * fi Ca-a -GP                             JZ.

                  4v\rf~)r&LA c-Jt                                Ct^rb~              'f~i-JL.                   /UA.&- jcf -S^nb                                                  ---
                 C ^ L J i^ y X                                  W r^ /~ g -     _         k           -g-^T          ~     {       ~     &       L    *     rv>     'J - L   sl


                                                                    Oy ~f~                                                      i       /(y -^ -€                  ^^jsj-TXJod                        .

                                                                              /^Iy-1                         s4-<                         tr x s u l Y ''6 S M -$C f TaC fz**

                                                                              -*u *                                                                    Qj-t Ukj-f              0-~*.


                                           ///
                                   ^ Lut-fcJ                                          -Tstn                                                   E        Z      ^
                                                   -t                 -pLju                                                                                 -v r

                                                            ~/b       T^La.            !           i o i C-&                    C o ^ h a d                        flo*
                                                     JZ             » /iN t                    f         (X.    ~f~       V^~a.                              7f\r tr f P^oX.
                                 j C ir u s d d                  £ -QcJt              '/^4-tW*—                       -A.
                         cf
                    Q*\A-&____ q
                               Q                             -V^V             ( jlA            ^                                         *>/ 'f -fct r
                       U*/                               ^ v i                                     /^- 6vCg           /j^y~ce ~£



                jdjui~k£j> J                                                                             a^uJ <*-<L&cf
                   + h .                      S ^ u j f JA                                                                                                         7T

                                                   ± .u                                        /
                                                   :L s L    ■V is y f]         k - y l o < *T ~                                                      /-e

                      " iy                0 - 1 f t T y .. ,.g j l ^ - c ( .           ^                                                  (h A

                   jd-Ji
                    h U             ^
                                    Sb                   Uv*./ 6** (JL                                  C                                              0VTU. > ZI 3                F

                     dp/l-tj                  W^vS           ~7^£r IJ.                     t~c*J~f~               '4~L-4-ij                       c/t-&( -xslo-'h'

                                   J=L

                         a    A                              c -e                                                tr ^ e s s u r h
                                                                                                                yfcrAir                                     c a ^ y tC
                                                                                                                                                                                   CR-FS-01
                                                                                            3
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref.........................................                                                                                          Division


          Date..................................................................................................................




SUBJECT
                                              J.                        J / Jj^A41J                                                I*** $4 I/C
                                                                                                                                             f- e*S
                                                                                                                                                <   atx^e.
                                                                                                                                                  / CjO-

                             t              dnA.<J                                                                          ffM .     -
                                                                                                                                      t kh Lt ........
                                                                                                                                                 ‘ a?, -r, -kjl-fu
                                                                                                                                                         >■irS&’k K <**!■ ------
                              J           'Z 'J

                 Luc                    /                                •& !\l<t I                 <>*.a                             T~&, 1'4-h bnA^ja.i




                                                                                                                                                -vt     A




                                                                                                       r             1 <a-C-




                                                                TZ     q k                    7                  /
                                                                                                                                         ( Z      - f c     n    t iF
                                                                                     A-e.
                                                                                     2        2



                     / o iL . C c ^ r f w r /                                              7^                                                                      r
                                                                                                               (dj            '7^// & > D              /rv-e.-o*xt
                                               as-r~* v^c f                           a**
                     ^77                  C ^ -i 4 .p K y (                       s 4 r C ,              O           /~ fQ /s~ * C                           T^^g.

                      ^V1 r , J j U A lf                                *.+                ' * U J ‘                      s/pfJK




                                                                                           ^ 0 C />W() o d                                  0     *


                                                                                     |0*                        tlS.,<CtrM




                                                                                                                                                                         CR-FS*016
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
 -1
                                      For th e a tte n tio n of   Your
  Tc
                                                                  Ref.
          Chief Fire Officer

          Do Lockwood D. 48           Please contact              Our    06/2/2
 From
          West Division               Tel.                        Ref.   DL/MR


Subject   Incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium        Date
          on the 15th April 1989                                         17.4.89



          On Saturday the 15th April 1989 at 1522 hours. I was informed of
          major incident requiring cutting gears at the Hillsborough Football
          Stadium and that six pumps and Emergency Tender had been mobilised.
          I booked mobile to the incident at 1524 hours.

          En route, I heard a make pumps 10 message for resuscitation equipment
          on the radio.

          My initial approach to the Stadium was via Penistone Road and I
          encountered some traffic congestion at this side of the stadium.
          Further radio messages informed me that appliances should attend the
          Leppings Lane entrance.

          I proceeded to this area and met StnO Swain at the contact point. He
          informed me that crews were inside the stadium and ADO Robjohns was
          requesting additional resuscitation equipment. I instructed StnO
          Swain to assemble all crews and equipment not already committed into
          the stadium at the contact point and to maintain contact with me by
          fireground radio.

          I then proceeded into the stadium via the centre tunnel of the West
          Stand. I was then confronted by a scene of several hundred
          spectators and police on the football pitch.

          No Fire Service Personnel were evident to me and I later realised
          that this was because they were down at ground level attending to
          casualties and therefore screened from any view by standing
          spectators.

          I then proceeded down onto the pitch and eventually located StnO
          Fletcher who informed me of the situation as he knew it at that
          stage. That was, that some casualties had been taken out to the
          Lepping Lane entrance, but the majority had been and were been taken
          to the gymnasium at the Penistone Road entrance. First aid and
          resuscitation was being administered by crews on the pitch.

          I could find no Senior Police Officer present on the pitch so I made
          my way up to the Police Control Box. When I arrived at the Control
          Box I could see the whole of the ground, and a number of casualties
          being dealt with by Fire Service Personnel. When I entered the
          Police Box,I identified myself and asked who was the Senior Officer
          in charge. I was told the assistant Chief Constable but they did not
          know where he was. I also asked if a senior officer of the Ambulance
          Service was available and was told that they did not know.
No police officer present came forward and identified himself or gave
me any information on the situation and I was virtually ignored as
they busied themselves on the telephones and radio*

ADO Robjohns then contacted me by radio stating that he needed men
and equipment in the gymnasium. This I arranged with StnO Swain by
radio at the contact point and then continued to co-ordinate movement
of men and equipment from the vantage point at the Police Control
Box.

When the Fire Service Control Unit arrived I requested an officer
with a fireground radio to relieve me at the Control Box so that I
could report to the Control Unit in person.

I was relieved by T/ADO Green. On arrival at the Control Unit.   I
briefed ACO Hornsby    the incident at that stage.




DO Lockwood D. 48
West Division
              SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


              H e a d q u a rte rs R ef.........                                                                             ........................ ....D ivision

              O at                                                                                 e t ±   4 £ L   ...........................                        ..S catio n



SUBJECT


 biirtWA                                                           2C?/
                                        T                77
H/UZ&oZcuod                                                               ZL

                                                                                 &>lr. ^ a d e r t ^ v               /A
  syS
                        —            f r r - - Mr r - ar* -    .   ,             ----- —       w                                 *     /
                                                                                                                                                 z
                                                                                                                                                 &   ?    y       >   C   ^   ^   .



                %d:/WU;
                     t /
                         f                    ,
                                                      tnA & tc&e? .ky
                                                                   /
                                                                                                                                                              A
                                                                                                                                                             " 11'-’ '■
                                                                       q A 'M'S&A&euj'j!                                                                 s?^S&e/cA}

                                — !■■!■ IH T U      ..— I—_^r. ........TwT ”11


                                f                                                sJt                                                 /%*ts<>/ &//<£?*&<$/
              -£ -/. /A o ? /£ > & /^ , &>,                                                f       /S/9&y£>e<? A .                                       <&U p J j2Jxa^<i _



                  ,%                               /&/>7 s £            /5^2 /%^C£>
                                                                             *                              /                              -j-
                                                                                                                                             £-
                                                                                                                                              i-
                                                                                                                                               S0Oi-<ij£L
                                                                                                                                                        ...<?


               £^1/% &C'S~                         /^ettaey-s.

               /dfl£~d* &t-ex.y                                                                    /4L&*^6~.       f



              '        /       ^Vz-                                     &.//                       PeZxcjz dclt^h'P $%
                                                                                                                     S-e<c^T
                            '4 h z/Y / y<                          ^                           <ri z> O ri£ 2 2 & & rji4 .           /J ^ e j-c '



                        ^'/b’-ry/' &A / y%C /^Ctcs-n                                                 PA^^Y^t'S'/dy&y ?^p*uZ_

                                                                                           2 ? ,£Lu.~ Y//4t> O                                                G/P
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                       For the attention of   Your
  To
          Chief Fire Officer                                  Ref.


          T/ADO GREEN                  Please contact         Our    016/2/1
 From
          WEST DIVISION                Tel.                   Ref.   BG/DG


Subject   INCIDENT AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND,    Date
          15TH APRIL 1989.                                            18.4.89


          On Saturday the 15th April 1989 at 1542 hours, by exchange telephone
          at my home address, I was instructed by Fire Service Control to
          attend a major incident at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, and to
          enter the ground from Leppings Lane.

          I then proceeded to the Stadium and arrived at 1603 hours. On
          arrival I reported to the Fire Service Control Unit and was
          instructed by Divisional Officer Hildreth to go to the Police Control
          Point, which was situated in the stadium, and take a radio hand set
          and act as liaison officer between Fire Service Control Unit and the
          Police Control Point. I then went straight to the Police Control
          Point to standby. Whilst I was in attendance at the Police Control
          Point until the end of the incident no messages were required to be
          sent between the two units. I laft the incident at 1726 hours and
          proceeded to my home address.




          T/ADO GREEN B 610
          COMMAND HEADQUARTERS.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY RRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                    For the attention of    Your
  To                                                        Ref.
          Chief Fire Officer

                                    Please contact          Our
 From     ACO Seaman                                                AS/DG
                                    Tei.                    Raf.



Subject   Hillsborough Incident - Saturday, April 15th 1989 Date     18.04.89



          1.       I was duty ACO on the above date.     I had worked at Fire
                   Service Headquarters during the morning and arrived back home
                   at about 1345 hrs and closed on button 9 (available at home)
                   on the encoder unit in my vehicle.

                   At about 1525 hrs I tuned into Radio Sheffield for news of the
                   FA Cup Semi Final matches which were being played.

                   It was immediately obvious that some kind of serious incident
                   had occurred at Hillsborough Football Ground and a reference
                   was made to fatalities. I anticipated that the Fire Service
                   would   most   likely have been called and I immediately
                   telephoned Fire Service Control. The number was continuously
                   engaged and it was not until about 1540 hrs that I managed to
                   contact Control.

                   I was informed that the Fire Service had received a message
                   "Major incident - cutting gear required" and was given details
                   of the appliances attending. I asked who the Senior Officer
                   mobilised to the incident was and why I had not been informed.
                   I was told that Control had me shown on a paging unit and that
                   they   had tried to contact me by that means without success.
                   They had therefore contacted ACO Hornsby who was attending. I
                   informed them that I had been at home since 1345 hrs and also
                   that I was mobilising to the incident.

                   I set off to Hillsborough shortly after 1540 hrs and arrived
                   at about 1614 hrs. Whilst enroute, I receiveda message via
                   Control from the Chief Fire Officer asking me to obtain
                   information on the exact details of the incident and to
                   contact him as soon as possible.

                   In fact the Chief Fire Officer arrived at the Control Unit
                   about one minute after I had arrived and a meeting took place
                   between the Chief Fire Officer, myself, ACO Hornsby and
                   Divisional Officers Hildreth and Lockwood. The Chief Fire
                   Officer wanted to know what actions were being taken by the
                   Fire Service and what the police required the Fire Service to
                   do. DO Hildreth was the Officer in Charge of the Fire Service
                   Control Unit. He said that in order to establish contact with
                   the police he had posted T/ADO Green outside the police
                   control box with a fireground radio so that he was able to
                   communicate from there to the fire service Control Unit.
                   ACO Hornsby had surveyed the position which was that numerous
                   people had been crushed on a part of the terraces and had had
to be removed onto the pitch where they were being given
resuscitation and first aid.    Fire Service personnel were
actively engaged doing this on the pitch and also in carrying
the injured to the club gymnasium which had been set up as a
clearing   station.   ADO Robjohns was in charge of that
operation.

The Chief Fire Officer decided it was necessary to make
contact with the Officer-in-Charge of the police control and
instructed myself and DO Lockwood to attend. When we arrived
there, T/ADO Green was at the top of the steps leading to the
control box and I asked him who the senior police officer was.
He said that there were a number of police officers inside and
he did not know which one was in charge. I went inside and
asked who the senior police officer was and indicated that the
Chief Fire Officer wanted to know if the police required any
assistance from the Fire Service beyond that which they were
currently undertaking.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson spoke very briefly to me and
said that he was in conversation (by telephone I think) with
the Chief Constable and could not talk further at that point
but he would speak with the Chief Fire Officer as soon as he
could. From what I could seefrom that point there did not
appear to be anything more required of the Fire Service.

I left the police control box        and sent a message to the
Control Unit by fireground radio. I was able to see the
section of terrace and confirmed that it was on the West Stand
terrace in the area behind the goal mouth. The area was clear
and I passed a message that myself and DO Lockwood were making
our way to that part of the terrace to investigate.

We inspected the terrace and it appeared that a single crush
barrier had failed at a point about 12 feet from the perimeter
fence. (I know now that two sections of a three section crush
barrier had failed) I passed this information to the Control
Unit and then returned to the Control Unit to speak with the
Chief Fire Officer.

The Chief Fire Officer and myself went to inspect the terrace
after which we went to the police control box. All casualties
had been removed from the pitch at that time. The Chief Fire
Officer spoke with ACC Jackson in the control box while I
remained outside.     When the Chief Fire Officer returned, a
message was received from ADO Robjohns via the Control Unit
indicating that the work of the Fire Service was almost
complete and suggesting that pumps be reduced to four.      The
Chief Fire Officer confirmed this action and we then made our
way to the gymnasium areapart of which was being used     as a
mortuary.    At this point the Chief Fire Officer decided to go
to West Division Headquarters to look at the file kept on
Hillsborough and asked that Divisional Officer Binnington, the
SFPO of West Division, be contacted and asked to meet him
there.    I then went to meet DO Binnington and the CFO at West
Division Headquarters and remained there until about 2200
hours.
11.      During the evening, I checked with Fire Service Control what
         status the display board was showing for me, bearing in mind
         the problem in contacting me earlier, and it was apparent that
         although the encoder in my vehicle was indicating that my
         status   had been updated, the Control computer was not
         registering for some reason.




A K Seaman
Assistant Chief Fire Officer
                                        STa / . b


                               , g / f / r   .?                                                    r. A



                                <£*w                                           if*                       fJ&J                                            •
H ttc S to /w ir t
                     / /       . l i         $         (a s - * s >                                 ^
fooTflAH*
^tK.aisA'd
                                                     *£ M :
                                                          s&s£rr-**y£- feiyC&ddf
 ir/f/tf                                                                                 spdfe***/         CtfS$Zqpsi£-              As&St

                                                        '                                          <                                 j


                     -^^J>                                               **-


                                                     ^ . * L ______ \ - ^ - * y £ * y * S
                     svdk^               as** z ^ t A t ^ / .                              ^                      /<is^W>^' ^


                     ^ 4               £*rj£*l                  C6*lf               C**k<A


                                                     ^«Ov-                                                                ^
                                             *              A*^                      £    yd^-.O


                                                                                                                          y 't£'&*               $




                                                            i»                                     y£(ytL*£&-                                &6-m*Tr~/

                                        A
                      i^ w .,                            O S & -^Cs            ^ y ^ . . y>. # ^ w            ^                              ^       ^   trv*
                                                             ^            ^         <U4s<r>^+*^               *£+£—           -    ^          c<^ju~d~



                                        y ^ U t ^                     <2s 4 * ? ^                                              £ &           /Us&£)

                                                 # A           yU > £ > ^-          &                   <r*~r ~       C" r* 7        ^       Z^      \
                                                                           A M s U             —                  -       —              -       ^
                                                 i                                                        —           '       '—
                                                                                                                                                         £iy^9
                                                                                                                              *> - ^ X
                           t       /^&JUL                                           /^ys£f             *c*c*7~*-*v                   /t*s€eZ^ '

                                        ^                                            d / &~*-                                                    tfS**
                                            sts^L                     /bJQ      A<d>2?^tr^>                   ,       j   *£-*/f«            y*u^£.
                      ^ < y S t c-                                                                       <*                              o ^
   Ufa*****
                  & hs £ u u £&-                 ^yrv~t<s*S>*+**~~ -
fo o ' /M* c-
                                   2             U44*<»r*yCipv*^Jts*f s 4 c &

 /jvW/9           JdLfn^^jf            S&^&ijL     /♦*>w /           <^>—*//
                  4djnsviL^f/      4*    44/1*     %/&.                          ^                                               *c
( (&y\ (r
                   k W 7^          4^^                                                                                       * & & £Z-r*uU,,

                                               *>** ££*>-£          •*<£+**/ s u p f          <
                                                                                              ^-e*+*~ *-                                ,
                 -j£~f       & C S                         yL^t^t               ~^£S          ~fa»-               ^r^<r&y-
                                                                          /<>^»>~                   / ^ r>-
                 A*^r+~0               #&*                   /     «^ry         P&                    &**&>                      £o™£*S


                  ^Jvv.                                6^8                                                             ^ cf* ^ >' /


                 **d?                                  x                         ^        ^                                       u^eS'


                            S$&r-Lr*^1-^                                    #7^-
                                         a / & yiA^>tr>^y                   &        s~*~ 1gCi'C"^*<in,
                                                                                           1            .-   <t}’
                                                                                                                j r * “- ■   '




                                                    z^ C l

                 ^Lv.                                        ^                                      ^
                                                           ft P*                          •
                                                                                          & —*/■ ^S&/1                                      ►
                 /^ />^v.                                           ^       <2^Cc
                / f ^
                                                                 7s^& •
                                                  *£^e       £%JZ>t^ yZe^/~tt^L


                                         )      <7^f       ate
                                             J%./o * ^ W * V )       /                                                           d?~~
                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


                 Headquarters Ref.                                                                                                                                                                  Division
I
I                Date.......................                                                                                                                                                        Station
t-
I
I
       SUBJECT
I                                                                                                t& j.
I
I
                  s    •\x
I                                   ( %              vxd.ur(\cv<A                                                                                     oA           l S \ “7
>
I
                                          To           (\t\             v<Ng-vd<iLA\                                                                    j                                       ^ S
                   )A+0^M
                   |A < |o ; > -w^.A
                                  <a*             la u
                                                  ya^^.               yC^»»£
                                                                        y          ^>Q5-Vi<jg
                                                                                   c ) *< -* m v_t>        C o rn Xn r
                                                                                                           v u                 sqj   \\       fi frv.
                                                                                                                                                   c eu\^<
                                                                                                                                                       Jj          Q*>         H
                                                                                                                                                                               i \f l ! \ o r ^ < u A <


                  \\fld Qor' ifc&A                                    Q$l" ~tijL          \\v\Xb^ooroV\Q^\                                    ^~Q'otL>&-H                     S>^clvu-H - ‘tN
                   tr>\oVVAfi-C^                  c o a \V q            \      lU e J t              %          W iqvjA cI                     V<L.A' j-gjdc                H> ~^Wj> v x L v d g j i t .

                                              ^             0 0 -t- w g .A             <xt       ^Va            - ^ W cL a j M                           £x\~         \ 3 ^ 9               V o '- Q ^           Q . ac\

                   \H t~\Bx^\(x(q_\                                   V-^f\Ao^ya >-^«gr\ u \\]L                                                               S U5>Ql\n                         4        1 U
                                               V^o.rNAL-                    €Lr\~tr-o,f\cJQ__,                        o \a \o L \^ g .c \                    v r\^ o > r» A a \lQ r\                    -W o ^

                  S io                 t& 1U CL-lfer^ 1WV                                                        MA.KQrt>J^»                             csx^^cA               X\jv±                 i^e;€-_____
                  WKJO\ \ f s i A                                      e~\i^         CJH*3>V                                               C^e\ tek^|\\y>ClOL^ic>/'^

      J           Va c ^ V£_g UQ&\ gxl                                      H-O^BO                               \P             ’^o <t V€tku-bdxl cult oo                                   (2-cU A.M,oXt-
      q           CXAc\                                tiv Vu>                     ^                       vA              UAOvfe                  CPf^u^vQ^                          a^cA            iUACt-O^.
                                                                                                                                                                                      ------------------------------

                   tyvil                                  Q ^ r o w > c \. .           S         & x A \ / o ^ ,c \                  1U S ^o                                                    S        t/Ao v A
     ej-.
                  1^0              CK/gj-                  clo^^\0 »j\A                          A         "IV/d-                    >f\cadQAV                     cyrA              1\\a^                K^a,____
     y
      J           ^>VvO^Nt\                       oAvvfc*IL                     C-S^cA                   <}\~*fcA                     4 ^ ^                  aAt^          ^W/V~                     Rw-S-Iva \
     :£            uc^>           Cc>r>\acH pct^V                                      jar           1W.         u>cuA-ent                              cxa A             K&.

      1            Q&3)ku^                        %&,                 cjuilxtb                           CW\\ro\                     0 \      ^CQT. cA ~ \ W Ql^ViQ.
                                                                                                                                                                   Cc^CJL

                   S       ~ \& n             C g ^ v - ^________________
                                                          rv A o to ro A ov.                                                   g          ________                ^ C y c lt Q                  C w \

                    ^OCjQg-d q A                                            IWg.       Q^vjl.\A '•nvt~Q>m^K                                     IIaQ t u A n d                            \-gAcli^ ^Vg
      I
      fi                        V \ q A $)Wac\                              W          c,;           .     ^n^cvjrg,                           ^> fj(\^!>or\                      KU.Wv£rouft
      0            CLOvI^Va oA            . V         V         v^Xir^^x'
                                                                     i^ S -xOx
                                                                            V^             V-Vc’NO^
                                                                                           V-Vc’N O^                                                 Cl\
                                                                                                                                                     Q l^lA           ^ V \O t3 (L .
      2,
                                              o                         W ~V^v            io.            Q>bO»^A ,AV^g. V c ^ O M                                                W          m       ; t | C\ ft
                  ~^U
                  . i .. ~   i >•».l>.ir>,i
                                                              Us 6sr>
                                               i,i ................—...
                                                                                   V f i "A a ^ w M v A                 0-
                                                                                                                     \w^ j '
                                                                                                                                     K ' ^'    ^
                                                                                                                                                     i■■ W' ——
                                                                                                                                                            ) ' ■»                • d c \ Vi. ^ r W ^ v f^j
                                                                                                                                                                       ........ .i........——i
      J
                  WW              1^ Q j          ^ ttS u rN (k                 or        c ld a v g _ a a ^ \a a                             cr>       HtvQ         ^v\ cV\ .                      &     U .o x b _
      I*
      *                                              onV o                  Vvo>                          yr>        c -rd o v                               & £>g-.^jftoA.'vA

      X            Q,rcoJ ^                   4               ^ ,.           x ,XXdd<<33 \pn
                                                                             x,                                 d{                                   0J\           Vo^oJivObb Ao-hV.
                  (^Ls)                                                                   o \,                                       O jyoV             d v A M ^ O V -A b                      r \o \v C J L

                   oWcAT^ Ko^v^ca                                                  ok                ~%\h                &\X                    r\           \a          A\V(l\\ _                              U3c0^
                  cUvvftufi •fccdf W                                                                     Q,     Wv^e                            ^ u u W
                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                                                          A              tLC&wsWoh


                                     Q><^ osbv^ou^ro. to.e^ \a<sl>^                                                                            cK<AfA\^            uAojr&jcj
                    VHK^iSShX^-Q.                                ^             <g3Xo>AJ\Vg.d                     ^                    VaoW                   Cpr\\aC-t                      Ul\^-              \W
                             V                                          \ \-                 '           v .     ' .                               iL              -\-A              \          ^       1________
                     ^Avor                           loo,              e^icgy             \-x                                                                 |\fek } V^oX \secjcm,,^Q_
!   *.
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FiRE SERVICE                                                                                          2 ,

                   Headquarters Ref.........................................                                                                             .. Division


                   Date       ............. .......... ..................................                                                                ... Station




         SUBJECT
                     ^         KtxA                 r>Q           ^Q£Xf\k>                           vA                       U ^ \o ^A jio                     ^
                                                               o«- 9o\>
                        f
                    (^vxQ^vt t^o                                 uaAiL                      fe>    (A Qjs.fr ~^Q         j\Ack          <A %e>£»l ^ Aft
                    d't^^Lx  c&SH’f r V ^    C a & u q A ,\ta W x a c M                                                                    %Xb o^oiAci
                                                                                                                                                 •“ ■   \ W
                          w            ^                   ^            ^5"'
                                                         3 "
                    0>Q-\jW KQ- to A ja A o ru U a , ~^v£)^e. Ci^VAcqtvjJb                                                                            flc^T v U L t W \'na
I
                    a fc ^ io n -
I
I
                                  ^                             Kaq Aft. CLoAacCV' u-mL                                                                    CXAA
I                                                        a ri           ol"iVa_i^<Lc\ 4c-<sm fa iM  Ova Q\/-gr ia £ ,u i C
                                                                                                                         d Jk -
I                   . -t-           V '                  ^             r m       * \ * i.» ■jtv_r+' P(XS>U<\\A>'-&5 i^-QjrQ_
                                                                       t^QJb    O lA\/ oJo A A W t
I
I                   U^aV\Q\ cAggk yg_ck V=.                                                                            R-sx^A c^nA o|. tW ^VcU .
I                   ^         c^Q-Ca           A^A                             VyoQfi^             ku         UQJJy            Itu/^         >QjsA       a^lU.
I
I
                        VQU-<\c\                Ovt\A                                                          A.^Vst», ^V'Vg                                  ^^POTtQ.
I                                         V -Q q a U ^ ll.                      ^             aiAvvk&A          1W        c_s>AVa-C^            ^ vo vA        W ttsu\o\
I
                    rs\\             Qa/GuA cAA^                           j^S sono^A                    <V\c\ t^Jb^C -vV oA ot^                      t~=> ~fac>       Slt\A
I
I                   o\ \o. lj\\V(ik t^eng, r\u.MorooJs Cm>uoA"Ugjb t^qtveA
I                   cttiaxx^3rcxA.cQ^ ,                       UU             /S\              ^         c s y ^ -o V
I
                    u&£>           cxAw'JbO^                                          a           ^ V v^ M oj-
                                                                                                             n A W \            A W h _ vQ'Or^
I
1                    CLG5>i\ cJltuLb                          V^L
                                                                UlL^Vr^s.\^
                                                                          ^                       (Xb^^OACfi . X                                    \Q>tlu.M i
>
                                            A                                                \o     jfc\fc>    loo-cxtl
1
(                                              UvJ-W^ ~\Vji5 ^qjaoc\                                     ^ VvPtxr A            s y o r ^ -q              c^i*^nou-\d
                     V~a A1.
                           iO
                            10 f*ta
                                 *y-dVAr                    ~K j
                                                               O_> WcsoAu ^ io^ A
                                                                   K^U^\y^uV>^\                               ^Q3t> >
                                                                                                                    <vau>
                                                                                                                     YOW            t     C o^K A rvA               f|    Y^L,
                      VA^-A4jiA^ .                 ^              q.A,Vi Jlgj                             UocW^O^eL                       ^V-6. ^^■Qwoj'Vo^ at
                    iW           hpujn               ro^vkaVAu                              <A^x■^v^Q         cMgy           °jnA       v^   ^ v&^S-A           lV.tt.l~~
                             prior                 b>                                       uiA               ^asiujjvo              o\      cLgJa,wgv\t^eb

                    V&opvWl j                     -^urtUr-                  cxkIdvAo^Q^                    vV o u \ A>                                         fe        fci
                    ?Qa \^Vqcm L R ^ cvA                                qa     A            O^ -\Ia Q,        f^T>Vv»A
                                         <$          V^-Hoa.NQ.A                                   \j W 4-oo\.l3cxjA- ^\y\c3\                                   <^Xk.


                            ^ O U ja A                      <X         C V c n                        H aW       im      r          vO>oqa       o3~xxx.-vA
                                       to_r               o\ ~\W - |\ vVc-k b>                                 (p ^ H           ^Aa)r A’ ' ^
                    i                                             t                                                                       I
                    Co>bK.cAtv^> yjj^.iyvJLj oWv.^VCKACg ; ^                                                                         fNKOC-figjcl o A \s fco
                              UPvaJxuH                    .
                                                                                                     v^eca.      c\ Wy'Ao-d             y«>\o       ^                          t
                     ~^W                            ^         C^OA                                  o—                       ^xvH         'H aV ^C S ^ ODrfe>I\t\\’\C
                        •^VO^VvvoAV-^                                      S o <^3^V\Xvfi3& ,                                  cAa\v^.        ^ 0     e S o> V/>Q^>
             ■<■}«* '•         SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
              .'c?                                                                                                                       3»

                               Headquarters Ref..........................................                                                                      .Division
           .1
                               Date................................................................                                                            .. S tation

*         r \

             I
                     SUBJECT
                                                                                    Qqj^uci^v\                  Iaa-ac^ »v>Cj cxH<\.            Q^ro^ittolVeu^ <S>*
■S8 :?Sa                         CflSsWXAM-£b                          'ki ^Wjbs-vnA A
                                                                                     Atom.
                                                                                       t q M.                   cUUl
                                                                                                                c        w     K
                                                                                                                               (v^>       o\    y/^uLtu                      \i>

•
             i
          ■"■:
                                 •|tu5           <xKA.,               ^ 1*4           SftrvvW-                                                         \v/.0-c\        lo
                                                                                                                                                          <A        cdr1l^
:V ^                               c x io a t o f >                                                    1       ^       <XXi<xA<xUj2.
                                                                                                                                u ~                    !\SiX
                                                                                                                                                         ^          OAcl
    -i - r                       SltH jU A H cjA                     ha                         c\gjl\o^ctA
                                               * f\ CO                     \\o^h>Vju                       Ho5 fi.                            us’ilL H<L ^ J k ^
•'V             I
> v:••-
                                       A        ‘
                                                S           o.dujltaftA                   lliH         c\ ~\\a         fclt* a^Tio *->. V o             <*dv/0^od             WJ?

          /; I
                                 te d - U                                                                                        _®1_lW—W<UcW\ -
                                               WMXr                       o>t^0             S h o >cM a<Ij^           c&s-t-wQil              ChacL $> v C \ W 4 < l 4.

                                             *V w 3
                                               ^ HJKCu'^                                              qA      ic             V\/\ &J>i            Ov           v^
                                                                                                                     - f e
      7. i                        <2oj)W.olt     V l M o y ,oJ                                 CM\C          g.cXxv                                    Vv tit V^LnJb, £sA
      ■         I                           3"
                                      ■cLar       Ml
                                               VJKV                                                   lo*\o^oy        yg-^1 k.ct-



          ■ !

             :l




                                                                                                                                                                             CR-FS-0
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                       For the attention of    Your
  To                                                           Ref.
          Chief Fire Officer

          ADO Robjohns B.L. 169        Please contact          Our    06/2/2
 From                                                          Ref.
          Training Centre              Tel.                           BR/MR


Subject   Incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium     Date
          on the 15th April 1989                                      17.4.89



          On Saturday 15th April 1989 at 1517 hours, whilst mobile to an
          incident at Shiregreen, Sheffield. I was informed by Fire Service
          Control, that a major incident had occurred at the Hillsborough
          Football Stadium. I informed Control that I would redirect to this
          incident.

          I arrived at the Stadium at 1529 hours and immediately rendezvoued
          with StnO Swain at the Leppings Lane entrance. I obtained
          information from the StnO to the effect that, numerous casualties
          were involved, suffering crush injuries and asphyxiation, he had
          requested make pumps 10 for resuscitation equipment and that in his
          opinion it was confusion and chaos within the ground. I advised the
          StnO that I would take over command of the incident and that he
          should advise control of that fact and that Rivelin 1 was contact
          point for the incident and he was to assume the duties of Control
          Officer, at the appliance. I then commandeered a fireground radio
          and proceeded to the ground through the- tunnel leading into the West
          stand Terracing. En route I passed numerous casualties suffering
          minor injuries and shock.

          On entering the ground, the bottom terracing of the stand was
          relatively empty, the fans either having left the ground or
          congregating on the pitch. I made my way onto the pitch in order to
          ascertain the gravity of the situation, it was an hopeless task due
          to the hundreds of fans and numerous police officers massing at this
          end of the pitch. It was obvious that there were a large number of
          casualties but to determine the nature of injuries or whether First
          Aid assistance was being administered, was impossible. I attempted
          to make contact with the Senior Police Officer in charge on the
          pitch, but because I had no means of identifying who this was I
          approached a Police Inspector. I suggested that attempts ought to be
          made to clear the pitch of those fans not directly assisting in
          casualty handling, this would then enable me to determine those
          casualties not receiving attention.

          I then made contact with StnO        land StnO Fletcher and obtained
          from them an overview of the situation. I was advised that
          casualties were being cleared to the Penistone Road end of the pitch.
          I decided to make my way to this end of the ground and control and
          deploy Fire Service Personnel where required. I advised the contact
          point to send all available personnel and resuscitators to this end
          of the pitch where numerous casualties required assistance. Whilst
          in control of this situation, I was advised by a fireman that there
          were further casualties requiring assistance in the gymnasium, I
          deployed personnel to this location.
During this period I heard over the Fireground radio that DO Lockwood
was now in command of the incident. I advised DO Lockwood of the
situation at the main casualty clearing area and requested that in
order to speed up the evacuation of casualties to hospital, further
ambulances should be deployed to the Penistone Road end of the
ground.

I remained on the football pitch until all the casualties on the
pitch had been removed, if then deployed a crew to make their way
around the perimeter of the pitch to confirm that no further
casualties required assistance, I then proceeded to the gymnasium.

The gymnasium was divided into 3 sections, the first section was a
make shift mortuary containing approximately 50 fatalities, the
centre section was in use as the casualty handling area.
Approximately 30 casualties suffering from all types of injury, were
in this area. Fire Service personnel were involved in resuscitating
and rendering general first aid at this location. I arranged for all
available personnel and equipment to be deployed to the gymnasium.

ACO Hornsby made contact with me at the gymnasium and I advised him
of the situation, he advised me that he was now in command of the
incident. Shortly afterwards SDO Smoothey arrived and I reiterated
the situation.

I remained at the gymnasium overseeing casualty removal and acting as
Fire Service Liaison Officer, until no longer required.




ADO Robjohns B.L. 169
                         Incident Narrative.

Hillsborough Incident.

The call to this incident was received at Control at 1517 hours.
I proceeded with two pumps Central 1, Central 2, and E.T. (10
men).
The route followed to the stadium was along Penistone Road, the
route was reasonably clear, the weather was dry and sunny.
On arrival at the stadium there was no one there to meet us which
I expected given the message said (major disaster).
We drew the appliances to a halt just before the first set of
gates into the stadium, I dismounted the appliance and asked a
police officer where we were expected to go, he said he had no
knowledge of any incident or direction. I asked a further police
officer if we could get in via the double gates, he said yes and
immediately opened the gates into the roadway down the side of the
stadium, I went to a gate adjacent to the entry gate, the police
officer said they hadn't called us and didn't need our assistance
but perhaps we should go further down the road, this we did.
I ran down the road to the end of the stadium where the police
observation box was situated and was shown the route to the pitch
by a Marshall.
I proceeded onto the pitch the crowd had not moved at all. The
pitch around the area of the Leppings Lane goal area was full of
people some casualties, some relatives and friends of casualties,
people stood, people kneeling, people laid down. Many people in
obvious shock this included St Johns ambulance personnel, police
as well as the fans.

Once on the pitch I asked several police officers who was in
charge and where the casualties were being moved to - they
couldn't tell me.

It was clear to   see that no rescues as such needed doing, but
bodies and casualties obviously needed removing from the scene. I
gave my men instructions to carry out first aid and resuscitation
that required doing and to try to be as selective as possible
(there were only five men available initially).
I spoke briefly to Station Officer Swain who informed me he was
having difficulty in getting to the incident.I informed   him I
was at the actual incident. It was obvious to me we were going to
need more men than the initial turnout and there would be an
urgent need for resuscitators. I then lost contact with him and
my own drivers,  I sent a Liverpool fan with a message to my
drivers to make pumps 10, this he did, but in the meantime Station
Officer Swain had already sent the message.
At this point I contacted Fm |                the driver of Central 1 and
asked him to try to get ambulances to the point where our
appliances were as I knew this route was clear - this he together
with F m I       Idriver of Central 2 did. Shortly after this Temp.
Station O f f i c e r [ r e p o r t e d to me I asked him to go to the
roadway were the appliances were parked and set up a casualty
handling area, which he did, I then proceeded to try to get the
most urgent cases transported to this casualty handling area,
approximately 20 to 30 persons were transported by means of make
shift stretchers to this point, approximately 10 persons were
taken off the field by ambulance.
At this stage Firemen from Darnall and Ringinglow were arriving
and giving first aid. This was also the time when ADO Robjohns
arrived on the field.
ADO Robjohns informed me that a temporary morgue had been set up
in the gymnasium, I responded by having the obvious dead removed
to the gym and the other casualties to the point I had set up.
DO Lockwood arrived on the pitch I gave him a brief report of the
situation, he informed me he would go to the police control box
overlooking the incident and set up a control point which he did.
ADO Robjohns informed DO Lockwood that a casualty handling centre
had been set up in the gym but there was a shortage of ambulances
- the number of serious casualties was quite low at this stage and
the decision was made to move the remainder to the gym, and
discontinue the casualty handling area I had set up and divert the
ambulances to the gym.




STATION OFFICER FLETCHER.
                                                    V*                /I Cvf-c-l Vj/^


                                                   /-/«// S’ ^ o f o ^ ( _____ J / v c i Xa^. f"


           Tie.                   fJi                     Vtx              H-
                                                                           r ^ .>> ,                                 t >.d_^A
                                                                                                                         —    V                                   v_s»
                                                                                                                                                                  •  —e*~Si             *"**•C‘ '             ■J - CJ                kjT


                          4—         ^              CjJb"                   *         f7          iu (t S                         ^                | 7 jt* C1 ^ -G-C (■£• .c c                          w * ~v.          —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1*p
           C <£>—

                                                   C - o              '      . C-c?ri                       2.               -        e t                          ( J O - m                  J •

                                                   -r                                 ,                     n           }L,                            f                K             ,/le           s J^\l.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         &chu^                       w o
                                                       /» u x          ^ O vJ>^                             fV -d c jo c /                                              O                            -" ’


               ® -           ^                 f<£.-*\                                            I?                                                    «“                        v~- Cs-fc                              t^Vv.'^

                                               H_p                       o P . ~H
                                                                                                                                                    i                            \
               C. •*©cs                  ,     I1
                                                — C-              v.o
                                                                  t , \ ^C.     •,                                  v_o ®>>                        c^~* m                   - - -;           i>
                                                                                                                                                                                              —■-«•*n a

                                                   ^
                                                   C--‘«V                  -v *
                                                                              "t“V                     »                I
                                                                                                                     0>_i                   f*'-C-           ~li ITCv'J rA3-VV-
                                                                                                                                                                      CT*
                                                           t ,                            .                                      t-                                  ,   .  ■   \                                    ,. v             '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                  to f'-.s                 r ■-                                             i«- -CLft. ^                               U'-i-    o - ...


                                                                                                                                                                                  U-.                        -           T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -       \U./*-
                                                   LJ C                JkAjd                           HZJ^                Of? V ^ c . . l                                        vO          ''■'••■
                                                                                                                            r S'
           *                                                      /*\                                                    v *      *
                                                                                                                                                                                  . ^                1 U                               ■
           '-■~C_f''0(vX-                    'La ~               ■*'\-f>-&r                       t-C. ;                o^             /_
               \           „> . ;
                           ■
                           - -X *•-_a ^r-._               r
                                                              -i.iw•              V ■"                     Cx-l.v
                                                                                                                , .- \ , 0 „
                                                                                                                  •                                *•              j , . .-.■

                   r. f                                                                                             V            \
           £.-;--^ uu,                                                    u .> ^                  '-o e.i^                            ^ov. •
                                                                                                                                           ,<, t v(.

           I
           fcwX                   ! r.% c-J
                                  ^       1            r- o            L

           x,                                                                                                                                                     v c_c...r
            J              tt,£> ^           "•'        '■ -          .                                    i


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •VC.       r
                        .\                   1.4 ,            r\i'»                       L-\> v-                                         ,'-C.                   VO O v
               ^ Ci,. ■■''‘                                ,
                                                           '1' *‘-                                                                                                     '-
                                               v                             X                                      V                   1                  =->-             K d   t             r-
                                         e, ^ » -.v.-v ,                         -'                                                                                                                  X->
                                                                                                                                        N k            »                                                             U       a       A '
                                                                                                                                      ■ ?J - 4f*   t
                                                                                                                                                        r r
                                                                                                                                                        C-C^
                 t                            s..                ‘
                                                                 -f'l                     ■}o              ^ c*£~
                t \u                     -I • v~i*                                        ^                                                                                              i
                     J                                                                    ,                                              V             ^                       e.s.^oti. VW                 :_c
       ,        1'^J                 •,;                c.. cl
                                                                                      \cl              V            »c<s_p c                           ^                                 h                                           -1,^
       v           -                                        •                                                           r\        -r...                                                                       * 'J               '
                                                                   r\                             fj 6          .                     : ; G.,t"
                                                       c       ,lJ r’                             'j
       '   ■    '     A... Cwj-
       !                             ,
                           ! »-                                                                                                                                                       i*                                 I   ■!•
       us Q               C v... >                                                                         •,                                    \.                     I...          11 ,,             ,_J , .-■     A r' ' '-f'
                            \                      .                  i.              „                     -o                   I            - •;■                      ;^            ■-”■                            ''        r          .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <-_5c^>
       .}-•• \ -                                   ‘                         1 ^                                                                                  C sjc.-.’••'"•■ -                  1-e.^r
     0 U vJl^W                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         »n          J■»
                                                                                              r        ,,Jcx                     ^                      + U . . f ‘ ^ (.
C-                 i_o r*.^
                                    V                                         ! 0„ I ^     V
                                                                                     CT> > '•. r .
                                                                                                                                      4-'
                                                                                                                                       < Wo
                                                                                                                                                                  f
                                                                                                                                                                  r
                                                                                                                                                                    ' V, ;                      c.           <-              J
                                                       f \ ^ <■                        CJ                                                                           C   -



                                                                 I.                                                                                                ■
                                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                   -'O ■-VJ-




                                  oft 0 0*3 |                                                                       w , ^ f fe.of                                                                                                »
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r   l       "     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '       ’-w




            6
     <> J-Vf (C C          r^
        . I                                                                                                                                                                              1-                -        |V -Jp
                                                                                                                                        f-LoM                c       <-.-• ~ «
     Co                                                  C           ••-■ - O' *                                                                  ■w
                                                                                                                                        4-'^                   f. £*         tC!_(6,C U ^ A                    j
                                             \      ',                             /*

                                                                                                                                                               __       J            C   U A    <-- . C.- '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •^ i."->vj
                I                           v^sic_cLfl-A                    ato                          f-                          ^ 0
         ’S w t a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   'S
                                                                                                    i),t O,
                                                                                                         .                               ^                                                     ° ’— c l              si
         *V<2_vC?_(Jvj?. J                               V-£> r w *3 V
                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                               p;,                        Cv   -   CS


         ^- ' ■-■'             r-~ s                            ,’
                                                                 y    *_A\I*             V' \\ <5<\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¥■
                                        -   v I V - <,                                                                                                       '*•, ^•V-'*-

         '.A          c*                                                      "i -»~.-                              I       ;:.V■'
                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                 a                       (H u
                 ' \ it    -       L--. U
         «*••-i<=v'..;• .c   1— v.»’'a_i’ ‘
                                                                                    ^•-r,    r* i   . >
                                                                                         ^           1    ±                        V:
                                                                                                                                                                     Al^js

                                                                                                                                                                                -H“                                 V,
                                                                                                                                                         WV,          C. ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                \
                                                 ••v-                    ->
                                                                                                    s



                                                                                                    <7
                r-—- JN._                                            jw p e>                        •i-'—

                                                         .   ‘*?**»»/v      £            i C) .'-
                                   r'
    S-               r>


\
                               V
                                                                                                                                                                       ..> ■3 .




                                                                ft                            “••5                      h    J       'tvWr\ou.Jr                             e~~d * k^L/>.J>                              U j 6oJ
                                                                                                          D                               ^V         \f\.
                                                                                                                                                       x—

                                                                                                                    ^          C, e~-«■."!     (> • t"   V ^ >fj            .~ ~ f   1                                     -[■
                                                               V' .
                                                               ! *_AA            'jJ o              Or                        ^
                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                               r-,.               4'rf •»M       \ C>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r *.v.’
          f '/C^                            C *:
                i                                                                                                                                                                                  \           (                    i-
              - lv.                ■f ■-•                                                                     V                                                      OJ'P                CuA.          '           fi |'_S-.-— i
                                                                                                               1                                                 - It
                                                                                                              L.c                                            V. ' I ■-,

                                    I                                                    i
                                                                                         --'*>C*' O                 t*.'.; "{
                                                                                                                                          *f'i "                   or ~ •' ”
                                                                        /
                          ‘P                                                                                         ^-1 r>                              -Kc                                                               U_a :-v-
                                                                                                                ; (
                                                                                                                 cx.
                                                                                                                   -■
                                                                                                                    ’      c--w,                                                                   (               ix.,c3

         .A
                                                                                                                                                           U-                                                             _x_r v
                                                                                                                                                                        4- v
                                                                                                                                                                    1 • . '!                      *           ',,- -■
                                                                         .;-                 --s
                                  ! i C---W ^ ;■ i
                                                                                                                       .V' -*' •■. f
    'a. ?| ts'*~              ■: "         ~--   -
                                                                           _                  ’.r'’
                                                                                                              {-■•               "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O l-Q
        c O.^ V*                                                               -!u *                 f - - - ~ > '«■'                                               ^          1=^ =' -.
                                                                                                    i’
                                                                                                     wv ‘ r ‘- / J -   (■. ■ C J         .

                                    r v              ,■                  »_                         ru                                       .fus .                      - JA —                                      i; — c,w.s.
                                   H     r       4lws.                                                                                                                                                                        ^
                                                                i' „ •    .                                  h* . l                          J              T ~ .i ,                                      c     J ^               ■ '^ °
                                                                4 u,t ^ vvC\                                      '                  "
        -tT*                 v^U^.               A3 o           Icvl^NfeUfs                                                                      ON                                                   •
                                                                                                                                                                                       i     Q.v.Vf* -s{".'
                                            O                                                 ;v^P                                               ^         1"'■'                                                                  •         ,
                                                          .     v                        .               .                                                                                                                        J
    A '\                               i v ' v -*                              id &                >*r          ^                                    *
    ’
                                                                                                                                                         ,,-S            t> ■t!-<                     *-XJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                        \                                 ci»
        ?         U v ^ C,                  41,           c !? , u r ^ -                                                         ^                                      - ^                '...                      ■



                                                                                                                                                                                                              >f
    + u                                    c—             - v' ^ ~                      v-            ^                      f' - - v
                                                                                                                          '' u '"'
                                                                                                                           J-      f                                                                  C       ~S-    j   ■




•
                                                                                                                                                                                              \
                                                                    ,                               *■•< I . • ,   ;          9                                                                       .
                                                              t>„         * -                                                     fs                                                                  I                           1,
                        ,T ' °                                                         i_,              -4-      V”      "i        ’ ■> i V~
                                                                                       TU_            j ?•'-•wC--'- -•'- 1 "
                V> SA_U- V t-~"
                                             k,           '-•                f V: ■
    U_^C> a              I        C_^ C>       ->
                                                                                                                                                                I             f. . ■- . !■ ,«v.
                                                 •V                      i.».i               c'       C -\C -           'i   o


                                                                         ?                    '                                                                               ?                                          w
                                                                                                                                             ' "                •rv.-w'-J ^ o '                                          r
                                             ^        ^ ‘-- ^ ^                                                                      ^                                                            ^                      u , c-           '^v.
            Cc~oL J h~                       kc~^d\^v. <\                              c-^ ^ r - s -                         cv ^            wS'" '”                                                                     .            f

            V v ,.>      V L c .c --                                r.             :                            -
                  -'■■■:'            .■                                                                                      VjJ         oJr             tu:u                                             - ■' -
                                                                                       “l
                                                                                        #yvJuLkji,
                      C O. 0 '•>- =■ '■ ■ -S- -                                                                                                                                           ,V, - ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                \.                                ■‘’-f
                                                                                                                                                     h                                - ^fVi
                                                                               ,         i                             ^
                                                                                                                       -iV» o. -
                                                                                                                               ‘1
                                                                                                                                  r.                 '‘-A           ^
                                                                                         ■L         'r~
            c L ~ . >•- v « > -    o                   " ^                                                                                                                                                          <• i
                                        .c)          cV.•„iC.O--<v "                         '-V^




            '7H C
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE _ ^                                       s ,-
M EMORANDUM                                                   C     > 0       « :   ' ,

                                       For the attention of    Your
  To      Chief Fire Officer                                   Ref.       C

                                       Please contact             Our     06/2/2
 From     S .D.O. Smoothey A. 517                                 Ref.
                                       Tel.                               AS/AJ

          S.S.C. Incident - Hillsborough Football Ground
Subject   Sheffield Saturday 15th April 1989                   Date        20.4.89


          As duty S.D.O. I was informed by Brigade Control of a reported 'Major Incident'
          that had been reported at Hillsborough Football Ground. Control were not able
          to inform me of the exact nature of the Incident at that time, but said that
          six appliances had been mobilised and that D.O. Lockwood and A.D.O. Robjohn
          were attending.   I instructed Control to inform me on any further messages,
          and decided to proceed to the Incident. Enroute to the Incident I was aware
          from 'Radio Messages' that appliances had been 'made up' and that more Senior
          Officers were attending.   I arrived at the ground and not being aware of the
          exact Contact Point, I parked my car outside the General Office Block and
          proceeded on foot. Being informed by Service Personnel whilst enroute that
          the Contact Point was at the Lepping Lane End of the ground.   After reporting
          to the Control Unit, I was briefed by A.C.O. Hornsby and instructed to over­
          see the roles of D.O. Lockwood who was in charge of a group of personnel
          attempting to rescue/recover persons injured in the area of the Lepping Lane
          terrace and on the football pitch, and A.D.O. Robjohn who was in charge of
          Service Personnel in the Training Gym at the rear of the new stand. Fatalities
          were being taken to that location.   I was issued with a hand set radio and
          proceeded to make contact with D.O. Lockwood.  I contacted him on the Gantry
          of the Police Surveillance Point at the junction of the Main Stand and the
          Lepping Lane Terrace.   He pointed out to me the roles of Fire Service
          Personnel who were on the area of the pitch, and informed me that in general
          all the fatalities had been removed, all Personnel were looking to assist
          in any first aid. From the vantage point of the Gantry I was able to oc-oerve
          that several hundred fans were on the pitch, there was a large Police presence
          on the pitch and in the area of the terrace at the rear of the Goal Posts. I
          was satisfied that at that stage no further persons remained trapped in the
          area of the terrace immediately behind the goal. D.O. Lockwood informed me that
          there was soon to be a public address announcement that the match had been
          abandoned, and we agreed that it would be best if Fire Service Personnel were
          to leave the area of the pitch before such an announcement was made.   I was
          concerned for a possible adverse reaction from the supporters who were roming
          about on the pitch.   I proceded to the pitch and instructed Fire Service
          Personnel to leave the area of the pitch as I was concerned about a possible
          crowd reaction to a pending announcement that the game had been abandoned.   In
          fact the announcement was made whilst I was on the pitch and was received in a
          good and orderly manner by spectators. I proceded to the Gym and made contact
          with A.D.O. Robjohn who had several Fire Service Personnel with him. He
          showed me the fatalities layed out on the Gym floor and indicated that
          resuscitation had been carried out, but that all actions had now concluded.
          Strict control on entry into the area of the Gym was being exercised by the
          Police, and I was satisfied that Fire Service Personnel in the area of the
          Gym could remain and carry out any assistance required of them in assisting
          with fatalities.   Liquid refreshment was available to all members of the
          emergency services within the area of the Gym. Several Fire Service
          Personnel informed me of their efforts at resuscitation and the harrowing
          sites they had observed.   After a period of time I returned to the area of
          the pitch and noted that the ground had almost emptied,   I returned to the
          Gym and informed A.D.O. Robjohn that if all tasks had been completed, he
          should assemble all Fire Service Personnel together with any equipment and
          return to the Control Unit. A.D.O. Robjohn informed the Control Unit of my
          instruction to return but was informed to remain with Fire Service Personnel
          Continued....
                            _ 2 -


in the area of the Gym until advised by the Control Unit. I assumed that
Officers at the Control Unit remained concerned about the reaction of
Football fans and felt it safest for Fire Service Personnel to remain in
the Gym until the crowd had moved away from the area outside the stadium.
I returned to the Control Unit to see if I could be of assistance in any
further role. At this point A.C.O. Hornsby informed me that the incident
from an Operational Point of view was being wound down. I left the incident
at approximately 1730 hours. •

Whilst I observed the results of the incident, i.e. the damaged/broken
crowd barrier, restrictions in the crowd escaping from the area of the
terrace at the Lepping Lane End., I did not witness any actions at the
time the incident commenced, and as such I am unable to offer any
positive judgements as to any actions/omissions taken at that time.




a   .   omuuLiiey   J

Senior Divisional"Officer
                           SOOTH Y ORK SH IRE COUNTY F IR E SE R V IC E




 IN C ID E N T -   HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND, S H E F F IE L D -                15T H A P R IL , 1 9 8 9

       R EPO R T O F C H IE F F IR E O F F IC E R H . E . W R IG H T, Q F S H , M I F i r e E , F B 1H




Whilst at my home at Bawtry Road, Doncaster at about 1545 hours on
Saturday, 15th April, 1989, I received a telephone call from Fire
Service Control informing me of an incident at the Hillsborough
Football   Ground, Sheffield to which cutting equipment had been
requested with reports of fatalities and injuries to spectators. I was
informed that ten pumping appliances and two emergency tenders were in
attendance and the control unit had been mobilised.    Assistant Chief
Fire Officers Hornsby and Seaman had been mobilised but were not yet in
attendance, the senior officer in charge being Assistant Divisional
Officer Robjohns at that time.

Information from the incident was limited and as I expected an
Assistant Chief Fire Officer to arrive there in a relatively short
period of time I requested the next message.

No further information about the incident was received so I decided to
travel to Sheffield to make myself more available to attend the
incident should the need arise, booking mobile at 1554 hours.

The messages about the incident heard on the County Fire Service radio
scheme were sufficient for me to realise that a serious incident
existed at the Hillsborough football ground and I proceeded there
arriving at 1612 hours.

On arrival I was directed to an area behind the South Stand of the
stadium where I parked my car and was met by Temporary Station Officer
Clay who provided a very brief outline of the situation and advised me
of the location of the County Fire Service Control Unit in Leppings
Lane to which we both walked.

At the Control Unit I met Assistant Chief Fire Officers Hornsby and
Seaman, and Divisional Officers Hildreth and Lockwood and was advised
of the situation which was that many casualties had been dealt with
both on the pitch and at the gymnasium and these included fatalities.
At that time County Fire Service personnel were in the gymnasium
assisting with casualties or standing by at their appliances awaiting
further instructions. Contact had been established with the senior
Police Officers at their control point in the ground and Temporary
Assistant Divisional Officer Green had been positioned outside that
control point for liaison purposes and was in contact with the County
Fire Service Control Unit by radio.

Assistant Chief Fire Officer Hornsby advised me that he had contacted
the Senior Police Officer at their control point who had advised him
that no further action by the County Fire Service to that already being
undertaken was required.     I was also advised of the comments heard
regarding the possibility of crowd disturbance if the announcement was
made which abandoned the match.
I took over control of the Fire Service activities at this incident at
1618 hours. I considered the need for detailed information from the
Police as to requirements of the County Fire Service and the situation
as it existed at that time and instructed Assistant Chief Fire Officer
Seaman and Divisional Officer Lockwood to make personal contact with
the Senior Police Officer for that purpose.      A radio message was
received from Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman advising me that no
further requirement of the County Fire Service was needed, the pitch
and terrace were clear of casualties and that he was proceeding onto
the terrace area where the accident occurred.

The spectators had during this time been leaving the stadium at the
Leppings Lane end, a number of which made congratulatory remarks to the
personnel situated there.

As the crowd cleared somewhat I instructed Assistant Chief Fire Officer
Hornsby and another officer to personally check the situation at the
gymnasium where casualties were still being dealt with.

Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman and Divisional Officer Lockwood
then returned to the Control Unit and provided information relating to
the situation on the West Terrace and I decided to view this myself
with Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman.

I decided to visit the Police Control Point at the stadium and whilst
en route received an up to date report from Assistant Chief Fire
Officer Hornsby regarding the situation in the gymnasium with a
suggestion that we reduce the number of appliances and crews at the
ground.

Upon my arrival at the Police Control Point I observed Assistant Chief
Constable Jackson on the telephone and Chief Superintendents Mole and
Duckenfield all of who I knew together with other officers. I spoke to
Chief Superintendent Hole and advised him that I proposed to reduce the
number of crews at the ground to four unless the Police required the
retention of more. No objections to this reduction were made and
thanks were expressed for our attendance. An instruction was given by
radio for all but four pumping appliances to return to their relative
bases.

I proceeded to the gymnasium where I met Assistant Chief Fire Officer
Hornsby, Divisional Officer Lockwood, Assistant Divisional Officer
Robjohns and Station Officer        ~| The senior Police Officer was no
readily apparent to me and no other Fire Service presence was evident.
As I could only see fatal casualties being collected in this area I
instructed Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns to make contact with
the Senior Police Officer at this location to see if there was a need
for a fire Service presence and to advise me of the result of this
enquiry by radio.      I then proceeded to return to the Control Unit
stopping at the West Terrace to again look at the area in which the
incident had occurred.

Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns advised me that no presence was
required at the gymnasium and I instructed him to return to the Control
Unit.
Whilst at the Control Unit I was advised by an officer in charge of an
appliance that Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns car had sustained
damage due to supporters leaving the ground walking over it. I
inspected this with ADO Robjohns and noted damage to most surfaces of
the paintwork.

Instructions were given for all appliances to return to their bases at
1224-^hours after sending a "Stop" message to Fire Service Control.




Chief Fire Officer.




Command Headquarters,
Wellington Street,
Sheffield SI 3FG

HEW/MS
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref,      ..co /l/L ......                                                 liJcJszd..                                        . Division


          Date                                ...............                              ' H a izu s ^                    y      .                . Station




SUBJECT




            _____________________ u o f             Oof              ^cUas-Mai/                      Ii
                                                                                                     i T- r
                                                                                                          tHh            ■&
                                                                                                                         m /e J p il/J                            *cf
            OiJ as)            /'A £ a / ' A r /                     0 , 1          C         d/
                              Q £ a l c jJ                                          *kt}M             r/vtt                            tjX. nlLCL

                       $ 4 .,t     jL                                      f't            4t/a*                                                        .

                         M o d a          t     c           u     ^ / c?u { z A c i / f 6 h (a a *s.
                                                                                               >y.tv£l/»L u ..                         t     — --------


            _______________________________________________                £ t _ ____   £>-d      / ^ 4
                                                                                        -r^-x w<^->        v     ___   c ^ oiM L .--- $. M .
                                                                                                                       u . ' r r   \r*f ~ r Y y <     x .




             sCC                 COC/                                ^ A jl             a f o p ^ a K r'-y                         & x c /              £ f

            t y U i p 'T
                      c *^C&P O
                              &f         ^C£<Pj
                                         ^                               Q<2?<.
                                                                         COk f  ( fr
                                                                                   l Coft/           ^
                t       a /                             1        W         . /           A
                *      %C                                                                     m                                     _ggfe/__.________
                 <O Tt o ff/iM tS )                                                           jto        ^P ? ^~                                                 s& i'? t(?

             J t a m c ' f a y c S O Z ^S jz -                                                                                                         fb tfw           /t
              ^ A jz^O l             9 / at/art                                                                                                      *kli£&
                 (JL     r / Z 4 J / £l /&          /            Q A 'i& y         w a o             £ ^ /r O ? & r s ? { ./
                 Qja w k             c r o c A &J3SI. cto                          <S~L?
             {tt/Uc/              'Urn#             •yUc'nvumc/                                       & / tfocyciM-.                                    /7/tcd
                 &      efcc/ M ' k &                                    ci^<ucnt/^/                                                    •%&/&&. ^ /
                 Ccni'dt-tcjfatf Cj? y^>                                                                                                   ^-/fo a&zSjjgcf
              y^O                       IQjJCsd                   tlfA^sUJZ                                                            c/           ~ & u l______
                 4)7?rt-^inAU/)
                   +L..t^r_ -u^ ✓-----                           —*.r.Hwr.-v,^^pyrCj?
                                                                              Srrv /"v-^.,,...s    a /v-
                                                                                              „•,,u:u, a   *:_:
                                                                                                       .y,,,  s„/,..y
                                                                                                                    ny...<r
                                                                                                                          ^; ,,
                                                                                                                              &t&zo?ec/.
                                                                                                                              /:.,r:rrrvr.r.;
                     * $/ m < aO                                _ .&    / c / /*£>          '7 ^ /o c s * < /~                                                                x
                       l j 7vf<ria')'uu^i.                           0nt       siMLs{/r;£                                                       W           „>&&><?c /

                       W c /      'ca/)s.ta./tc&o.                                             CtwrdatctK fa#                                         cm<.
                 pa/{pp.                n < 4 j L t c A u > ._______ _________ ________________________
                          ^              ' '7                          Cl'ybL(Al0r/' -VOsc/t                                       Oh         - A /ciZ'COiC

                 JSl L - O           -5-i
                                                                                                                  L j t r m ..




             12445                                                                                                                     CR-FS-018
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                             For th e a tte n tio n of         Your
  T°                                                                           Ref.
          C h ie f F ir e   O ffic e r

                                             P lease c o n ta c t              Our     0 6 /2 /2
 From     L /F m U                       1
                                             Tel.                              Ref.    m ^M R
          B a r n s le y


Subject   Incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium                     D ate
          on the 15th April 1985_____________________ ____                             17.4.89



          On Saturday 15th April 1989, I was detailed OIC of Barnsley 5
          (Emergency Tender) with one other rider.

          At 1521 hours, it was mobilised to Hillsborough Football Ground.

          On arrival I told the driver, Fm                          to stay with the appliance
          and I reported to the control point.

           I was told then to take our Motivus Resuscitator to the Lepping Lane
           Stand and give assistance there. En route there I was asked to give
           help with a casualty who was already been given oxygen,       as the
          jcesuscitatoir ^was^beipgused, was running .out of oxygen. This I did
           until the casualty was     taken by   ambulance‘to hospital. I then
           proceeded to the pitch where it       appeared the motivus at that time was
           not needed.

          I was then told to report to the gymnasium. On arrival there I
          helped load casualties into ambulances and police vehicles.

          Barnsley 5 arrived back in Station at 1750 hours.




          L/Fm __
          Barnsley
 T

                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


                 H ea d q u arters R ef.............                                                                                ..............................Division

                 D a te ........                                                                                                                              Station



       SUBJECT



$
§

J
-i                  j£_X^                        a / ,y d S c A 4 ^ K L . &sic>~ sz*AA„4&]&kc£                                                             a?sl.

                  /2-77'4’t          S       /    A     ?               ^ d r tA /( A ^4?&<?'<-/                            l_                     £S

                     /A}              •SAzA?**^ &//£e£s~ jhbsj?__                                                           ^■/&         S*Zf/ <&£*/ ££'»-                   , y


                   j f / >Sv^                          A jS             /IS^/         *£4M-44*S't£&*«‘                              SjUtyPtMnf                    Ots^L
                     ,£*i.£Zt-           fA j     ^ ££^nSKHT-4-f          O s i- A                        & >A &            *'A ?                        — 42'^*
i)
                      -r -     / . i s
                      J./zz*?j?c&k/6s                         m y l             /s x s A a z s ^ -' "
                                                                                  ~              -W.-.
                                                                                                                     /PUs
                                                                                                                       ^
                                                                                                               .—.... - -
                                                                                                                                    /CjCZi-ci ’ /
                                                                                                                                    —- —
                                                                                                                                       ' —-■»»..
                                                                                                                                                 s£~
                                                                                                                                                7.
                                                                                                                                                   -' &&/*■- * .>
                                                                                                                                                        ~~~~ ~                 ""

                     /L & 'C S ts*                    g^&^/Z/lM/xAZ.H ** * ?                                 ^
                                                                                                              i*y-Jz>/mjA jd£r s -A A A A S ^
                                                                                                                   .- .. " p
                       ^/Y&r                 /7c9~ / t J2/V&*- / AJ ^ tZ n r'tX .                                             *At<f' /a test's/' gtS~
                         s A                                  j g £ £ t £ ___ d A / ^ __&A/szr«;,s>                                                                     ------

                    /ftssltefcj JZT 6LA4J / A t<- sUsA/Z^ A                                                                                   /A ^/kA?_*?±__ _
                                                   Ar         ..zs'L^fr- /Aa                                                                                                        4r_
                     77f-/o           /7/AcA                c z / ls/         g&.u/zrzA                       /l.d-O &;2^/xsi0s
                                         \S/Z/c,~A</J’ /9s u >                   O slsA              ./ton                                   s&*L.</ 'g^vtyJsyteszS-

                                             A U ^                        0s?         /A                 j&eAb/. . . J £ (t/i&o                          t.sis?yX-z.i'Az’-t/'

                                      rA •&. j/svr A'&Qiva A                               A         ._.<sA & A ?             sf&y Cs^^u                   cz-st^A

                     &sss*cs?/n£?t/' sAr /A -A&S' f&'^z-er $ / r A
                          (&
                         f\s?
                                  / ... .21
                                        z r—sS^&T^/i^s?
                                              z ;.....^ 7
                                                          <seadiJ&6r                                                                                      <res^

                                                                                       C S S .ii.t-,>                                                   £C.      s & tr j f e ’     -



                                                                y         —     7 ---------- ^   —       —                    -^r
                                         m        W c/ ^ A              Z/Uz          /A*
                                                                                        .
                                                                                           u^v^g4&*i±.
                                                                                          //y
                                                            7~«Ai<6                *6              £jS7>?f'UC-2/C/>'n                                      £&<2S2.t'J/jF A
                                                                                                  - W 7
                     /An /PtiAtXa^^/t2'/it4suA/z,iu£ .sAsszsttZ ^&sc*&y?
                    *4!Z'                                                         .S ? & d J A ^ A x
                        -- 4—/~A#
                               --- <2  £L/2Z6a<(£AtJls±__ &*,.cA    Co   /tu s
                    —^             ^ •l"— :                 — ---- — --- --y--------                 -0?
                    /?r>           Z A s/k /izA        S€Q M '9 cal. / zz/ i ^                       £c*a'.*            G>/s# * £ * A . , / $ & A                 A ys

                                    C'At/tsCt/eP cOl.?.                       C/o?.i'L>„




     R3980K
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                      For the attention of    Your
  To
          Chief Fire Officer                                  Ref.


          StnO                        Please contact          Oi'r       06/2/2
 From
          Stocksbridge                Tel.                    Ref.   O     ®      '




Subject   Incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium    Date
          on the 15th April 1989                                         17.4.89



          On Saturday 15th April 1989 at 1528 hours, I attended Hillsborough
          Football Stadium as OIC of Stoeksbridge one appliance. On arriving
          at the contact point, I was instructed by the Station Officer there
          to take my crew with first aid kit and resuscitation equipment and
          enter the ground and go onto the playing area.

          Immediately after instructing my crew to gather the necessary
          equipment. I was informed by the Station Officer not to enter the
          ground but to wait at the contact point. After approximately five
          minutes I was then instructed by the Station Officer to enter the
          ground, make my way onto the pitch and contact ADO Robjohns, taking
          Stocksbridge one and two crews and equipment with me. On the pitch I
          was instructed by DO Lockwood to take my crew and equipment to the
          far corner of the pitch.

          En route I stopped and assisted an ambulance/medical crew deal with a
          male casualty, putting the casualty in a stretcher for .-removal to
          hospital, Stocksbridge crews were then directed into the gymnasium.

          Inside the gymnasium we assisted the medical/ambulance teams giving
          first aid to the casualties and to my knowledge no actual
          resuscitation was carried out by Stocksbridge one crew.




          StnO
          Stocksbridge
                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


                             Headquarters Ref.....                                                                           l.S .a .l............................... ...Division

                             D ate ..|.^ :'.!t.:.’^.^..                                                                                                         ...................... Station



              SUBJECT

::r   'VESA'S/'                                                                          c ew .

           VWv6fco<loot;%\    £ k . v&^TtAyvAc’                                               m ‘X           \c\ ^ $                       rX         i ^           2    %      W
           1rboT6>f\\-V,      ) y W t ^ ? A v < \ A .■e ^ v \                          v
                                                                                       ? t.'xz-jp.
                                                                                         t.^a^p, c   m u m * \~^
                                                                                                   csx-QSi.eA tcs a*.
                                                                                                                  o. n ic u -
                                                                                                                      n\tlu.Q?r_

                                                     s x .          \    \ \                     ClC,xlC\V                                     o\V>.C^k.—£ .
      VC
                                           \^cCS> ^AgVwv-vr. C ^ >— OA. C.^.c
                              6       /w          CoMN w g i ^               4.\             V . ■g^PO v^w                    *■> -^w c^v\ <2~ _ L
                                                                                                  ■fv
                                  W \ AW                     CLt*,wvXx c-i^w ^~><~v-vv^. C ^ - ^ S                                                         C:wv\.A---
                               lAA.g^\.vAvc.\A                          \ o,      \~cjv^e                 xvxu,— L ^ £ ^ U > — U1                                              y /.S?L _ & * L

                              cvw c.                 —                       1£.
                                                                             vcm . .         e x. . o x             Q^-w^V
                                                                                                             T.---------------------
                                                                                                                      \ ■\                 ‘. a a \ c           \W p           c \-<                 L
                                    A—LCaccki
                              Cijss\C
                                                                                                             y
                                              w     g.              w \ACUu-
                                                                           W -Wg_.
                                                                               X ^ - 3 (V.\A\                 <s.<r. 0 0>rv\cv^A'

                             x x x c j Kj£           uix^W—                                   V^ c J W ,                    V > l »A v.^e_                          ^<£.^><1

                                                  o A ^ A               W ^ . q
                                                           Vw o         ~^v gSO v

                                     i L                           w v C~Q             Ca^        ,yxWg- e-XWg                                e .-w A               ,         — s.O C w > ^

                              XnRjX—                                                                                Ls^A.                   C^ y v A . <Xg-C^.— wS-Wv-
                                  c (j- ? n   oci^\          v «2_s       VVvr s \*                                 \   c .V v g _ ^                  v.yv>vNro                 V w Q ________

                               e\v ^ M J < v x A u ,v y v v

                                                    kS»_   \>      xx -
                                                                      x-a ^O    L'Wc’\                                   C=aa m .C\
                                                                                                  V.J;c^5S c k s .Q.-.:k>£                                                    i VS<?

                                  \Vx(?                                      __ci.AQdE\               iJ
                                                                                                      t .3 O J ^         V
                                                                                                                         V.ov 1iy
                                                                                                                                >                 C ^ - v V '. 5
                                                                                                                                                  CgjaCSJ^sa>: g .H


                                  A^c-Ave-^                              .Aje^ocJOi y-e,-^__C\S__^Ln.S— ‘Szfca A A r                                                                        3 ^ 4 --------
                              (• /Ag-AA % vo g^\i g_- c .\w \-^ \.n                                                >\      C ' w X —             <* L A A . X _                                  ; VdLXvoA

                                                                                         >U<0.                     (a /'j^ j e_ n                         u A<\A          c \v ^ -v _            \   &

                                  V\>v*>e.^           rLf.>io cvQ \ l                    — cccs.                           4>?g V.vA~ .nrtf.                                   >-c n ^

                                      kHx                           P ^ ,M   *\ X.
                                                                               .*■'                                                    *                                <2-   V o Q -X               \io _

                              S               »?:            rrv          C > s & -rv. ^ S a — c ^ - 'V ^ A — M rS% J* s 4                      X s ------- V   ,


                                                                                              "-S^jwA V x ^                      \,y\^\y v^g\v<i^f\ T




           R3980K
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                      For th e a tten tio n o f   Your
  To
                                                                  Ref.
          Chief Fire Officer

          SubO                        Please contact              Our    06/2/2
 From                                 Tel.                        Ref.
          Stocksbridge                                                     /MR


Subject   Incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium        Date
          on the 15th April 1989                                         17.4.89   .



          On Saturday 15th April 1989 at 1528 hours, Stocksbridge 1 and 2 were
          called to a major disaster at Hillsborough Football Ground.

          I was riding as OIC of Stocksbridge Two. On arrival at Leppings Lane
          I was met by the control point officer and given instruction to take
          my crew with First Aid and Resuscitation equipment into the ground
          and contact ADO Robjohns.

          On entering the pitch no contact could be made with ADO Robjohns, but
          we were instructed by DO Lockwood to go to the far end of the field.

          On arrival at the other end, I was told to render first aid and deal
          with casualties that were taken into the gymnasium.

          This building was also being used as the mortuary and was very
          congested with bodies and casualties. At this stage my crew were
          giving first aid and resuscitation treatment. I myself gave
          resuscitation to three casualties on different occasions.

          After a period of time we were told to regroup our crews and return
          to our appliances till further instruction.




          SubO |
          Stocksbridge
                                                                                                                                                                 £
                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


                     Headquarters Ref....................................                                      ........ .fe.a%x....... ... Division
                     Date..         ..... .....................                                                                                     Station




       SUBJECT
                       CL UxgA              C vg O A V i

.   Wc\3                9dr             V’
                                         X v^'S V-Q^vrv\ Q ^ ICqa                   L oc-W^croc\
                                               \         \Acxs,           O^lvdfiLi ^ cAvtxscue                             oV 1L> C o                    h~ol
                        O     v^ l V:         oOc\~e^c\                              \A^c,vcU>uL\r cJr                      S   a ^<?   U v j e A d V^ec\uJi£c\a'
    ^ o oTfe (\^ V      C>nVWA\                                                    O w       ^         A pvA                                              Q-\Tl C>cv\ .
    C ^ O O Ki>>
                         V COVA-VCXCL-V-aoV                               W^g.     Cov^Vcv.cV Vqv^ .L ( &,0>elv/-
    \ c - 14            O-      <p\ tcvwCje.)                      CuV      Kc?           C\CX-Ws>            CxV     \lo           V--g. p p UA.Q s V-O.VU2.,

                        o a     .Vr~OLVM_jR, .
                                             ______ V^e_                                      . V a c V c > r\           "~ ^ > Q       W .o ^ k ^ o -o o \

                        Vd >ui      ^VA<2C<Co *-a a a .cA-                       QX-dv-e,           \A fxV           \      ^ O lS                 q   A \€aa .c\cUA-&
                         c^LcV                 uoLsV'r^cVecN                        Vo      S>eV              op     Co^troV                    PoCx.^.,
                       ______ ^vv-acxdLQ                               CjQv^Vro\                              u^qc^>_vj3lc\              cx V:                _______
                         W^O l V              C-j o          V c~o\         Qv\ju\:          iA(XS.           A jouv^           CoJiTo\                Pq ^ J c ry*;,ri
                         \       C o ia . V CXcAfyg. c \                  ~X >Q      k o c U .U ^ O O r \           CXuV-c\         A t> p        ^C ^M <bV \r-\

                         Vua-V                                    you,u.c\.        TOwc\, V/O           V^OuS            y\.Qu^
                                                                                                                                                         %
                        c     W cX vA vn.Q-\                       2             "a ^>o      U vX c L ^ W '               o-Crvped                 (Xv-^cl
                         VooVz.                    <oQ              cVvjJiCg-S            ol Cov-vVv~ol OUa-CqJT,
                                   K           Q - ( A 0 e x .u v c -jg .        C o v ^ V ro \               Pocv^V             ^O iC cS        ^»g_V:    Q<p

                       oAr         vw . o                         WA. ’                      t^AV             S ^ o         S v\*%O O V^o -a^ Q/v.cA
                       A^) Q              C^.o Nq^o\^ ^y.                        Osj^~c\         A ^>0 C^VgjgA-*. Cv-V~ H_g-
                                  N.C-g-                W V- CA x Aj2A^V"             Co Q\M




                                                                                                    vVs,




                               .vA*
                                                                                                  to- V J ^                         Ocj - ^ .      OJ)


                                             -V^Kjq^tgA




                                                                                                                                                               CR-FS-Ott
                             ft                                                    Q ^ ..      C   o   ^   t    B   o   v-        rr
                                                                                                *

                                  H x L - L S ^ Q p Q c^h               <
                                                                        ^CjQ~rg>A,>wv.         c^o_o^                    .   \S )U-^ S^n




                                             f,£.N j[ \ S T <          cl




     .          i _Atoi            Uitf ■•— . --------------
          PoR fATAt-iTig                                           tSP\0<Sa>     V ^ o f
                             X
     3.«.bjO 3 KtecST.U^ \         r-i.   :..,   ...   ----------- -------- _.--- -----     ---------- --------
        A.^o Ss%iOH*J




                   NpC.<vA                                                                                                     S c o fr i

                    StPi^V,                                                                                                    oT(\AX>
                                                                        TovA
*5




                                                                                                                              Q        . ^O i \ £ - E L Aft^C_lI>tr.N> TZ
                                                                                                                                         Eeo>v\.
                                                                                                                                         /Ybo Cyg.egv^          .
                                                             i &CLC2.>k c_ l.oc_




                                                                                                                          Ca^*Y ^(Vc£vc£. CbwtASfc>
                                                                                                                                       — ^-ers^L-^j—
                                                                                                                        v-E’
                                                                                                                           T'A-i      vjAuu-




                                                                       C^AcTfeS


                       ^VVTriC^V                            ¥
                                                                                   ......    4~                \ ^Q-v3L«ju_i^.vYI_
'S o u t h Yo r k s h ir e          c o u n t y fire s e r v ic e
MEMORANDUM
                                            For th e a tte n tio n o f   Your
    To
               Chief Fire Officer                                        R ef.


               LFM                         Please c o n ta c t           O ur     016/2/1
  From
               MEXBOROUGH                  Tel.                          Ref.        DG

 S u b je ct   INCIDENT AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND,          D a te
               15TH APRIL 1989.                                                   17.4.89


               I was Officer in Charge of the Control Unit attending incident at
               Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on 15th April 1989. On arrival I
               contacted the Contact Point (Rivelin Valley Appliance) at the gates
               at the Leppings Lane entrance. We contacted Divisional Officer
               Lockwood by fireground radio that I was in attendance and instructed
               to set up a Control point.

               Brigade Control was informed at 1557 hours that Control Unit was now
               Control Point and I contacted Divisional Officer Lockwood and
               Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns that fireground radio was now
               working on channel 2. Divisional Officer Hildreth arrived and took
               up duties of Control Officer.

               An advance control point was set up at the gymnasium with Senior
               Divisional Officer Smoothy and ADO Robjohns and ADO Green at the
               police incident room.




               LFM
               MEXBOROUGH.
       %     .             SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
       / -

                           Headquarters Ref         ...............                                                                                     Division

                           Date..A.£>..,                              .............           . . . . . . . W ^ . . £ ^ . . < k £ ^ ...... f i f e ~...... Station




           SUBJECT


m

                               ^cs.ofivi \^.y~Cs V j > TF--&C.                                           — .-V,                         ».O,:
■i:%
                                a    i^ c .         y^                                                              At                              ~fK^£s
                                                          fe-.                              ^il o                PS^_V^VVA-JS£l^£o
                               'SVw ^              o n v
                 V
                                                          aNJ&ALt-                                                                                         ____


                 -z                 t^v        \                                                                £ . .C J b & K . a
                 h                        — t -c n *v£.c      ^ j-                                                                                 <-^&.-S>___

                              *^-K>           V_^fc>S            li-^TNfW              VWJEs           S?                                                            ----- -

                 A A

                                                      \ f^>                    C-ilP       *t~^\~g=-.                t      £=.5*^          Vjfci       -Qs iriC-

                 t i v
                                                    Vv&g,V £ \\k                             A4D                                                        4 -______
                                gtSOV^r^E-^lV                                   Y^^UP-Vv^
                 %    j
                 <y7 A        V _fx                       A>«^ &               <^C O ^Q gy                                               h c s ___ 8t£r.
                 k            iXS>             «S>T& f- VfL V-ifeAS                            v^           £e=. g >^\ P/ - Q
                 d P                               P^r-       V w ^                                                                Vwt^
                    Q
                                        tuCat-^VlX^V &-X^>                        «& W i ♦ £^>                  A .w V        -C^CS            V \c^ fo?v& A a a
                 ^    j£     • A p m i t^fttl-                   ^CsL-L-               1~A-LLL              hit^Ti                J-4%:r__ Wj^r,rsi
                 J             \ *4                                         _^Vy L ,
                 /}
                 J              Vr>            Vdt&          (LA^ks^f^cv/vN                                 tA           Vv \ t =        ^ o O N i ^
                 ci




                                                           Y~C±               Ai > ^


                                                                                                                                               CASQgyVvfcS

                                          <^ A . ___ O p^,„___V>\^r.___ C->. ^.rsv^ \vS t\ L                                                           J~-^vV va
                             ■ H s
                                                      ;^o-eiF^g>                           J^r^iN                                             far. ^l o x - K ^
                                                                                       _    VK£^                                                          o ^        vrvv
                                (LRh^\                  r^x>                                       ^cf^eh^/s                                   S q
                                                                             A ^ K           S>HA -Q >                                                      1   «^v-VC^
                              t^ £ ^ R fc             P&Vfcrf<NfiV v ^ ^ u ,                            Vb                                 g,&             fi.
                                                                                                                                                                     CR-FS-018
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref..                                                                                           . Division


          Date            ........ ....                                                                                .. Station




SUBJECT




                                                                 ^   C S .^ > V                                rev      V ^ A r.

                                                    v vS <Nf\


                      P^£>S>V^V                 W     ,         4Xyyyg<0'^xAC£-.                      ^ ^ > S JUL£:__ \ A                V^.
                  V-vbV-xA^                                       f L ^ t v A G ___ ^ V £ ^ C . K € r £ S -----------

                      bV                  Yv.v^i      (^r~.fyvtXtA \         d» — \ *?^,                      (.
                                                                                    TCVV^
                                                                                       wXl—   A ^ ^ O c V v b A,
                      TvNfcA                i-A^fcv.^Ei£s             iA .      v   ^ a        v -a   ^ vc3

                       ftA.                           ^ ^               str^i-ilkisr_■■<-A:
                                                                                          V ^ C>T>J
                               £r£-j                 £^*a £S     \--v Q s A"~       A.^ £ s.          ■A»^__ ;°Voj-&-----------—
                                                     ..                                                                 _____________

                  _________ Vvig=>                                                            :Vv^                   CA&^vh£-_<?

                      \.\jx£>                                   £^-^C\*^T==k                  V ga                      bA-L        ,

                                                                                <w^fc:                1                lA^VfiOch^V
                      V o                                                                                                       V~H*S___

                      x                                                                                            ^ b ^ P ik ..Q c^. i V
                                             *^VN
                                                  ^r
                      Y\M=                 \ A l .1 b k - A V t         ■ 3 y \ \ o g ; Y w >-i
                          X . N p-_          U > ^ £> £=r e x tsA \ W \ Sv’S^IS                           ^   6XS f e _________




          cw* ia**s                                                                                                                     CR-FS-018
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                           For th e a tte n tio n of   Your
   To
                                                                       Ref.
              Chief Fire Officer
                                           P lease c o n ta c t        O ur    016/2/1
 From         SUB O'l     1
              LOWEDGES ROAD                Tel.                        Ref.       'DG


S u b je ct   INCIDENT AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND,         D ate
              15TH APRIL 1989.                                                 17.4.89


              At 1528 hours on 15th April 1989, control mobilised Lowedges 1,
              Sub O.l    H as Officer in Charge in response to a make pumps 10
              message from Officer in Charge at Hillsborough Stadium.

              Our approach to the incident took us along Langsett Roadand
              Middlewood Road, and our progress was not impeded by traffic
              congestion. The appliance was parked in Leppings Lane 20 yards from
              the entrance to the Stadium.

              I instructed my crew, with the exception of the driver to bring our
              first aid and resuscitation equipment together with a short
              extensions ladder and salvage sheets to be used as stretchers if
              required.

              At the entrance to the ground I contacted Station Officer Swain and
              handed my nominal roll tally him, he then informed me I was to
              proceed to the gymnasium in the ground taking our first aid kit and
              resuscitation gear only and report to Assistant Divisional Robjohns.

              Whilst crossing the pitch oxygen was given to two casualties lying on
              the ground, both with chest injuries and having difficulty in
              breathing. The remainder of my crew and myself reported to
              ADO Robjohns and Station Officer Fletcher who were attempting to
              organise a priority list of casualties for removal to hospital from
              the gymnasium.

              I was asked by Stn O Fletcher to assist the ambulance service in the
              lifting and placing on stretchers of the remaining injured.

              The crew under my instruction were then involved in this task as well
              as assisting with resuscitation needs and first aid as and when
              required.

              After the majority of casualties had been removed to hospital, some
              crews including mine were instructed to return to their appliances,
              this I did, informing the control unit that my crew had withdrawn
              from the incident, shortly afterwards we were mobilised to Base.




              SUB O
              RED WATCH, LOWEDGES ROAD.
                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


                     Headquarters Ref                                                  .................                                                                                             u .                                                   . Division


                     Date..                                    k- SSL                                                                                                                                                                                      .. Station




      SUBJECT
                       OHhY
                                                                                            O r/c            (Q f                  C Il - n Y J ? Q I                                  • O -A ti? .                         'J L

                             1
                             £S'Po//Di=7^                                                              On              'Tlf#'                                                                        ^ r d P M a U A .-..^22
                      Wbhr                                                                                         L 3 t £ 0 V£iL'>) A y                                                             G # o OVQ                                             /i J C t d ^w/V-

                       Z 1?/77-/ A                                             'TDmL                        Q/e&uo                                       o P                     F6u(? P O b a L
                                                       Of/                             /heftofli                           &r                            fgwi <ptz?a /£ £j)                                                                                ./&*£.
                        ^imj. a                                                P u ^ r C H ^ R                                           *~rg(£l>                               'T'c             P^h A                          (Quy                         t & G M .


                %     sl'rtt-                                 P o licit
                                                       Pa L ie . H                                         C o         u
                                                                                                                                                             'H-hi
                                                                                                                                                             5C A /
                                                                                                                                                                                            /*/ C
                                                                                                                                                                                      r ft- 'I b M                       *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7 - //> ? £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H./■j^'St $.AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U       0 4

                       '77-+^? iT                                          t-M£>                           &2£i£iJ                                   3 o m a                           /^7 P ^ / a / .PL                                                          4 k
                      ^ f h ^ y j P / - C L t D i £ £ > ~ T & 'T&t<ror                                                                                                     (9uP                           PurtPS                                       VoO>tO.

                      - r ’/ ' t e r                          A lU                       i^ ?         S / D B                                  /^ > u 7 V ? P , ^ O i = r ,                                                                                 U         ‘£ S

                       PtijKtinfrnt                                                          #d U £                        fJHtzP                                    of                                                 riuySiDis '77/*
                Q       /OaU/ct-                                        tn/2S,-V uA 7T t‘} t/                                                P a /u r . S V x ti                                                   'TJh .i                        fl<?//ur ~P
                        D//? A/ay / r '/ v d O                                                                   A; bM,1"                                             /^ CcJ/=r>H-'— o /? &, ^ T _
                       / A / f T £ u                      c.y-2-                   0        A \ y            C . A ^                         T V              J      7&     S          C ^ ,         7) v 7 ? - h ~                          /    9S *                f           e
                      'rt'flz                     J?T~K/ O,                                     Ana                riy                                                               ffkP?£z./ W                                                      'T7£L
                        Q - & o            1> < J              n               r               A O         ' T M r -                 ' T V f                      ( O J ~        '   77 ' f c                 C d       ftl-KT                    ^        )#/'...


                        L ^ h t ^ r z p ,J/3y> * J * H                                                                                       ( 3 o / ^ r k O                                                                 Ot/T                           /H-k----
                       tQ
                       i y (J}^&                                   f i r-------- /f an fs j.Dc*'-___
                                                                   f-ZJ                          -------- /9
                                                                                                          r <&r #r.... tJt s A                                              'T f 2 c±>ifi^,----------
                                                                                                                                                                                             i-----(\ jp - v0 /?
                                                                                                                                                                                                              * e Lrr— /7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r ?- C- W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               - ,ThL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ■— *-

                       f\~£cjr) ^                                      f~)Uh.& / 3 / h r * / P                                                                    £2/'hPsO                                    /y? /? S'CZ?                                      — CJ A_J.


 I               Q
                        .V



                        ifkis
                             _
                                                  ..



                                                          CvYrfijG
                                                                   f       -




                                                                               .   ^
                                                                                        f            r *'                  —       ..y        ■ ..   ^



                                                                                                                 £=tQ u //*(#!.&*/>-. A t ^ g ^ ^ e ^ p
                                                                                                                                         ^
                                                                                                                                                         -   ru t»




                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                       -




                                                                                                                                                                           . V
                                                                                                                                                                                mm


                                                                                                                                                                                        „    ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,   m
                                                                                                                                                                                                          „    »    —       j - g.   jm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r  .,.— — . - . ..




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ,   A    /    - V - .          /}
                         n        t , l y lfj G -                                              & - < $ (         j i   P       M              £ r J i ~                    O           /H 7               N         o T                      O J t Z P                    &       ±


\n              <5     ft^L.                              ^                        (ro y m y                       c /£,- c j -no U o o £ iC                                                                   C m - M .— w                                            ^ / ...
                       P&bP/i?                                                                 Pc ZSf/ZL&j m o                                                             cr?^t t v                      /77Q.u 71ij C r ^ D / ^ C

j .
            10                                 S / h = * r\tQKjS                                                                                             i^cT S u J ~/V A f r o r J S — CD ( T b 'T M l
                                                          / Z                  ^ S J X           / T i i r v / ?                                                           !( ? - £ >            O        /             O      ^         Q            M P i - l / b r C < = \
                       <PU C£                                          i                                                                                                                              a




IO              O'
                       P 3 eJ= C > ( r i o
                                                                       j ^ o F C i T '


                                                                                       6-          i ) S>              -n o
                                                                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                                                                ~Z ~ L s I


                                                                                                                                                     D o
                                                                                                                                                                                     'T u f r - (r /
                                                                                                                                                                                                      7 ? y ^ < £ —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C-                /f/^lO .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (t~ M P               K s= h P -




v\ \!
                         GvtisiG, 'Z                                                             'T t> » L f                       &UL&                                                                                     of                        f3?X2L
                         Cyyc^-d c                                                     -tt            <Do                          tffHr                             O r               Co<Jj-0                                       &            *             'Tliz*

                        & (Dcj i P m
                         .. . . . .J ^   n r , i.i?i..i        »
                                                                                                            U}
                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                                                             M - f r Djft n J C u «   | | -
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0 1 >J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ......w£                          ~T24?r cj J B                     ■   .



                        (Pi-                      (Ois£                                      Q L j J                                                         / q a a ; ^l.__ S t/i:6 / ShQjs'$
                                                              'f                       L if H                     i a / m > £ //) ^ d )                                               'T M = £ t£                              c ^ t£ d ~                             J b f r t i£ .. _
                                                              ''                                                                                                                                                        rD .ee_A *                                                CR-FS-0>
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref..............                                                                                           .. Division


          Date........................................................                                                             ... Station




SUBJECT

                                                                            Ourf/Ptr                    /UkihZ j ^ jir (WfufaJc^


              f2 r :t/? £ &                {Q i/b           ~~TlD "TT-fegr                 /tyjY )S?</L               &     L.) t f 7 C(-f CJtzi&~
             P/fi?*4r/-0                   fin' '71'Thr                     STlPe?- <3/--- C-ep~*j£..@L' @M*L,-- rfol*)-
                                  Lj o J p             Tl-hzA              C . f H Q X ..TbteiuJfr H .                       —      Tfhttr              dju
                         ( uftu'r'i£~i                          ~t ~c           T)'h^~                                                        77*4—
             P^o r.r,a v su/~l                        A-as'O£ tfkc? Li
                                                                    Su V s/r/H?,*es
                                                      #-# 7 ^ K _____ r x   — r ,'.„ r                                 ’      — *---                        —


             ~ r c ~ n -fe                         O ^ /V ^      h h Q k L . *S?% I <?                                / - I ^ r c H i- i? /H >
                                                                   __ •                          _     j                                      ._ . __


              cQtj/c.              (€ f         -T7'^~             rf-rO/31/ Z.f?/Vc «S[—                    J'c^ & k.h C <~ y Sc/72<zZ

                       '-'t?            /Ov"            f                      m                       a <J /a / 6- 77-ftr~ Pkz-vfi fc-_

              F te c m             '7 7 'h -             /~ M L l              / M TY>            r k v f? ./L /9 * s c < E £ —                  —

             &       V tf L iz            LS i 71-t               JktChlrv-                  / a /< i u £ i& J             Ofci^cT         TV/j!


                              jV /                           > ~CT ~nOnL<-                     (P o ^             'Th/*J          /€ c j,& r__ _ _
               p5/?                 A           L ) I 4 il .£                ft        PocttX                                'Ti d q k ' O v z Q

               r Z lc ^                   m i'              C J t-          <zrt<.e<<*r£>                  f a r # P i s - / M T V . H ’h f -
             rfrV)rtJi~A*s<uzr r                                               //7J          e£j)£r£S.                't      t}rft           'TtitjV
             fi!ur*?p t o                              ~~r&(<'<-'              rwy             C £ *< - J          fi/vo          Ct^Ccc
            - m + = -                   (ZAt'w                 m N          -trt       A£Z?          /!c      77-to^r          C^bXc=~
                                                                     /Q Sh/ /-}(— i *t^-z£ .                       f~~ (-Q                               0 .
              (\^r                                 / /flltr'              >4       f2t$-0(O            j'Y)iz J S / ^ C t r
                                  p.jgfcguj^C                                     / a ./      T^fg                                   /-fayt-c
            -l- i^                                             -n o         'T l-h ^ A -                                          &r             /£ £ _
                                 Cr£oc)fi~Q                        u \               t o      ( 3 cZ          B V Q<l U R 7 2 ^ P . D B '

                 ^Fv t -ib ^5X?                                  T7-6r               A-Pf*L!/9v                C l-


                                        <S^Ti?fict-                       (0 A J &
                                  /<re^/-KZjr ____
                                                                                                                              5     c     ^      o      3
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                          For th e a tte n tio n of   Your
   To
                                                                      Ref.
             Chief Fire Officer
                                          Please c o n ta c t         Our     016/2/1
 From        SUB O
             CENTRAL FIRE STATION         Tel.                        Ref.       DG


S u b ject   INCIDENT AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND,         D ate
             15TH APRIL 1989.                                                 17.4.89


             As Officer in Charge of Central One, I responded on the initial
             turnout to the Sheffield Wednesday Ground Incident, with a total crew
             of four men.

             On arrival at Penistone Road I and Station Officer Fletcher tried to
             find out from the police what the incident was. All the police could
             say at that time was there had been some fighting. We then decided to
             take our pumps down the Riverside Entrance. This was fortunate as we
             pulled up right outside the police observation point. Even at this
             point I did not know what the incident was. I instructed my crew to
             stay with the appliance the Station Officer and myself went into the
             ground. From the top of the walkway what I saw was bodies laid out
             all over, at and around the goal mouth area. A verbal and radio
             message was sent to both crews. All resuscitation and cutting
             equipment required. The cutting equipment was not used at all. I
             got my crew to work on as many people as possible, mouth to mouth,
             cardiac compressions and resuscitations with the one resuscitator
             carried on our appliance.

             People were just tugging and begging us to do something and keep
             going. I took over control of both crews to do what wa could with
             the equipment we had, including the use of our own personal
             resusciades.

             I was informed there were some ambulances outside near the appliance's
             I organised stretchers to remove people out to the ambulances which
             were parked at the side of Central One and Two. Word then came
             through to all casualties to the sports hall. All personnel and
             resuscitators to report to the sports hall. Station Officer Fletcher
             and myself tried to organise with the Officer in Charge of the
             Ambulance Service, some kind of priority of moving the people from
             the hall into the ambulances, as people with slight injuries were
             just walking into the ambulances. This was fruitless. I took over
             this role for a while. A doctor then took over from me. We carried
             people into the ambulances on his orders. I was then asked to take
             my crew and check the ground to see if there were any more
             casualties. None were found. At that time a radio message
             instructed all crews not in the sports hall to return to their
             appliances, as the ground was to be evacuated. We stood by the
             appliance till instructed to return to base.

             Central One returned at 1805 hours.




             ________ SUB O 03
             CENTRAL FIRE STATION.
                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY RRE SERVICE


                     Headquarters Ref                                            2».......                                   v ; .............                         .Division

                     Date.            .'f e iiila ...                              ........
                                                                                                                                                  tin■Mi               .. Station



                             04ife/                  pint                    &£f\
    SUBJECT


                                 Am *Sfa                                             frr t<it rie&. x                                                                               kv
                                 C&&W Oil f&U&JKl&ktnJ 1                                                           To        A ft*-<9ulCT -To
      V-                         H         Hf^TpR.                     h a O ftfc d T                    p i* t    C ite /fife i-h                                     fe tffg ^ lu
       ■2
       a                         4-ta^u^                          Ujtk££.                      Cyrtthifr                CrthK                 WAl       ftfc<$ui*gb.
'      cr
       -z
                             ‘g>J           floUTS*                          “To         Tt{£                mflftW               MPmA*JC&£                     W 4£fc ^<ggCf£J?
       5                         To "TUfe     LfcPPti4&£ lA«0£, fajft flf ~tt{4 ST^atU*j .______
                                 P**l(u>4(kt>wl 1L €ooKfefr     ft'T-re^t^sJCg. Err     fi*ttrHi±f

       f                         iSVi                         .              <w               tojvV                x         oN-mc-rfo SrtM.o. ^ w 4t4 >


       S                     X         T{|4kJ                 Pfl&UliAtJb                              OA         Fb tfT       tXifTVl t W l A
       0
       %                                                          f e S -lo ^ T A T fO K I                        S *T       *Vd&                          ~ V £ £ £ n jL /         O dTe
       ;2
       5                         TO*.              PLA^H1*0fr fVRC/\                                         OF Ti44           f r E p u M f r . _________________


                                 ltf£,        -S4fe&&                        M A 6 k1>To o £                               Tt4&         tKia&jknr              ia>A£     uMSfcfift-/ij6r
                                 b o z B s il               &f                   ccjSufn^Ti££                       UW        OhJ Tfrfc.                                       Q&A
            -*
                                 W»t4                 (-kwft&iM                          e>F           •SffeCfATogj.                  <=vmo         fioutg             MhjuiJ6-
       “K to
       cj -

                                 O M u UEHCftTlOKi
                                  —    -   ■ f.   v . ^ % w > |    g   I U           .       OStKjgr
                                                                                             % ^ W «     W        £lG&G£& Okj{)
                                                                                                                   » **■          ~ ~ ^ V i      fo&lo'S
                                                                                                                                                    *      —      bjtyi
                                                                                                                                                                  - »    » ~   DtffjCyt^        »



                                 E£C aqs£                     eF TUfe                           i-^ fc £           ifcuuMfc.                     HQISfc,         tsl T 7#           STA&WM
                                     ftbp         Co&3otl»tf                         S W                tvA&        WiCrriv^.                  -So 4 £         6»JUn.4*JfvCCigjQ M y
                                      £M)(0         .________________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                 X                        Ki^            C A W                          lAfegg             t>up6lsfc6               ftMoMC^rr              Tt^£,
                                 CASuAcD&X                                   oP               g t;R           O W n/         l/ouTifl«s|            %>           £&»jC>fc^_______

                                     Cf&biPtCs                    MA&Q&£. |                              MoO-Tif             To           Mctrffl
                                      <W*> MfrXjHlW ft-fc^^DTATihKi                                                                 ( ft                                g&SuSqT4ti>l
                                      flPP         A         gfcxxs&RiP&fe.                                   fi-fPLiA»JC£.                                                    to &(L
                                      DjffcCTiW ^                            ,       ^CTi-loQfe^l                      -SQMfe. 'bot"Z»(U>                  AWQ PftfA*&0\tS
                                      \AlU.€. S f * j i 4 b                                   W w W f r                    MftyiMA-W                A6SoSctrfte>&                    \m * * £
                                      Of          Mp              W L\)


                                      RuJ^uM^CfeJ                                  fig,                -X£4n 1 C / ^                          4 ^ P rT 4 ^ ~ >    .
                                                                                                                                                                          &T.6 .
                     GWB 1244S                                                                                                                                                      CR-FS-018
      :-TW-■: v,-~
              SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


v             Headquarters Ref.........................................                                                                         Division


              Date........................................................                                                                      . Station




                  IhJ       7,lie .        M -a sl               SrTA-bkS              o f-        Mm         M A W & l.         a:                 fa u ¥ Z L
                  ~nM-f               m q ic L          Pom Pi                r **4                      Q U u iu r fr r to * ]       f o e f to z q
                    ft                                      PofijT            4 a&                       H 4& £ . ____________________
                     X                                Tw o               ^Axhog. ftou.ic£                         tfaxtfJll           lC ‘Tt\oS$L_____
                     ^PfeCTTATogj                     M0T            N T oftfeO                   M               Ia/Am         CaUus g& M o i4 a
                      OUT e f T 0 £                      Cqi46££t<okJ                     To            E m a& l£.         ~t>ka£ € iJ6 e ^ o o & iK j6 -
                      Tp          (ytt/fe fiSSi-STWiJCS..                             Mo££               AbeM        -To        V J o d K       ,             & £ P i M


                         \N fo           1 Voi           lWk;&               tH JM M ij                T Q it*     To 'fro                  _______
                         PoUCJL                 C& - e>|2&n4AT(okJ                                      C6K|T&l,           S€£.MAA           To          &&____
                         Mo*J            L X tlT /W lT                6M T44.                                     MJLA _______________________

                       f i H&UUHJCE_,S                         C-rAgT/E>                To             Aft&ivk.      AmA           <*ch)%£Ti€£
                        TfrtQ kJ            Tp            4   ^ ^ P « T A l-         « H                                CL£a*J          &£M^t<s?£o
                          U)»t 4           W u fr c r ifc S                  onI    Tt4-4                               Qg£A           tW u              -flte .
                          LAI t           &AA            SOnJ                ftaWcA               ._______________________
                        ~t 4 £          &tf^KiA^U>M                                        0TlU2&fc                        ft      t4oLOOd&
                          Fa£           T (4 f.        U4 T J& L A                 UfQiTtNi &              To       6 -0    't o        fr(oSP>ufa- /y jf)

                          vm    nH         ^                                                      ft                             k *o £ 4 u £                ____
                          R     t a u T i £ S ,______________



                        T t|4 PetU-r                       iv H              (Z&Pjt+HA                              *SoPh&rtAl IaJ#£
                         To          LiA U £             ft*>&          f ir Ttte            LfePPujq                           &sio o f            Td&
                          •Sfa/4££             0»>JS4i-Tnv/                         WA£                ££uj(r       C<Vui<L£>           A|          fifcfe.
                          frFPu**!^                           <Wfc           ft Sictff C M . .                     t/^M

                                               \Zfc4lO£l                  ZESiTto                       <€>       aiSliT                             r




                                                        6rHM »J               LP M                                         U^S        (yjl/A.f            ~'0i
                          koCfe&s                     t<4                                              Rgjs-r      frift        TgfcAT^&iT
                         EXS>U6ST&p                                           CA€u¥Ti£^                       »W*&         f&>H        T(4&              6YM,
                          To           W < * m d 6<              frM&JLAvJEeS.                                   ____________ ______________




                                                                                                                                             >tu,o.



                                                                                                                                                              CR-FS-018
    %L>&f%fr%«fcabb.ZZ%:
                       -:vS~*n^An .-T’-.’.
                                         -
                                         .“‘'                                  'fir''?-’"'-cv;.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                      For the attention of    Your
  To                                                          Ref.
          Chief Fire Officer

          Stn O                       Please contact          Our     06/2/2
 From                                                         Ref.
          Rinainqlow Rd               Tel.                              I/MR


Subject   Incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium    Date
          on the 15th April 1989                                      17.4.89



          On the 15th April 1989 at 1516 hours. I responded with my crew on
          Ringinglow 1 to a request to attend a major incident at Sheffield
          Wednesday Football Stadium where cutting gear was required.

          'En Route' to the incident appliances were directed to the Leppings
          Lane end of the stadium. Ringinglow 1 booked in attendance at
          approximately 1527 hours. On arrival I contacted StnO Swain.

          I then proceeded on foot with hand radio Maximan Resuscitation set
          and crew directly onto the playing area of the ground.

          The sheer magniture of the incident was unsettling, dozens of
          casualties lay on the playing area with hundreds of spectators and
          Police milling around.

          Communication using fireground radio's was difficult because of the
          large volume of noise in the stadium, ADO Robjohns set was defective
          so he commandeered my radio.

          I and my crew were dispersed amongst the casualties of our own
          volition to render cardiac massage, mouth to mouth resuscitation and
          Maximan Resuscitation. (A Maximan Resuscitator off a Stocksbridge
          Appliance was found to be defective. Although some doctors and
          paramedics were saying working Maximan Resuscitators were of no
          use!).

          Assistance was given moving casualties to ambulances for transfer to
          hospital.

          In the early stages of my arrival I was aware that make pumps ten for
          resuscitation purposes and a contact point had been made.

          I asked two senior police officers if those spectators not injured in
          anyway could be moved out of the congestion to enable those
          endeavouring to give assistance more room to work, the reply was 'we
          have already tried to do this'.

          Police co-ordination and Control seemed to be non existent on the
          playing area.

          Ambulances started to arrive and casualties were taken to hospital.
          I and my crew remained with casualties on the playing area until the
          last had been removed.

          The gymnasium was utilised as a holding area for the injured waiting
          to go to hospital and with a clear division a temporary morgue for
          fatalities.
The point was reached where supporters were asked to leave and at the
Leppings Lane end of the ground- Severe congestion was being caused
by fire appliances and a staff car. L/Fra          [had these vehicles
re-sited to assist egress.

In the gymnasium assistance was given to doctors in rendering first
aid treatment as requested and casualties moved from the gym, to
waiting ambulances.




StnO ____
Ringinglow
              SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


              Headquarters Ref.........                                                                     ............                        .Division


              Date.i..i.:....l±:..:..Sfl..                                                                            .                         .. Station


                                                                                t v -
SUBJECT


                 fyloAXA.|tb(ldi                   RA.           V A U                  S k o _______
                 <rlU,        \AnJLx d ? m L                 ok
                                I \_< /"N                                   A                                  *■            I_*—        I*              L.
                                        . ^7    v4 Ig —      OL A , | J i l     CIaaI   sl-        W fr-i                 c c th ^ c U i^ \A ^ L      O -t,
                 1                r x   !>     &/1t                         viLp-4 ,,|=vrv^„=
                                                                                            :» N t l m                                             t UA-P'vJ l
                 fe b L - c_ fA\ J j i X b yf) o -M vb ,                                                                         '^ d 2 ^ y _v^,c^
                ^fi/VxciiuX                                ^ d CTMitX<LizJ.                        A u j J 1!) o                    C t/w A .

                 6,vu w4L>ji: b L ^ ^iuJtu-aJZyy^ co                                                                                    (TVfcLiA (liVkt^Cu^

          i     tXv       t U           W C t£ k u u ^                          ;    (SM.          bie_     y ^ lis ^ v ,       tL'Vrt,              i-W----
                  *1)                              t^LxL            •%^Luyirjd^rtX<--»v^                                   £iyn (A-                   CiXoJ
                       |v,U^/1
                        \ j l m / i VwflWb
                                    viao-hI:       rla iL b
                                                   cLoJLk,          ^ - J   1>UL
                                                                            iX/t.          < * -    ^AtLic,                             'Th&CiL'^xt-i'n.-)



                                                                                     CO a l i i lo LU^ ^ ^C-Uja^                                  ^ -iw a v .      : ,;j
                «^w Jb~V-^>An Wtl                                           r^yu^              ^ 6<_ v| j>yfc£^-                 1^___|
                                                                                                                                  > pJsr^V-Q— -rzrz

                                                             t^V>      h-Musi ciw&t .                                         WRjs^v, \pi-T^-cc£L^i
               ^
               ■t;- ,,
                    I^U                 c»              (hAv,-i                     Ov-e                                       L^4n7^Vt_CLa f
                             (r                       jvi~                  t~U              M V W . QAviJl               I IN-U^-c/L             (9JV). 'Ay
                •-vi       —-Is..                    Ylfi^cA i^V\^U M u O K t,    >
                 faa H-LO'b                  y^jL. ^Lgj^ rw . V^U?     ^»yA. VA^^vx-rU-^X u^/)                                                               Cj^j-cn

                \*XAiX^L ' W j . u o O^-Lci X L^~                           >^-C^U.I^O I/VU>va1                             L^-g—        uvv-            Cj(|n-v..

                 1 fLa"Vv/'ccu^L^y(                    ^              o S w U^/Vv                   fxi;                   C iTV\J^1L^£           V)C>-0'Ks^
  JJ            ^ c ^Xi? tiIXC^Jbi*yl. Wv-fi— "tp                                            his-
                                                                                    ^ 0 ^ ____________ i/w. r.^\ (/,
                                                                                                                   •1                                        ,
   8
                 A O     0        1ft ^ &H j ( i(t-M^
                                    ^ &—         —    . \            C- (Twhi^te.J                                  A-^)L>        fi.           G-Ctvn_W 1-^.-
                 Ax^ekjil                             .^T        ry^q'wv->JL-                        oixft-wb
                 rMUvvN ^                   Mi!o       CiAv> s-Ijl^j                                 lAJv^-g_i/v           UL^                                   w)6vq

   . -)         U/lvrJUv c LT<\jbw»-l                        ^      '-o tA                          ^       'Kg^~ov>v "fe*               m>-
  ■ <j
                w itL                                                                                                         S, ~ f v o
 J                                      t                           A € l^                 A O f tT -c t - l         VJ
Chief Fire Officer

StnO                                                       06/2/2
Mansfield Road                                               ]MR

Incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium
on the 15th April 1989                                     17.4.89



Mansfield Road. WRL StnO         OIC attended the incident at
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground. The appliance was in attendance
at 1534 hours at the Lappings Lane entrance. I went to the contact
point, the appliance tally was handed over. I contacted SubO
and asked him what the situation was. He reported casualties in the
walkway, on the pitch and gym.

3 crew with resuscitation set and first aid equipment dealt with a
male person requiring resuscitation in the walkway, they were
successful in bringing him round, a further 3 persons were given
oxygen in this area. They then proceeded to the gym and gave further
assistance. 1 Fm went straight to the gym and found a person with
serious neck injuries, he found a doctor to treat the person. He
then rounded up 3 crews with resuscitation equipment for use in the
gym.

I contacted StnO Swain at the contact point, he requested me to go to
the gym and help ADO Robjohns. I contacted tue ADO Robjohns who
directed me to organise patient removal from the gym to the
ambulances. When the situation was under control I was told to
return to the appliance with my crew.




StnO l________
Mansfield Road
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref..               Ofel fY i | ....                                              \&&T                                          .Division


          Date                                      .......................                              L k r£ m             & k.                     .. Station




SUBJECT




                                                                                                                                     r r n r                     ( ■
                                                                      x n w i                      ~~f~        W ws             fvCTrw^el

           jjTS   —X      ,


                                                                                                                                  _£k$_        A    n > A 4 i>      ,


                                                            C rru > -> & C -             CA
                                                                                         < lr      .
                                                                                                   ,'U    ^l          fy x jt^ r v       r~ b u .> ^
                                                                                                                      IYMJi"ryv>__-----------------

                   ^                        - - ,                     —                      CXl A-                              —f ^ C
                                                                                                                                      V V «^A
                                                                                                                                          o r >^S-i-v                             —
             yJL . fv3s v ^ t ) l r A s                                                           .msyjfri.L S : 1 —              ~~— ---------------- — —
                  fi^ 7             K   •Ib                               Q. A .                          n                      v lW s o ___ p U r - r w > y            L & fA h :

            j-Lo                   KrWy~oi>                 ^irrt^rNeiL f)A. j fyr^Ls                                    fy%ivr^
                                                                                                                         p^nv^              Ruy^iw
                                                                                                                                            I C.>J V<AJK V
                                                                                                                                                         V J L

           gfrrX                  C rg .        i p W I.’.r ^. ip
                                                                «r            Hi!                             Oo-                       i,JkS- c><>r>o-v^Xx__ _j[
  -ft
           C ^ ^d b v g A L                 Cynerv;r>gL                                             IL L   SW n ^ .U -^
                                                                                                           s                  - r r z ----
  —   I
    ~<D           vXjpOnt                                                       _£   ^                ^         1.. K.O-0,
                                                                                                 gL>?prCT^>^^<LL-<— \$ •'Ilk fCT?   D ^t=
                                                                                                                             (S^..--S nj-
   . c
           Pa.-                             OcNGN; i         I                                                                               Q>~\         PA gyp j .

                              p     O                                          cLlo-’w;            W                pv"Q Lz^AJA                CyVexvn                  \7r^_
                                                                                                   C<bdb*Jt-               4        O rJ l                                  ^ V _,
  — t                                                                                              C          L o ft-v ^       S-v^sL l -    ~ q ^"*

   —4 *                            <r                   a-gAtWj___                                                   L-j
                                                                                                                     L          < ^ * k            i
                                                                                                                                                   Tnns
                                                                                                                                                     W bk^LS
                                                                                                                                                         v J T )l V*
                                                                                                                                                                  y ;v£
    o r
           Q'enPiTyv^.K                        rgvs              t HoC,l^A                       J
                                                                                                 i ywN .w.        bvpy
                                                                                                                     J _ fc L               j^ /U k t r          ~^~bL
                                                   ^oy^yXT                                       SAjo^fryi.          W- a.              A<y?~l- Q o              or*,,V^§«£“


      n
                                               CjjCtg»->S-- Z**                          -       ^ A jO ^ vt         W

                                                    ^                                              Jkr-i-Lzj-              £ JT>1 Sir:.            WflS

                                                 P cvciIkj                                       <7W                            ?c          V ,^         yockd
  J                               VjU-yjgLs^-                                                    V ^V ulL L — 'Q CLt -S $                     U j          f e l^ 7
                                        [P>)
           ________ OilW_ ^fM---                                                             0           (nsryr-v^L,.         ^Trv^-      ^ / ^ - ,                     W'gxA
                                               D o J- 'V                D r^ fc o                                                /k ^         ,^ jb —                   —


            ry^vd?                  Q          P cX J jls               Co^>My44^^-                      Wv\^                          __ r& z          OyevLz                  ,_

            Ut'vWCTyyaJuK/m^-x                      Cv n A -                                         -        C rrv jv L i.     Lrx.-                                   L»? ? v / t

            f \ | -T\                                                Vn ^ ?

                                     k^-
                                                                                                                                                   j. nv^-K^.o                5
                                                                                                                                            CirJ^                           (:>



           GWB 12445
                                                                                                                                                                            Cfl-FS-01
               ^ov^                          CirN                   jHr\o^>           W'*-             W'OsL-                                        Idva

                                            Vfi-*5j       Wo?                 v-|        PJ'cC*J ^ o        CdfV^^Ndt^
                                                                                                            'w* ^    I               Irv'*^^
                                                                                                                                     r* —               (
                                                                                                                                                        vH
                                                                                                                                                         ,-

                       .   Urn*®.'*"*'                              G-        $Kcdc                    p^c«l

I VvT»5       rs^v           C;\cXj_^                       oVl^-             C^'v-s                                                                   — ,5*

jVye,         |?yv>/*&.o\l>-1.            to         Lc|^>wa^                                    QtrJl             ^ooIaA.           G-\?        fVvV^T
                                                       t r y

 f e w
                       I                             O          \^obw<«'-S                       r^A>-v6^0^rV^                   Or<L       Sj=5© T<-'              ^

 kNoM^Lb-         3 T         O ^ A « A                  CV\1           q                              Ovl             Vd?        U^l            ptv/tsiay

 *^3                       onpvv^t           ^ 1 ! ^ ^                                   ’
                                                                                         P'Ci'^N                                GCjf-L-SS              r^orrvjD t

 (L^3^- vvO|                           slyvrd              W e           -|cp£si                 ©vw                            tLfNovJ-s

jOrtrwNir         CfrA              or^o                          pCmiK ,                                             W%J

  C CrrrvLs      COroS-S              C                                       iuD^               cvi?                 w W k      c       Gfrrv-^J
                                                                                                                                  _ p
                           ^crv-t     CVlJv'v'*«y          TyNcJ^/^In               ^3        rr^vi^                  G.Vn^1 ^ C^*55>0'C
                                                                                                                                 m"^/0 ^-' VYY^SSaes

                              lr^<>"^cyLx          e»~                        S ^ ^ - ^ 3 cy\               W&^

 I t w                                    tfa       Wcr«JL              C5,r-Jl          ^TOo^                    OV^T"        Cjj
                                                                                                                                      3 ?
                    (Vo-L^l S
 jrn cxS ^ o ^ .^ „ £'r«JLv*i$                     o<*     .. 1 ? ^ -          C<>^A,Nci3^--                  I                   >fcW--------
                                                                                                                                        ^Xk            U-
                                                                                                                                                       i Sf
                                                                                                                                                          Xe
  -Ict-^J^      V^e-         Cot^tosac-
                             Cot^^nsac-              Cir'A        cWrr~v vT
                                                                  (Lcrv\'fc               r>pj'&L           V?-|3
                                                                                                            U-vo        fVrp'
                                                                                                                        fVrW          |"v^
                                                                                                                                      fW\ Ccs-v xJX>'~
                                                                                                                                           Ocik'^Ay

                L»OGli>1            Wfcx>       W^crv-«^p                     ^7o                           ^LvJo-- ""^T*            ^ v— ^Swxlfcj

   ,          C dvS w Jca> a          W ' sxS               1 w-**^      ~i   x *        kv bw         v/   '•-"       Oni       C:— c m ^ i            j *— *


               p i r V v -J (^\              b,«                  V''Oo^‘'v''-c\                 drr^C*j,
                                                                                                        lo^v^--                  \ V>i'V«iW_-               \~<^~

  W s           ^vkr           v^o                        C<lO^r^             o1         v^iL          Ci¥rJlovlo^rt_Sjt.''ivvCt_- ,

          Vr<—         Qr^£5k          fVOeJo^,            Cj'-'"             Wo-j                bcscK               O r ^ j T^_.

  3*olt        V ^ri^w -p                 '^ T o rir        C^                       T 0 .4 i.               Sfe^rjA                             c .s ^ ^ ? ^ -

  (cTo    '^T>'-'          p^^VcL                         o>0-\^<L-s                               C                                             ♦

   , \<y^i..      V^~;~V            . 1d m         ITNCTW         ^or^^-j                 \>r\ 4 'Ot a !'               ri               li|2j

   lo+<~         sk^(fcjT                                                           ^1).0         .    UA^v>ci                       .U
   poi^           V^Vv7             Wv k            W*                              tltyy-^.           UoX              loCfii^'i            •'Mr. .— --

   W n                       pe\jUx_-                             CTV'^v"1'L>cvLiivvq                                     /Z5^0ctum^A I V/\

                                             Ik S        ^70                        O^j Kv ^ S ' ^ W y - r                                  Ovx"

                                                                                                                  s

 j(n^        V»'^-'        ViH--*-        ol-^jzl^Jl             ^7.o           ^V»'o            Co-S-t'oBxc-i                Vvto          W*-

   0 >XA_l       j>.        (y>^       f/rrrJ^S>~^C t                         4\jV4"VV^v^.1'                                   voj t k j ;           V 'Aj£_»SL-

                           ■^To y V' 4^~ o -             C^t€>^     OirX             Cfio               VA=*-tvp              cy,Yir7<'^0,^^-5 „
                                                                                       i'X^tvv>^>J3<><vv>w ^ ' • v U i L -          .
fr^*-'     frwi^             leKi X>r€tkc,          (jT*wi                  ~£mS csU,                fe>   (^^-T^L-

W «,     rrejL ? -     OVs'          W trS         \cx>xL\         ^W3     OW*           C ^crol^o^^-'          (

W <-     W ire-'                                          WfcsA?      *^cyr                         v>^|>V v^^«^S

   S/erTr^         Vy\C*1|l«/~S> ~ o "                       jp-^4ai*^-         W«C©vr^                                CL*n4

u^>sA‘          Uki? a«^pWr^e-S                     es»xl. c                s W r C<x~               V^<-
.^jxJbs,      •^-iTNewv'*     Ai-JL-          lartr^^ ;             \VjL-e.      W 0 .S W t -           V«erL>cL ^                  ^

                 Vcru- kcrv-C ""^cC'r-s-                  C- ^ e jo < J i       J-eJ=>      rverW       *x*w           o tT "

Qy\l>.                  ^7/>«=X\          "^ke^/-    Cjr^yir                    <7rs                  G. ,\ , f

                                                                            *               V/3      tcM       O.v'X cy'^z-v'v!^

                                jh-is        Slii           Cjjs*1
                                                                 '       W»i >         IVtsV”4^                 Or-£-

           rNkJ-rrXs-ft/-               irr'jLrrJtKr'-£      °^~                p^/lfsL-C         ^'Oojlii/          Va S £ -

U J c          W~*~         l>®*i                   dvX       Cl-                      r^»p       Gerr~        vsbc       0"W“

CiQjrJs vA~s3        Vno^Ju                         W-S       •'jo^r^r*           ^                  rv*^>N               jaztv*-

         ,< yrerw -k T ^ lk u i          W ^ re,      .r^ A ^ fc^ d        .O                     ^r*<^»pL^i        le J ^ r    .

                                    ~\f*CT*rrJl      Ino^                                          V^jOCurrsM

       .vL^      loo-cLv        <^C       <!>^7r«^v~rrcLs&L~4             .V^ *0-0 V o v ^ S ,




                                                                                  q      C~       ivs
                                                        G .r .




                                    LtPflch/fc- L A N•C !I             6 n o   .


                                                S t a w d   i    *




                                                        IU 6         U o f




                                                                                   P C f V «,.£ior/ C'   P~oA 0

f 'L f t w   o £   T iM   (r c ftC s r fV                                          A lo tiJ U
 IS'*        m m .        V Y f l X         ^

U rd ^ R o u fe o          r r f iD H ji-
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                      For th e a tte n tio n o f   Your              J
  To
                                                                   R ef.
          Chief Fire Officer                                                         1

          LFM HOUSLEY,                Please c o n ta c t          O ur    016/2/1
 From
          CENTRAL FIRE STATION        Tel.                         R ef.     'DG

Subject   INCIDENT AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND,         D ate
          15TH APRIL 1989.                                                 17.4.89


          On 15th April 1989, I was nominated Officer in Charge of Central Fire
          Stations Emergency Tender with Fm               as driver.

          During the course of the morning a lecture was given on first aid
          covering crush injuries and resuscitation.

          At 1516 hours the E.T. was mobilised with two pumps Central, two
          pumps Darnall Road, One pump Rivelin Valley and one pump Ringinglow
          Road to Hillsborough Ground, Penistone Road, Sheffield.

          Upon attendance at approximately 1522 hours at the Penistone Road/
          Riverside Entrance. (A on map). After a short delay we proceeded
          along the private road following Central 1 and 2 in the direction of
          Leppings Lane side of the ground.

          After proceeding approximately 60 metres the approach was blocked due
          to the height of the appliance against the stand which gave no or
          very little clearance. Station Officer Fletcher was informed by
          Storno Radio that our progress was blocked and unable to gain vehicle
          access by that Route (B).

          Asking for police assistance the appliance was reversed back onto
          Penistone Road (A). At this point a police constable was asked for
          more information and where we could be utilised best. No information
          was forthcoming. Remounting the appliance we then proceeded along
          Penistone Road in the direction of Wadsley Bridge. At this point I
          overheard a storno radio message that resuscitation equipment was
          required at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

          At point (C) on the map we were stopped by a Police Inspector who was
          in radio contact with a colleague. However after a short period of
          time he was not able to offer any positive information. So we
          proceeded to Leppings Lane and parked at point (D).

          Taking with us a Motivus resuscitator one spare bottle of oxygen and
          a first aid kit we proceeded into the ground through the north stand
          access ramp. Entering the stand we forced our way through the ground
          and onto the pitch where we immediately came across a casualty laid
          out with a group assisting by giving mouth to mouth and cardiac
          massaging. Taking charge of the situation we got the resuscitation
          equipment to work and took over giving cardiac massage. Friends of
          the casualty pleaded with us that we continue and don't give up now.
          An advertising board was brought to the side of the casualty, the
          casualty was transferred to this and carried from the pitch (E) to a
          waiting ambulance (F) where he was put into the care of the ambulance
          service.
We then made our way back onto the pitch and walking in front of the
north stand giving assistance to four people and oxygen to a further
two.


We were by now directly in front of the Leppings Lane Stand (6), I
contacted Divisional Officer Lockwood by storno radio who had by this
time located himself by the police box overlooking the ground/
incident.

He directed us to the gymnasium with our resuscitation eguipment.
Upon arrival at the gymnasium (H) we were directed to two casualties
whom we gave oxygen and comfort. A further two casualties were
assisted from the area and onto waiting ambulances. We continued in
this area rendering humanitarian service. Five minutes before the
crowd has asked to disperse we made our way back to our appliance.
Where we were instructed to wait for further instructions.

Some members of the public became agitated and upset that appliances
and a staff car were blocking exits from the ground. There was some
verbal abuse "you have done a good job now xxxx off" and some took
their anger out on the E.T. (no damage was dona on later inspection).
To try and alleviate the situation the staff car was moved to one
side.

A number of members of the public thanked us for what we had done and
a young man came into our care who had lost his father in the rush to
leave the ground. They were reunited a few minutes later.

After the crowd has dispersed we returned to Station arriving back at
approximately 1720 hours.




LFM 943 HOUSLEY D
CENTRAL FIRE STATION, RED WATCH.
                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


                     Headquarters Ref..............                                                     M    S ..................            Division


                     Date..                                                                                                  ................... Station




SUBJECT
                                     f if e . O jfto s r pec OiuisiortoA                          Co^v^oJor.,

                     0 \A                    dau                   Hoja
                                     L ^ fo iv v o u U
                      c v o u c te o (-                                  M ax                                                        urnps, JN5CS-.
                                                                                                                                         DMA.
                      feojuutfpcT o >                      &V\effieAjtf iMeduies^oui                              a r n ^ d , Peui&fUte, & W -
                      b u . f n o t e , fc> H v e                   i^ c iM e v U - a            kap^lqs                       fe \/e U r \ 6 u e y a & i,
                        U2LU€
                      frioLugd           uia-          CbukM                 r e Q x A e s h ’i ^      c/vVmimfl a^l/AMoes                            b

                     aWe^st cJr                            iWi'S     Uc u a g                                to     fejlce. C oiAbcl.
                                         Q\\                f-oaA        oJr G
                                                                             aJMO't.
                                                                               M Sl                              HQM
                                                                                     I S T - I i ^ e . \Mefg, wvef Iqm IflLfttt
                                                                                                                       [aiae

                     y\auAtoerS o|- b&H^                      Police-           c m a <a        dulliOMS           g e a r e d , c u nHjiaA - U ^

                      (Q ^ W q ^ c jp , cJr VeJfo'ms,
                                             VeM kt&. U k P . \ r e O M e v r e d fltu -c?gy
                                                                                        c f lg m J a .
                      brluja resu^cihUn'cw  ■Hcvy UQVi^id                         fit
                                                             c u d e o i J u ^ e ^ H w ^ l^ed                                                               to
                           &#Aer         I/nA   ^rAjoilbvi
                                                r     '    r                               *’     0(|pifi°/^        q   XOuaqs ( -kg ^{-ra^cff
                                  •i^kPij       rntj-Xot vvo-4- a)je. oalm                          c W c u l ^ &-|- 4^g.                       cloU~. ?
                      a Hie*M^rm.               fc> Ga/ifa-d- q y ^ c                        icers
                                                                                           v{f i c g-^U i
                                                                                                        - ^Caw x
                                                                                                               x jqo *
                                                                                                                     p               uja. Sfcsfuo
                      (la d L fo bcM- | o u a ^                    IV-                               e»o e^ J^u q u ^ u 4 ^ » , b a ife /v e s
   m a o & iT




                      Uad          be°»^        cMcm
                                                OWX ^^
                                                     ai^ d dhoJr i/Hom^n                                     4i*? rcxfc6o hsshgcf

                       fAH&fpdonlM .__
                       ___________ i9C \ce 4'K j o u a U nU i , a a ie & @                                         a^c(        cW tp 44 -e ro a d
                       ©          ro\MA^v\q        b ^ l u w d vb-g.                \NsW          S(Vc\Md w € - obsgr\jpj^v <x. rwA*-4>&/~
   W'iu-Sfe2i2oa£H




                                                                    h o d jP A Wvmi &A- sU-g. Kidg.o^44g- ($ad
                                                      ck. i«tAp. o f               P f l u d y £?(jpToscS - IMe. lAAodg o t u ^
                      44unuaU                         H<MtAeA f w                  cyvfro c u            qJam.d<
                                                                                                               A~                            hSfTQC
                      bc>^~ otkefvjed                 ck    qrpqJ- ck2& A o~ j- acHui'Ut ^                                    4^e         p ifc u w U cA
                      \^e r e c u ^ v e ^ . w A \                  d i ^jpccUfu / 4
                                                                   cUffictUfu       W ‘o iW U
                                                                                  4KfnuirtA                             iX- -Ujg. ^ u ^jug,
                                                                                                                                        a . Pft
                                                                                                                                            nr

                                                   —                     —          ---- *         p* °iSiovi 4 ^ o > -Ue. i^ caic L
                                                                                                         — — ---------               u-
                                                                                                                                   —----
                      invJoUpjd          a       sk^ oh ^ roA cdicufiSe.                           oaA       e+ ped-ed               fo e creuiq             fe>
                      bp      U .\/c.lvjexl           ua     e ^ -lr ic a ^ ’^w o(- G a& U ixiK eS -Ah                                       n& t
                      i\MMecUq>l€i>                                      K> w \ e w K o ^ - I W                    c a u s e d -Kg             lage
                      yvUA<A b & /       o V          r^noiWes.
                                                       tW      o v 4 o 4ii?                jp^fT^A            YAA'ted v^r4k c ^ a ^ d A

                      0^ GS\A^£>e^ _C4
                                    ^vTfliQAA-S o * A a                                          v u a m Jo b c    aj- Police O j f c e A
                                             hWtcj             lamo             mx^ii)er<> ^|- u t G n W ^                          bow^        oM   O uis^ M u
                                                              beyZ\              i~o oJAbvA            b 4 le c0 A a.a^h’e ^                     wiLJtpV
                      GW8 12445
                                                                                                                                                           CR-FS-D18
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref....................................                                                                                 Division


          Date........................................................                                                                         . Station




SUBJECT


            [       hrieg( b                                   cm b x d r                   cMa&t                            W- CWuqp                      o* 4

           a       k        Uie.                                   • 1c m &a                          cc&ted                        ■0 ,
           o^d          li- \ajo^ a o re e d
                                  ogre                            K aJ-                                   &KJbuM hp as<Mcved
           44^nugL
           -w ro u a t U * >oulU %hvr\d to                                                           food hetuW lAiU&re
           ^ o u M kj
                    kcJr Vuh cx c a i u f l i h j c A e ^ M ,. c a e a ^ @ . C ^ j y i
            ry&raHfr-A
                  1     7^ voou\ —v\ecessbj^
                                  y           — i rji— fe
                                                       p- f■.■,.,m    V fo
                                                                 :.„z.iatr— u-£— re^buesl-
                                                                                 i         Icutje,____
                                                                                                (" T   ------------

           Aawbe^S gfr- <povis Yo <^gox^4U. ousted ^ -He c'CoMaHcfew^
                                    -K v e )r c r e d jt - ^ - U g cUd Mu$> QjuJidd^ c w d U &a _
           c r d a r l px\           v w x M tA & f.                              \^ \M a     P o lic e   <                     o v v jc A ,   ftlrO A J a x c U

            [ a^raJ^pd b k c u j e c H c A e s u ' m ^ a a p E) m o > m h x m g j p ( MtfgpojL
            Vq U p ^ madAAjcuu  . 1I bsUeue
                         UAiOii ,    bslieue ou&r ou&f Q U > caAuxUh'e>> ^ e r e .
            retMovei^ b 4-UW               •'tPvfOLua U o o f 4^m s> p e ^ c c l QxovcuU

            (2o o j ^          o r e u i s rewfluwejdl                                      rov^AMlrlpot h’) re s tis ^ Vu-h'
                                                                                                                             59-
            nwd           hxw^ArrHua                         ceaujiXh’
                                                                     e sV-^_____________________________
                                       1         ^1          }vAjorwip^(                S K a - 0. Retchsr                                             _ g & h

            rottfc WQ-k beiwva                                                                cv>M ^          c a A u a ^ K j rJgg/7'iAn o , ^ q
           l\a d           be e ^           e^V ^U fo o d . lMlu (e                         ScjLp g C v/i&twa 4ip                       foadtAjc
            ' ou^o(
                sasa -^Ko4~
                     - ^ y ^ r i>
                               ir vmolA
                                  vmola                                   herc^vuugi
                                                                          n e /c ^ u u a          hl/x^ejd
                                                                                                  p io c ^ e ju S ^ n U \ Purple c ^ i

           x ls L ti r^PA               bc^f a-^fe-T                                                  <x Kbcmct F&lfce Officer
           M * rr^ g ^ H c x A                           w qa             certixtpd
                                                                           edCbr    -C U rc U u '^ a k> 'He c m M
            tiAjJiV           NwxjcfiMed                             D-Q.              Loc/cwiood          ov-d SsfrM.fl-
           4w < f~            ( wiOuAjd Q-^iBvvoDh k> tcep p                                          cv^DuAeuA.r<^t
                                                                                                      Cvw,b u^euiftg* •piot\nV<!
            rnap(wcui (jj>) b d M 9 9 ^ 1 U ° ^ p i W                                         \!-^iw^. o v p \
                              X /                      CU
                                                       M m          r f t h,x r u X W l-o UL ^k /.3 r a A c u L l h ^ KUiO/i
                                                                                r\ i        rf\               m   M
                                                                                                                        j ^ ^/"i
                                                                                                                      I A   l
                                                                                                                              U <h u' 4 c u g g
                                                                                                                                b   J                Uti   ,




             1 |oUA_e(                  (Cm                               C vU ^.                             &HCC6

           4 i e          c M " ri\io A          gvO?l           /ft?.D (X rU u ^ , c i-             O^a                                V-
            i\u \1 q J X u                                   M & Jr         c u v tb u ^ O M c e j OyTni/i'iAa o f~ 4 /^ ro w % b ? w g
                              ^eUKevMce                      0           v^erc a x o i d ^ frdwm                                                aiAiAalh^
           \a\Ua rela>i\)eUi                                 rvaiACT y v > \a w ie S                                                           s s n o u s
                                                                                                                                                               &
            w'r~\used
              s\uured v
                      vMercSJ  a p ^ beliAa
                        j &tcSJihm~  peti^r c e a r M e J                                                 <M~ - H e             CQAuaXK
            rjaa^riMj;                  o.rea . t l J S                    iMok          reyolvi’ed, a f f a -                  (C^.                           C v ^f

                   n      a      ~         <^Mhxd- ini>K Polfce Cheers cM-
                               e ^ W a M c e                 . After              i     ko^       ofrte>(WM cv^\                        c^eRU i ^
               Sdtnmo               reuttn            fA      tAAe&saA^                       kciM&wM t-fggf                np^ ■•^ c,v-•■*
             WB12445                                                       vJ                                                                                  CR-FS-018
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          Headquarters Ref....................................                                                                                     Division


          Date........................................................                                                                            . Station




SUBJECT


            |?re. Cf<sva<s vsjUK                            resusdh^h'cw                     esu x J p ^ 4 -                  proceed                     fc> -He.
                                                               vleoviai'i'i
                                — ---- 1--- 1-------------- ~y       :                                                                                  ■       .
                                 -H g . 1m m ec U o ig - Q J^JK .(tU is woa                                                                       AfiO P ohlckhaK
                                                                                         i         I I             It          A /*/N        .1       _    .1^
                                                   V \moa                akouJr 4-Ua V w G . - V M -                           ACO               iA^bu
                                                                                                                                             Moruvs

            cut)oec^ o a ^                          \ p x & e ^ Qvv               riotou\k o j r . & ?-                                           t
          4^U>            b c a J n W s frj- 0 O UorJcuTQocC o x l                                                       A 0 0 fcbjoUM C.
                                                  CUcp         iV Kfld                                       rX&^c V           m       J t vvLovtr of-
           44-e. C O A u a i W e x                        Ia .clo( b e e ^          recoups!                                           p/fcA
            CaAfAflih^                        r i e & WHukq
                                                          -Q c u e a              1 w e w f r h>                              ^cy^Q&itw                          cwp   !
            iu|oa\ApW                          ^00        W)hjpUtAS.                               oiACDwwM^buAaMcas
                            T       T         1    U-^   - j !    *0~l                       i Z         ^         .1.
                                                                                                                        .^ ^ . . . . ,
                                l       u                                                                                          i                  ■     > i..,
           v - e r e k K I V q ^ 6v ^ U i a V                                                                  m    W
                  - H - e c a A u a M v & V 1w e                            ^ 1   M qm                       J A e 6\ a w A . Q ^
           Me.         CK^buJjStMCjeX we-reL, vwi^g. u/^oviK^                                                            o&fg-d Iag-ce,. Qj^uxX'f

            jloou^              r^QAJC. (^^Ueut-uxiXl^
                                             ik^cOlu                          r&arotxped
                                                                              f&qrofi-ft&d I^-He. qiftwuu/u/u* 6v\j^ tMfi-cg-
           ■H ^ w          ngrDiAg^rejsl t-n
                                         k>                        f& R U u v fo
                                                                   fg^cuuv    fo o l l t G ^ lla ^ c M g \\A
                                                                                 ouur                                                      'tirov*-d\ --PM-
                                                                                                                                                        b
           iM L u le         c e h tiiA M ^              Yo        c u lt    6 .|)p l)Q M c e £          C fO      W r la M -          a ^ fi^ o d         2 2
                                                                                                                          0
            I CMICD                                      Iuua V*> 4^> CoiaVto^ CUm h
                                                  i^ -e - ^akrX^ vaoa. <°>^a                                              chCM\d.C\A.&X OA-d

            M 2 t m ^(                      cAjgcu-e&l         bM~          rluG. iro M e .              po ^n aA o{-                  ojj j T gl^I)c u *c s s

           i*{                                tooh^a           ( M o         Uep^U^                Uu^p            v^ere, jo^ced                  k> c o ^ p ...
            ws\-o               cAo^e,
                                c A o ^ e <^Wra.c>h  wiVU^ jirguAew.
                                          CG>Wm.c|-- yviVUv jiYgwe^                                          o^licwc-S*
                                                                                                             c^licwci^ oo a^/A
                                                                                                                            A p Uce-
                                                                                                                               pd$c€L_______

           c[(tcer^ . T W Qcm^i gu n ilu UosHip                                                                           of                 cao^A ^qa.
           <x c a x ^ e - o|- a x A c e ^ y V J v t )                                          CRSW Ov^zA                                                   gue.

                 itKyf          ADO               <2ohlr>UtA^              GELT                                                                            ctoacUL
           P
           i.^ d tac UmK gL c ^ e                                         \AiU<^ wiouUcejd                                     e w m                       S U IT
            c a A Q 2/ t W V o                                                    owcA K e cxdxj^edL                                        Vn
             willM o a r a ^ p l ^ c e ^ ^ w I m C U n s . c U d                                                apgr                                             ^ |e^
            iMeire^                           akP.-Hg- (^puooU a                        cleajer                                ,. £ m f K M apferwcur^
           v^e,                              ry^oa^ed,                      4 ^ ^ o V i P - ^ <m c ( p M m i A A ^ f d




                                                                                                              Sago


                                                                                                                                                                     CR-FS-Olf
        UPffaQ LAN£




    ©
B




                   - faVSLiN f
                 2 - CCHTOAL I
                 3 -C£Nr£AL 1
                 4 " QA&n A u . i
                 5 -Ofr^NAu. /
                 6-C£Nr*AL.f
                "T ‘(^\H&itJCrlOvJ |
                8 -A00 /2o 60<3h-n 5
                ^ "C0NTj20£. UN/T
Chief Fire Officer

SubO __                                                     06/2/2
Central                                                        MR

Incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium
on the 15th April 1989                                      18.4.89



On Saturday 15th April 1989, I was Temporary StnO in charge of
Darnall Road when Darnalls' 2 pumps were mobilised at approximately
1516 hours to "Major incident, cutting gear required" at Sheffield
Wednesday ground, Penistone Road.~ En route to the incident a message
from Rivelin One was relayed via control requesting oncoming
appliances to attend at Leppings Lane and report to Police Control.

On arrival at approximately 1526 hours, we were met by large numbers
of both Police and civilians grouped around the entrance at Leppings
Lane. I requested my crews to bring resuscitation and first aid
equipment and tried to gather information from Police Officers around
the entrance but they could not give any details of the incident. I
attempted to contact other Officers-in-Charge via Storno Radio but
found it ineffective even though the batteries had been changed that
morning and the radio tested satisfactorily.

Once through the gates (A) and onto the road (B) running behind the
West Stand we observed a number of apparently dead bodies lying at
the side of the road shielded by a line of Police Officers. We made
our way through the tunnel (C) onto an almost empty terrace but
observed a great deal of activity on the pitch which we reached, with
difficulty, through holes in the fencing. At this point I was under
the impression that the incident involved a structural collapse and
expected fire crews to be involved in extrication of casualties. It
was not immediately obvious to me what had caused the large number of
casualties.

Moving onto the pitch we mixed with crowds of confused civilians and
a number of Police Officers and eventually large numbers of victims
some apparently dead. The crews began to attend to the casualties
while I tried to make contact with other Officers-in-Charge and
assess the situation. I eventually located StnO Fletcher and it was
agreed that casualties should be removed through the South Stand to
the road behind,where I would set up a casualty clearing area (D).
During this operation it was necessary for me to request large
numbers of fans to clear the aisles in the South Stand and, to their
credit, they did this quickly and in an orderly manner. Along with
Police Officers and Stewards 1 arranged to have a clear passage (E)
maintained through to the roadway. I believe over 20 casualties were
removed by this route. Throughout this period Darnall Road crews
remained fully committed to resuscitating and transporting
casualties.
X informed StnO Fletcher that the exit route was being maintained and
a casualty clearing area had been established. While supervising the
roadway (B) I found that it was becoming blocked with people and
vehicles but after liaising with a Senior Police Officer the
congestion was reduced. On returning to the control unit I informed
DO Lockwood and StnO Swain that I would attempt to keep ambulances
flowing along roadway (B) between Leppings Lane and Penistone Road.

On returning to the casualty handling area I found Fm         and Fm
       successfully handling the arrival and departure of ambulances.
They had initially found that ambulances arriving at the Penistone
Road entrance (F) were rapidly being fitted by casualties with
relatively minor injuries while the more seriously injured were not
being reached at the casualty clearing area. This was resolved after
Fm         and I made contact with Police Officers at the Penistone
Road entrance. After I had obtained an operative storno radio a
message was transmitted requesting fire crews with resuscitation
equipment proceed to the gymnasium. I passed this information to a
number of men in the immediate area. (This was originated by ADO
Robjohns).

It was about this time that ACO Hornsby arrived and I passed on
details of the incident and the locations of DO Lockwood and ADO
Robjohns.

Once it had become clear that most of the casualties had been removed
from the pitch and the casualty area I went to the gymnasium and
informed ADO Robjohns that oncoming ambulances were still attending
Leppings Lane, while the majority of the casualties were now in the
gymnasium, and the ambulances were more urgently required here.
Darnall Road crews eventually regrouped in the gymnasium and were
then requested to return to our appliances and stand-by. While
returning to our appliances CFO Wright arrived and I accompanied him
to the Control Unit.

The match was eventually abandoned and the ground cleared but due to
the position of our appliances the fans leaving onto Leppings Lane
were forced to come into close contact with firemen, appliances and
police officers. The occasionally hostile attitude of the crowd was
a cause of concern to my crew and myself. At one point ADO Robjohns
car was damaged by passing crowds including one person who walked
over it. 1 expressed our concern to ACO Hornsby and he advised us to
remain with our appliances, which.we did after moving them a few
metres to give the crowds a clearer route. Shortly afterwards we
were released from the incident and encountered heavy traffic
congestion arriving back to station at approximately 1750 hours.




SubO _
Central
         1- £|V#JN I
         2 - C.£NT72A{- /
         3 -ceht Ga l %
    W   4 - OA&UAU. 1
        5 'OflP-NQu. I
©
        6 -cenriZAL s'
        1 'AlNfrfA/Grtow |
        8 -A DO £063£h h S
        H "CO NT/Zot U n »T
                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


                          Headquarters Ref—                                           __                                           V.
                                                                                                           ........................... ............................... Division

                          D „ . ............. I k       -     4 - -        ^      ...... ,                                                                   ........ Station

                               C£i€P                    Pitt               O F f ^ / c . pes-                     ’
                                                                                                                  ETTElc^T^                           c -g m       M * Albert.
                                    yJeST
SUBJECT
                                    O^                  S a iu ^ U )                           IS lL       A f + J i ____ g - t . .. l.gV..fe J * g £ ______
                                 AxJ^yj\                              OAl              k/ttO           C-aj & k d .            j g ..— cx*v               yv^^ieta*<J:
                                                                                      (aJe A s r u ^ A c u j              ,4 g > « fr ^ a i^              £ |/- c -u ~ * .ei«
                                        U           W                  •\i^auJ~e0.iyvi.cj_ _ _ q j tcmcj__ P ^ i^hzaiJL                                           &£xx.d--
          Q & rvtJ&




                                ^            t u <2-            uacjA             ^Jc 1               a                                           ujcu            p &A^ gJ..
                                                    CcvdfoQ                            ho        aftaicA                                                     U ■'CL'VU*

                                m           ta z              'i^ rjA a A '                    i& y c7 v\t
                                              (Dn            ' ou-t~u^>t\Jl                                    UXXS             i'V u Lt           io Y SfrL O S LOcLl*.
          f r u ^




                                                                           :
                                                                           4u-e              Sskrinrm             <%yu 4              Ag­                                    J         tML

                              ¥rtr
                               iQ~             hi^tteL                     /n y              c~heu.J              LOtA^
                                                                                                                  Unity,               n icA iiru *
                                                                                                                                       f$Crfau~CL4                  cu^c
                                                                                                                                                                    OU^cf
                              Zks&t                         A d                es^Ajlp                  a.'Ajd f>htr&L(Lcj__ m t p i
                                                                                                  ^           -r-’f .... j         ---------
                                LepsQsw^s                              La~u>                   £rt£j-a*LCj?                iL j J A __
          e P o o - r &




                             ../TUik^                         Ca^LUcJ^h^s ,                               ..        .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                    v/Ag                   ol t<x>€^r- & {                     WsJ)                                               LaJQ~s3

                              & fi)L & ^ € c l                        hr          ^J~ co rw l ■                          m i
                               ______ \-T&JjrU/\.Cj
                                      l^rrjaru/LCj                                    ^^CcaL^cJ                 7 £Uc<7
                                                                                                                r^uu?                  UX^-L^'- Lcp>\__ /VLLJ
                                                                                                                                                        /Kiz
                               (A)eb&                   c /u ritle c /                       U hr pcu *-£                         h?          cd Z L c/
          &




                                                               ’A           hr                                                         Ate/             UJ-$^-(LLK2-a
                                 p&Q^u/dk *
          S tf z F




                                                            AJ<g-               LOtf^e               7^/1          cu^u^iM':/                       ht._*
                                y                                     OJ-LhJz€-                /7T        h£vH£nS€                 (!C^aMC(JcU.^a                          hr          fkJL
                               J&s-                 fad                    &/          /h>           rtroivrtfj           f       ft&iLoJdrw / u m c / &n/fosice)
                                urtA?,fj>.'                   C L ^ c u d t a / a cyZs                    a.vt/jf          c/oclirfS                                    uxuhmty
          fcr




                                 hr           CCU^td                       hf

                              ________________ . /                                           / W               u n ^ y f n i c - U J ____ ^
          (fljCsi&EMT




                                >4, -P. <9,                                 frs/xjts             hr        Hl&jl-              ^oj~5tvul                /n&*viLG-t-S




                              V taJAuuherf                            /cr               mO-ju-                                  LOcu;                hr                           c
                                                                                                                                                                                  cct M a f
                                            t-e^                                  c   I& l m k                 UXU&-                Cyv.         QM<2^l&(cx-sLCg                   .
                                        -------         «-t ---- ir        wy           olfiVU.
                                                                                        ~ if                   I/lI o^          k~> —
                                                                                                                                —   &• >         U ->■ & t i L
                                                                                                                                                --^-

                                lA^'sjrvucbeJ.                                    itr          h^Pcrfir                  hy          K\J                 J/yi/uztuxL-rri
                                 fayljLsHL                            U>^                    U>eJ&               M^vtsu^/eef
                             GOzlJzrt'S                               (xntL             CxuuJLtijlh z <7                      CU\            N > ^ a U Z ^ . cJ >
                                                                                                                                                                                   CR-FS-018
               SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


               Headquarters Ref....                                             W f § T .........                            . Division

               Date                          ....... ..........           -D A r£ j\i   A rL -A —        £ c sW r£ >         .. Station

                 Ci-irteF         fi&£      e> P R oetfl           fim-      CnJiSicr^A*-'                       C c v m ^ l Arv/tbex
                       W £S7~        & 1 1//£ /Ot J
SUBJECT
                   JfW                a                       cl             jtwuz.             Lye-              LQ^4-e

                  jg        ■tfJjJUny                                     Ap>fJ!icXsA-ZJZ.                    Ci^.d          UjaSh
                                                        i^w
                         $b        CX c^-t-eni                            JtetTS         f+g£               L
                      c fc c L z ^ e d        h r                               h r         fa a & z . .




                                                                                                                       SU8     O
                                                                                               £>Ag.fsfkU_                  <gc»fcfc> Cffgh)




          I
          jr •
          V5

          V-



          .V-

          Vi




                                                                                                                                          CR-FS-018
                                                                                                    !3Bg^gBgSBSggagT^ J T
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                            For th e atte n tio n o f   Your
   To
                                                                        R ef.
              Chief Fire Officer

              SUB O |                       P lease c o n ta c t        O ur    016/2/1
 From
              DARNALL ROAD                  Tel.                        R ef.     'DG


S u b je ct    INCIDENT AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL GROUND,         D ate
              .15TH APRIL 1989.                                                  17.4.89



              On Saturday the. 15th April at 1516 hours, Darnall One was called to
              and incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.

              Whilst travelling along Penistone Road to the incident, a message was
              passed by Control to attend Leppings Lane Police Incident Room.

              On arrival I was met by Station Officer Swain of Rivelin Fire Station
              and he requested me to take my crew with Motivus and First Aid
              Equipment and proceed into Leppings Lane entrance where there were
              many casualties.

               The driver of the appliance was ordered to stand by on the appliance.

               Having reached this location my crew were divided into pairs to
               attend to casualties to render first aid wherever possible.

               We were then assisted by members of the public to remove casualties
               to the far end of the ground (Penistone Road Entrance), where
               ambulances and doctors were waiting to attend to them.

               I was then instructed by Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns to
               take some members of my crew to go round the perimeter of the playing
               area to instruct any casualties that were not seriously injured to
               make their way to the areas where the doctors were in attendance.

               Having done this we were then instructed to report to the gymnasium
               where we were requested to assist doctors with casualties as
               required.

               After a period of time we were told to return to our appliance and
               wait for further instructions.

              At approximately 1655 hours we were ordered to return to base.




                       SUB O ___
              DARNALL ROAD (RED)
                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


                            Headquarters Ref...................                                                                                                                                                                                           .Division


                            Date...........                                                                                                                                                                                                               .. Station

          .i
              •


m                 SUBJECT
                                                       E 'P '                    £ -E ~                                                                     £g3<L.                                                 C -6 —                     (J D                                  Q       \ \ / .
 .T ”.        *


                                                      n~                i f - a - - 8<7                                                                                                                                                       c lX is _ r
  kA (




                                    e r ^ .. £ v                                           ( f A   jg -                     cyyJu^ci!-                                                                                                  « ^ a _       o     f t H       .



■. -
   •t►   :• •’
                                                                                                                                                                        V                           A                  O-ir                           * b (j 0          ■> *            X-J
         i:
                                    0                                                  ]r~cr7rt^-u^3
                                                                                                 J f f 3 c-
                                                                                                         , Ljjuy^r-
                                                                                                                i t 0 .,                                                                            ^0       . K *o ti -y J. J rT                    \ 2 L                  <==^a
                                                                 g,r                   \ S~ / £>                            f4>^>                                               ^rrrcJlS^Ll^J                                                     t=> "'JU.

                                                                            J L *                               ^       i - d                             ( >   4               o    Z      a   ,                       * -c-v« rl. O «                                 c       j r r w        T   s       J   i -


                                                                I f              ? 0
                                                      irzxp            iuv        ^ ahol                                              £>\JjR s *                                    a    *Uo ~                         t^-v^                         *=Qa. Y r r w
                                                                                                                                                                                                     n       r c   A   ^       v    J                ^C'iutj^uL
                                    “                         <^6
                                                                          n...  :.:
                                                                          Cyg~ycML-                        AA-»-<vvj^>0
                                                                                                                                              n ^                               Cr^
                                                                                                                                                                                     j                   3             v                ..                                              .


                                     cjvL'L                     n^-OruJlJn^e'D cJr C$s~ 43ijji - iK rJ^<X^<Jju.r
                                                                                   ,                                    2         *       1                                                                                               *   »                             0
                                C   f f r i £       i - t M            < X ^ .




                                                                Z^10              {j                                                              -«/                                                    dliL                                                               fo
                                £p£U J2-                         J&              ca         /\^ s£r^ b ^ Jt'                                      o             - \A                        A                 **Jc                      cr^k.         j g <$*<*£&■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            p  *  2.                        CV^iA
                                    /Vv              JLj^rui-J^ttJjL                                i~£-J/*jdL&£'                                     vX?v3                           yr\^Jjl_ -^<r' fH-
                                    uw                                'A^.yy—                                   >j)o                              CM^ru^~~ar^<JP                                                       v"r-ft--^i<? v-^- ZUjA / ^ sJ!
                                                                                                   c^fl.                 \s^ju£t^                                               cdlkJ^                                     L                                                            r'A -
                                     )                 otc                     i
                                                                       «Qsxrrr*r               Jb-                                                                                              /fe                    o c ''^X<l<JC J'Cv*
                                _ ^ A                                                      Y-t^Ju^o                                       JbjZ' J~dLQ.                                                         rvc                                                  .

                                                                                  iL ^ _   __                       i i                                                                                                            c L ctxtA                t   &       i               r~ 0 ~ rt-< (



                                        A   - i r




                                            ttjfcrruJ                        ^                                                            n^jg,                     /C^O.                           /^ c o J t                           ^-AJ-<.^ c^r                                         H        O           r




                                    oL?vm                        C^0>Q-                 loTZCg                      a                                                                               „              p-^uKiLai^

                                                                                        - ^ U gJt>Q-g
                                                                                               X > ^ 3 -g ^                                       rM                                 ^                   ^ z i                      C^S-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A . yyv-c-L><jL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          v -fr-?

                                                                             £XJ>


                                                                                       ySQ O                                                                                fcj^VVW'H                                          c L            a             g   %       o       -




                                                                                                          / L   o                         A                                                     H2^vu.vflwJ
                                                                        'oLvx                                                             A                                                                                                                     cv^A



                                                                                                                                                                            tK,                                                    k~S

                                    J Z                          ^AP-tV cK>
                                                                                                                            ( L       <       A   5   r
                                                                                                                                                                    <   =   k       f i A       ^                                                     J J yx ^                          k£ sl .

                                                                                  uw               AtrJvi^                                    ^-Gofe-                                                               &Jl & tsL                                                                                  ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r.B.rc-rtin,
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE                                                                  /©
          Headquarters Ref.................                                                                             ..................................Division


          Date..                                                                                        ^1xJEL.[2 >                                         Station




SUBJECT


               KLMi          s^liCcXe^a                      £5        ^vfi-    t?dkr\                                £bz.                                      Cud      t & o ie

                                                                                                        t& L                                             v-rLfljul--

                 ■*                                -    •         -*                  ^ _|7..........     ■. — - ■    —■     ~                I,.............     - W'      ....................

                 T ~ 2 L Q t ^ t l                                      yyuJU&JL            yju~r^\jQ                      / Q » ^rxrt~ VOAtiiXy


                                   /I p                 v& *>>               b ^ -g                <A 4 -. ,^Pco                           ^jO <arr
                                                                                                                           /S e c                                     r     x
                 fccA -               ^                crt^er^ c i k               na^      ^ U x               oir ~ciLo                                         .
                                   H it                                O ftvh          lJu a                                         (      k>          eu2oiLaA C$Q
                                                                                                                                                            h e &,

                                              \o                               u iua.                                                                             *. J
                                      rX^AeJaj                          4-< > &             C A j i                   te                    cnAjv-^
                                                                                                                                 ijfe. <3rf-CTix-<l                        cud

                 v /u afc S Z          fc ,/                                                                                                         Q o
                          (yT^vx-tr-rrt.                                 cc^A-o          rla-ZA^JdJ                     ^tivyg- C^r^M-VUU^^UL3
                  h               A       l                 <2/UJiX<r<Vg-             ^-gl              &X.J         f.v-T^ <r-0o         <^-ru%;(                    «■— C^i-
                  o    J I p -3-                                        ^ruA            J L v t a t-v^vA                -r & m
                         ■                             ,fc
                                                                          sisxQrw^Li\\^dL&
                                                                       cu-r'iV                                                                   4               dLib
                  C U .'fljL                           C X il          C L s -tv --l> v -J        .                                 jp&fe/yJL              O ^ J lA -
                  F           T           $            /I               To                 r
                  0       O           J&rAarr-rrzJ ^                             Ovtl                   /[ C - O             l'h?r*vdt~'A C^lr,                              <£&.



                 y jAJL,tJ-   JIt ^u JL   fe    (jL_____
                    u ___________________________  l--£. C*/UL^U<^ui-O
                                                            ____                                                                                          " c f c ja        t5 ~zu3

                                              M»Yv<jLnn                 riLit          fcfia             c j h t \s J        tcz-tp c.                                K    jlo      W         ,

                                      cQ&c\y&d                                                 SO-r-rJl^ML              r C C<ta__

                      o 4 a            ix&J;                                              ^-U^-v<^a-cu—                             (?

                                                                                                            f^fea A                       fijrtJL >l£A.
                                                                                                                                                                          -T ^ -
                (Xpj3^ i — < g-                             n^vcl                                         fc? .^rrv^e_ g t X __ 0                                3 0


                                                                                                                                                        C^T-v •




           C
           W012445                                                                                                                                                         CR-FS-018
SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE
MEMORANDUM
                                           For th e a tte n tio n o f   Your
    To
                                                                        R ef.
               Chief Fire Officer
                                           P lease c o n ta c t         O ur     06/2/2
  From         StnO Swain J. 274
                                           Tel.                         R ef.       SR
               Rivelin Valiev

S u b je c t   Incident at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium         D a te
               on the 15th April 1989                                            17.4.89



               On tha 15th April 1989, I was Officer in Charge of Rivelin One
               appliance when we were mobilised to a major incident at Sheffield
               Wednesday Football Club. On receipt of the call at 1516 hours, I
               proceeded to the Leppings Lane end of the ground. On arrival I was
               unable to enter nearer than the iron railings at that end of the
               ground because of the large numbers of police, public and ambulances
               at the site. I contacted control and requested that Darnall Road
               appliances attend at Penistone Road end.

               As I dismounted from the appliance to speak to a police inspector at
               the gate and an immediate request was made for a resuscitator in the
               rear of the ambulance which we applied.

               I asked the inspector what he wanted me to do and he attempted to
               contact his superior by radio but with no success.

               I then sent Fm        down the road at tl.e rear of the stand to
               attempt to find a more senior police officer. He returned to inform
               me the most senior officer down there was a sergeant. Further
               conversations were made between myself and the police inspector as to
               his requirements and at one stage he wa3 of the opinion that our
               services were no longer required.

               I then sent L/Fm           and 1 Fm to look onto the pitch whilst the
               inspector made further attempts to contact his superiors.

               A police officer then emerged from the ground in some state of shock
               requesting resuscitators to be taken into the ground as there were
               dying people on the pitch. In view of this message I contacted
               control by radio and made pumps 10 for resuscitation equipment.

               At this time ADO Robjohns arrived and I briefed him of the situation
               and he took of over the incident at this stage.

               He then went into the ground to assess the situation for himself and
               left me at the gate to lease with oncoming crews. I then directed
               five crews to the ground as instructed by ADO Robjohns and DO
               Lockwood. I also directed some ambulances to the Penistone Road end
               of the ground in the absence of anybody knowing the ambulance
               requirements and Mr Robjohns repeated requests for ambulances to be
               sent to that side of the ground. I then sent with DO Lockwood and
               ACO Hornsby into the ground and cleared five crews from the pitch
               back to their appliances as there was some concern that the crowd was
               getting restless.
I cleared all personnel from the pitch and then went to the gymnasium
to prevent further personnel from going onto the pitch until
instructed to do so. I then returned to my appliance and returned to
base at 1730 hours.




StnO Swain J. 274
Rivelin Valley
