                                                          ftco   CjFP~)




                        HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY


                             FINAL .OBSERVATIONS   fa C ^ v ^ e / ^       ^




I. INTRODUCTION
1.       A large number of witnesses and a great deal of evidence has
been heard in the course of the 31 days during which the inquiry has
been sitting.     We do not propose in these observations to go into
detail or seek to resolve issues of minor importance.      We will give
our views on the major issues and seek to indicate what in our opinion
are the important findings of fact which the Tribunal ought to make.
We do not conceive it to be our task to invite the Tribunal to
apportion blame, but we recognise that is inevitable that criticisms
will be made in the course of deciding what happened and why.       We
shall not shrink from making such criticisms as we consider
appropriate.


2.      In deciding what happened, we have been greatly assisted by
the video and photographic records, all of which have been freely made
available by their owners.     We should like also to place on record our
gratitude to the interested parties for their co-operation in
producing relevant documents and witnesses and to the West Midlands
Police for their immense effort in interviewing witnesses and
collecting the necessary evidence and in producing for us, often at
very short notice, exceedingly helpful reports and summaries of their
enquiries.     Without that assistance and co-operation our task would
have been impossible.     As it is, we are conscious that we have
completed this stage of the inquiry within 3 months of the occurrence
of the disaster and that many witnesses who were at the ground and who
could have given relevant evidence have not been called.     We have
taken the greatest possible care to try to call a representative cross
section of witnesses and to ensure that no serious issue has been left
uninvestigated or uncovered by evidence.     We are satisfied that we
have succeeded in this objective and that sufficient evidence has been
called before the Tribunal to enable it to reach proper and accurate
findings.     All parties represented have had the opportunity to
nominate witnesses whom they considered were able to give useful
evidence and we have, so far as possible, tried to accommodate them.
We confidently believe that there are and can be no complaints that
any relevant witness, who could add to the account given by others,
has been overlooked or that any evidence has been omitted which
affects any material finding of fact.


3.      In opening this inquiry on 15th May, there were set out what
the indications were at that stage of the sequence of events.       After
31 days of evidence, it is not necessary to change anything of
importance.    The picture, broadly speaking, remains the same.     By
about 2.30 pm, there was a serious crush outside the turnstiles at
Leppings Lane.    As the minutes went by, the situation deteriorated and
by 2.47 had reached such a state that the experienced police officer
in charge, Superintendent Marshall, decided that the only way to avoid
injuries or death was to open the exit gates to relieve pressure.        He
radioed a message to the controller, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,
who authorised the opening of the gates.    At 2.52 pm Gate C was opened
and about 2000 went through it.    By this time, the two central pens on
the terraces, 3 and 4, were full, although there was space on the
wings.    When the gate was opened, no measures were taken to prevent
those entering going down the tunnel ahead of them into the already
crowded central pens.     Most did so, causing severe congestion in the
pens.    As a result, 95 in the pens were crushed to such an extent that
they died and many more were injured.     Unfortunately, the police
officers in the control room and on the perimeter of the pitch failed
to appreciate that the pens were overcrowded and that fans were in
distress.   The perimeter gates, inadequate as they were, were not
opened in time and measures to relieve the situation were
insufficiently expeditious or adequate.    This does not mean that
individual police officers did not do all they could.     The fault lay
in a lack of planning and of leadership and, above all, in a failure
to appreciate the need to control the numbers in the central pens.


II. STATE OF THE GROUND
1.        Following representations by the South Yorkshire County
Council in April 1978, on 7th August 1978 Hillsborough was designated
as a stadium requiring a safety certificate under the Safety of sports
Grounds Act 1975 with effect from 1st January 1979.     The club
appointed Dr. Eastwood’s firm, Eastwood and Partners, Consulting
Engineers, to act on its behalf in its dealings with SYCC and/or
Sheffield Metropolitan District Council "in relation to the ground
being designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act" (Doc: 30).
There were meetings and correspondence about various improvements *
which were needed to the ground in order to achieve the capacity
desired by the Club.    The Leppings Lane terraces were awarded a
capacity of 10,100, after the existing crush barriers had been tested
and, as necessary, replaced and new ones positioned.    This capacity
was based on the figure in the Green Guide, stated to be the maximum,
of 5.4 per m2 reduced by about 10% to take account of the lack of
gangways.   This lack was not considered by Dr. Eastwood to be of
significance because of the ease of movement throughout the terrace:
at that time, there were no radial fences.


2.      In 1981 at a cup semi-final there was some crushing. This       was
caused by a combination of uneven distribution on the terrace, an over
capacity of about 500 and the late arrival, due to traffic problems,
of a number of supporters.     An early goal exacerbated the situation,
because there was a surge, and a number of fans were injured.
Perimeter gates were eventually opened and fortunately sufficient fans
were able to escape to alleviate the problem.     There had been some
crushing at the turnstiles and the police were, according to Mr Vaux,
slow to react to events.     There are obvious similarities to the events
of 15th April 1989, but fortunately the injuries were few.


3.      It is significant that the police at the time    appear tohave
believed that the figure of 10,1000 in the Safety Certificate was too
high: see Doc: 136.   Their letter to the FA does not reflect this
belief - see Doc: 138 - and it does not seem to have been put to the
Working Party of SYCC concerned with the Safety Certificate.      The
answer to the problem was considered to be the division of the terrace
by radial fences with 3 pens of roughly equal areas.     Eastwood and
Partners were asked by the Club at the same time to consider an
alteration to the turnstiles, but that did not in the end come to
anything.
4.        The erection of the pens was not of itself a bad idea.      The
fences were to have gates at the top, to enable egress to be made to
the adjoining pens.    Much has been asked about these gates and the
arrangements, if any, to man them, whether by stewards or by the
police.    It seems they were to have a dual use: first, to enable fans
to go from one pen to another to help in an even distribution on the
terrace as a whole and secondly, as emergency exits in case of the
need to evacuate the pen.    Dr. Eastwood said that he believed there
would be police control over these gates because he recognised the
importance of maintaining the numbers of people in the pens.
Unfortunately, although he was aware of the importance of this
control, he does not seem to have impressed the club or the working
party with it. The police interpreted control as meaning that the
gates should be left open, only needing an attendant if they were to
be closed and might need to be opened in an emergency.


5.        The reality was, as Dr. Eastwood accepted, that without any
mechanical means of counting, there was no possibility of adhering to
the capacity in the pens.      Accordingly, no capacity was formally
adopted and the safety certificate remained as it was.     Reliance was
placed on visual assessment.     The problem with that was that all
responsible, both police and stewards, accepted and tolerated density
in excess of that which was proper.     Evidence was given by police
officers to the effect that full meant chest to back and shoulder to
shoulder and that it was only when people were in obvious discomfort
that action would be taken to shut off a pen.     This is not
intentionally callous; it is a reflection of what football crowds have
been conditioned to put up with.     It is significant that in both 1987
and 1988 the conditions on the terrace in the central pens were
thoroughly unpleasant, but no-one complained and each match received a
clean bill of health.   The failure to seek the views of supporters or
to take any steps to inquire into their comfort is a notable feature
of the story unfolded in the evidence.   It has led to assumptions
being made which were dangerously inaccurate.


6.      In 1985 there were plans to improve the turnstiles at Leppings
Lane.   In addition, the police asked for more radial fences.    The main
purpose of those changes was segregation, so that home and away
supporters could both be accommodated at the west end of the ground.
In the result, the scheme to increase the turnstile numbers, and to
achieve not only segregation but a means of counting numbers into each
part of the terrace, was not pursued due to the reluctance of the club
to incur the expense.   In fairness to the club, it does not appear
that Dr. Eastwood impressed upon them with sufficient emphasis the
absolute need to keep the numbers in the pens to a safe level and the
desirability of the increase of turnstiles to achieve that.     He said
that he saw it as his duty to advise the club on the safety
implication of any proposal and to raise any objections he may have
had on that score.   But he seems, perhaps understandably, to have
adopted the attitude that the working party was there to approve or to
disapprove and, if it was satisfied, all well and good.   The working
party for its part did not appreciate the absolute need for regulation
of the numbers in the pens and so no steps were taken to review the
safety certificate appropriately.   In the result, the centre pen was
divided by a radial fence down its centre and part of it was taken out
of commission by a second fence to form the sterile area now known as
pen 5. The barriers in pen 3 had to be modified because one stretched
right across it. This was done by removing two sections of railing.
This had an effect on capacity and also resulted in the gaps being too
wide.   In 1986, as a result of a police request, barrier 144 in pen 3
was removed because it was said to be causing an obstruction at the
mouth of the tunnel.    This, too, had an effect on capacity.


7.       It is clear from the history that the pens were developed in a
piecemeal fashion.     It is difficult to accept Dr. Eastwood’s evidence
that he made a positive decision not to follow the Green Guide advice
on the width of gaps and that there was a full discussion at the
working party.   There is no record of such a discussion, which is
surprising.   One suspects that the significance of the changes and the
need to ensure that there was no overcrowding was not fully
appreciated at the time and there is an element of hindsight creeping
into the evidence that has been given.     Furthermore, the record of the
telephone calls at docs. 379 and 380 do not suggest that Dr. Eastwood
was as concerned as he now suggests about the need to monitor and
control numbers in the pens.     His evidence that he was misquoted by
his colleague Mr Strange is not very convincing.     Be that as it may,
the result of the changes was that the capacities of the pens
according to the formulae set out in the Green Guide were 822 in 3 and
871 in 4. A conservative estimate of the numbers in pen 3 at 1503 pm
on 15th April 1989 is 1576.    It is likely that that pen contained at
least double its safe numbers.
8.        In April 1986 the Sheffield City Council became the licensing
authority.   Mr Bownes was the individual responsible.   He himself had
no direct knowledge of sports’ grounds and their safety and was
responsible for a large number of disparate licensing systems.        In May
1986 he reported that the conditions attached to the safety
certificate gave "some cause for concern, as they appear to be
inadequate or inappropriate in some areas".    In evidence, he said that
those were ill-chosen words and he meant nothing more than that the
certificate should be updated to reflect the substitution of the City
for the County Council. We find that evidence unsatisfactory,         but we
are left in the dark    as to the precise ways in which Mr Bownes
believed the conditions were inadequate or inappropriate.     They
clearly were in that they failed to reflect the existence of the pens.
Mr Bownes very properly embarked upon a review of the conditions and
decided that the working party system inherited from the County
Council needed to be changed.   Sadly, his review was not concluded,
nor indeed nearly concluded by 15th April 1989.    He was undoubtedly
overburdened and he did not appreciate that there was any real problem
at Hillsborough.   Nevertheless, there can be no excuse for the failure
to sort the certificate out and more particularly to ensure that
something was done to prevent overcrowding on the terraces.      In
fairness to him, the other members of the advisory committee (as the
working party became) did not apparently appreciate the need for
action.   The absence   of any certificate at allat Sheffield United and
the glaring omission    to change the capacity for the Kop are
symptomatic of failure to do what ought to have been done.
9.      The police and fire authority both had an input, being
statutory consultees.     But on the key issue of capacity neither had a
direct concern.     The police were, of course, concerned with problems
of order and generally safety.     They were not experts in capacity nor
is it altogether surprising that they thought in terms of visual
monitoring.   The fire service was concerned with the sufficiency of
emergency evacuation measures.     They say they were given to understand
at a meeting on 10th April 1985 that the police would man the gates at
the back of the radial fences and thereby be able to monitor numbers.
The police deny this.     It is difficult to believe that there was such
a positive undertaking by the police: if there had been, one would
expect it to be recorded in writing and it is not.     The only record is
back in 1981 (Doc: 153) where it is noted that the new gates would be
under police control.    The probability is that the need to control
numbers was not properly appreciated so that having men at the gates
was not considered to be as important as it now appears.     The fire
service may well have believed that the police would be in charge of
the gates.    In league games they were, and the system involved the
filling of the pens one after the other.     In 1985 and 1986 there were
no semi-finals and the problem of a capacity crowd into all the
terrace did not arise.     This may have given rise to any
misunderstanding.


10.     It will be clear that it is our view that the avoidance of
overcrowding in the pens is the key to safety.     The perimeter fences
are needed to prevent pitch invasions and they, or some similar
barrier, are a requirement of UEFA and of the FA: see Doc: 296.     They
are not in themselves the problem, although the gates or means of
egress through them must be adequate to cater for an emergency.        Those
at Hillsborough were not, being narrower than the 1.1 metres required
by the Green Guide.     Provided that the fans are properly distributed
in proper numbers, no problem of crushing should arise.     Indeed,
smaller areas ought in theory to be safer, since they contribute to
ease of distribution.     However, the smaller the area, the greater the
significance of an increase in numbers over the safety limits.


11.         There are other defects in the ground which contributed to the
disaster.     There were an insufficient number of turnstiles to
accommodate the 24,000 or so fans who were to come through them.       The
Leppings Land entrance to the ground formed a natural bottleneck.
Crushes at the turnstiles were, it seems, not uncommon, but normally
they were shortlived and contained well within the perimeter gates.
Unless fans came to the ground over a reasonably long period,
ie. about 90 minutes, and at a reasonably steady rate, problems were
likely.     Furthermore, there was a complete absence of adequate signing
inside the turnstiles.     All fans were encouraged to go down the
central tunnel and would be forgiven for not being aware of any
alternative route.     Suggestions that anyone who had been before,
indeed any fan who knew football grounds generally, would have
realised that they could go round the side of the west stand we found
unacceptable.     The lay out at Leppings Lane was the result of a need
to segregate.     That need had not existed since the 1987 season, but no
changes had been made and no signs put up.     It was accepted by Mr
Mackrell that the club could not at semi-finals comply with the
requirements of condition 28(1) of the Safety Certificate that a
record be kept of the numbers of spectators admitted to the west and
north west terraces respectively.    There were no means of controlling
the numbers on any part of the terrace within the limits of total
capacity.


III. OTHER PRELIMINARY MATTERS
A. Who was to control the fans on the terrace?
1.      The Green Guide clearly places the responsibility of ensuring
the safety of spectators upon the management of the ground, in this
case, the club: see paragraph 23.    The South Yorkshire Police Standing
Instructions for the Policing of Football Matches (Police Doc: 11)
include as one of the specific duties of stewards that they should
prevent overcrowding and ensure that crowd limits in various parts of
the ground are complied with: see Appendix L paragraph 7(a).     The
evidence of all senior police officers from Chief Superintendent Mole
at the outset has been consistent.   The police did not expect there to
be any stewards on the terraces and no active steps were to be takerf
by anyone to control or direct spectators on the terrace so as to
avoid overcrowding/ The fans were expected to find their own levels.
If the central pens became overcrowded, the fans would either turn
round and go back up the tunnel or disperse by the gates at the rear
of the radial fences to the adjoining pens.   The police in the control
room would keep an eye on the pens and, if overcrowding was detected,
should take steps to stop more coming in. Alternatively, although it
was not part of the match operational order, police officers on the
perimeter of the pitch and in the west stand would report any problems
to Control to enable them to take necessary action.   The club was
clear that it had no responsibility for the management of the fans on
the terrace and said there was an agreement, not in writing or
specifically recorded (pace Mr Lock whose evidence in this regard we
consider unsatisfactory: such an agreement would in our view
necessarily have been recorded somewhere), that the police should take
on that responsibility.    At league matches, it seems that the police
did manage the pens.   At semi-finals, the arrangement was as described
above.


2.       In the light of the evidence, which is all one way, it is in
our view futile for the police to attempt to suggest that the club and
not they were responsible for the safety of the fans on the terrace.
It is interesting to note that in Harris v. Sheffield United Football
Club. South Yorkshire Police asserted that their responsibility went
beyond maintaining law and order and extended to the safety and
comfort of the fans.   This is not at all surprising, since it was
accepted in evidence that the police were concerned with the safety of
everyone in the ground.    There certainly ought to have been a clear
and explicit written agreement between the Club and the police to
ensure that there was an effective means of maintaining and
controlling the numbers going into the pens to prevent overcrowding
and its attendant dangers.     It was a grave defect that not only did
no such agreement exist but no arrangement at all was made which
produced any effective means of avoiding overcrowding.     The policy of
allowing the fans to find their own level was dangerously useless:
Dr Eastwood’s description of it as ridiculous is clearly right.
Furthermore, the monitoring of the state of affairs in the pens by
Control was ineffective.     It is quite extraordinary to find that Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield could look at a photograph of pen 3 at 2.45
(Composite II DB16/29) and say that there was still plenty of space in
it. There manifestly was not, particularly when one bears in mind
Dr. Eastwood’s evidence that people tend to avoid the very front
because it is below the level of the pitch and so the view is poor.
That evidence of Mr Duckenfield is a good example of the conditioning
referred to in I1/5 above and the dangers of reliance on visual
monitoring.   It seems, too, that the view from the control box tended
to give a false impression.     No field glasses were available and the
camera, which could have been used for close-up shots, was defective
and in any event not used at the material time because those in the
control box were concentrating on the problems outside the turnstiles.
The police failed to make it clear to the officers who could have seen
the numbers building up that they should report to control; there was
nothing to that effect in the Operational Order or any briefings and
Mr Duckenfield’s evidence that he expected the officers to report
those matters is not credible.    There was no system to deal with
overcrowding and the problem does not appear to have been foreseen.
This is surprising since in 1988 the tunnel was blocked off to prevent
more going into the central pens, which was overcrowded although not
dangerously so. That was not reported in the course of any debrief
and was unknown to Chief Superintendent Mole or any senior officer
involved in the planning.     It ought to have affected the 1989
operational order.


B. The decision to give Liverpool the Leppings Lane end
1.      Chief Superintendent Mole made it clear that he would only
agree to police the semi-final at Hillsborough if each team’s
supporters had the same end as they had had in 1988.    That decision
was in our view justified and it was left to the FA to decide whether,
in the light of it, to choose Hillsborough.     The 1988 fixture had,
according to Mr Evans’ report, gone well.     In fact, Liverpool had then
complained that, although they had more support, they had the smaller
ticket allocation.     In addition their supporters had further to
travel.    Mr Kelly accepted that, in retrospect, the choice of
Hillsborough for the second year running was somewhat unfair to
Liverpool.     It was also unfortunate that Liverpool’s complaints about
the choice of Hillsborough for 1989 were not put before the Committee
which had to decide on allocation.     Liverpool and its supporters had
reason to feel unfairly treated.     There were no factors which
militated in favour of Hillsborough rather than Manchester United.
Those set out by Mr Kelly in his evidence are unconvincing.        The truth
seems to have been that it was thought convenient to use Hillsborough
because things seemed to have gone well in 1988.


2.        Although the wrong decision was in our view made, it is
difficult to see how it had any direct connection with the tragedy.
There were no doubt a number of fans who were unable to get tickets,
perhaps more than there might have been had the match been played
elsewhere.     This may have resulted in more ticketless fans coming to
Sheffield in the hope of getting into the ground.     Certainly, there is
evidence of considerable numbers of fans asking for tickets.        It is
clear that after the tragedy, some Liverpool fans were blaming the
allocation of ends.     We do not think that an inference can be drawn
from that that large numbers of ticketless fans gained admission.           In
the shock and confusion things were said which were not properly
thought out.     There is no reason to change the opinion stated in
opening this inquiry that a disaster such as this could have occurred
at any semi-final and that, if Nottingham Forest supporters had been
allocated to the Leppings Lane end, an Inquiry might well have been
considering why some of them were crushed to death.


C. The testing and collapse of barrier 124A and the removal of 144
1.      Two sections of barrier 124A in pen 3 collapsed as a result of
the overcrowding.   There can be no doubt that that collapse caused a
number of deaths.   The barrier had been tested by Dr. Eastwood’s firm
in July 1988 and had passed.


2.      The test had been carried out     in accordance with
Dr. Eastwood’s interpretation of Annex C to the Green Guide.     The
force of 6.0 KN/metre width has to be applied for three 5 minute
periods, a record being kept of the amount of deformation during each
loading and of the percentage of recovery.    If the recovery is less
than 50% after the third application of force, there is a failure: if
it is 50%-75%, there must be a retest.    As may be apparent, the
question is 50% or 75% of what?    Is the recovery by reference to the
position of the barrier before the first application of force or
before the third?   If the former, a span of 124A recorded 53% and
should have been retested; if the latter, it recorded 100% and passed.
 Dr. Eastwood adopted the latter and so passed it. He justified his
interpretation in evidence.    We think   he was wrong and thatsafety
ought to have dictated that the recovery must be by reference to the
position of the barrier before the first application of force.      But we
do not think we can be criticised for adopting his interpretation,
because it is fairly open on the language of Annex C and has some
support from the tests in the British Standards.
3.        Although the collapse of the barrier caused deaths, there were
many who died elsewhere in pens 3 and 4 and, if it had not collapsed,
fans would in all probability have been crushed to death against it.
In his statement, Dr Eastwood said that it was in his view "reasonable
to believe it failed on 15th April 1989 because it was subjected to a
significantly greater crowd pressure than is envisaged in the 1986
Guide".     That evidence was not challenged, since it is manifest that
the gross overcrowding in pen 3 would have created an excessive
pressure.     The vertical run behind it to barrier           and the
diagonal run to the tunnel side of the pen at the top would have
increased that pressure.     There is no certainty that the different
interpretation and a retest would have led to renewal of the barrier
or that, even if it had been renewed, it would have survived the
pressures exerted upon it.     Furthermore, even if it had survived, it
is difficult to say that lives would have necessarily been saved.       It
is incidentally unfortunate that Dr Eastwood’s test records were
incomplete, since the test of one out of three of the spans was not
recorded.     It happens that in the case of 124A the one omitted was the
one which survived.


4.        We should also refer to the removal of barrier 144 in 1986.
This did materially affect the capacity and we think that insufficient
consideration was given to the adverse effects of the removal.     It
made it all the more important to regulate the numbers going into the
pens; this no-one seems to have appreciated.     Its removal made it the
more easy for fans coming down the tunnel to spread out into the pen
and we believe that its absence did result in a greater flow down the
pen. The evidence of Inspector Bullas, who was looking down from the
west stand, of a sea of people flowing down the pen is graphic and
consistent with the sort of movement one would expect.      A number of
fans spoke of being carried down the pen from the tunnel as they
entered after Gate C was opened and we know that at least 20 of those
who died came in through Gate C after 2.52 (a fact which gives the lie
to the opinion expressed in some quarters that drunken late-comers
killed those who had arrived in good time) and some of those ended up
at the front of pen 3.


D. The Police Planning
1.      The police operational order for 1989 was essentially a
reproduction of that which had apparently worked well in 1988.      So
much was this so that it omitted to include the instructions to the
police Tango units to assist the ambulance and fire services to make a
rendezvous point at Herries Road Bus garage as had been agreed in
August 1988: see Doc:477.   This omission might have been important: in
the event, despite the emergency that arose, it seems to have made
little difference.   Since there had been a minor pitch invasion at the
end of the 1988 match the Order underlined the instruction to serial
1, the offices on the perimeter track, to forbid anyone "access to the
track from the terraces without consent of a senior officer (except to
receive medical attention)".   In this context, senior officer meant an
inspector of higher ranking officer.   Thus it was drummed into all
officers that access to the pitch must not be permitted except in the
most exceptional circumstances.   This led to the failure to react
quickly enough to the emergency that in fact arose.   Police were
conditioned to believe that any attempt to come out of the terraces
must be a pitch invasion and therefore must be prevented.    In
addition, there was insufficient planning to deal with the arrival of
fans at the turnstiles.     It was assumed that they would arrive in a
steady flow and that there would be no build up. It is interesting
that there was a considerable body of evidence from fans to the effect
that in 1988 there had been a much higher profile policing en route to
the ground.     Fans coming down Leppings Lane had been stopped and asked
if they had tickets and steps had been taken to weed out those who had
not and to control those going to the turnstiles.     Some witnesses even
talked of a recollection of barriers across Leppings Lane.     The police
denied that there was any difference and there is nothing in the
Operational Order which suggests any change, save for a reduction in
numbers of officers posted to public order duties away from the
ground.     It may be that the relatively smooth running of things in
1988 has led people to think there was more control than in the chaos
of 1989, whereas in fact there was no material difference.     In any
event, it is clear that in 1989 insufficient consideration was given
to the possibility of the arrival of large numbers at once or to the
problem of a substantial number of latecomers.     The need to control at
a distance from a ground was identified in 1926; that lesson was not
learnt at Hillsborough.


2.         The plan had been operated in 1988 by Chief Superintendent
Mole.     He had considerable experience of overseeing the policing of
Hillsborough.     He was moved to a new post at the end of March 1989 and
was succeeded by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.     Mr Duckenfield had
little recent experience of policing football grounds and had not been
to Hillsborough for some 10 years.    That was, of course, not his
fault.    He inherited a plan which had appeared to work well and was
content that it would work well again.    He did not have the experience
to recognise all the potential problems.   This was not his fault, but
we feel that he should have taken more time and greater care to
familiarise himself with the ground and all its problems.
Alternatively, Mr Mole could have been asked to deal with the match,
notwithstanding his new posting, since to require that Mr Duckenfield
should be in control if such an important match with a capacity crowd
so soon after his appointment was to ask a great deal of him.


Ill SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989
A. The crush at the turnstiles
1.      Because of the need to segregate Liverpool from Nottingham
Forest fans, 12 turnstiles which normally were used to gain access to
the North Stand from Penistone Road were not used.   This meant that
all 24,000 Liverpool fans had to enter by the Leppings Lane
turnstiles.   1-10 were allocated to the 9880 in the North Stand, 11-16
to the 4465 in the West Stand and A-G to the 10,100 on the terrace.
This meant that there was considerable pressure on the turnstiles and,
assuming a hoped-for rate of 800 an hour was achieved, it would have
taken well over an hour to get everyone in. Any hold ups would have
increased that time.   The design of the ground made this imbalance of
turnstiles inevitable and it is a defect which undoubtedly contributed
to the disaster.


2.      It was essential that there should be no impediment to the
smooth operation of the turnstiles.   However, there are a number of
things which did cause fans to congregate outside the turnstiles and
to obstruct and delay the entry to the ground.   In particular, we
would identify the following matters:-
(i) The confusing nature of the tickets coupled with the
signing outside the turnstiles.    1-10 were marked A, 11-16 C
and A-G B, so that they ran ACB.   B was the other side of a
wall to A and C, so that anyone getting himself on the wrong
side had to extricate himself and go to the other side.
Furthermore some of the signs placed to show the appropriate
colour coding of the relevant turnstiles were too low and
invisible once a substantial queue built up.   Police officers
said that there were numerous queries from fans as to where
they should go and that the signing was not at all good.    The
Club ought to have made sure that the tickets and signs were
clear.


(ii) The activities of ticket touts.   There were touts
operating, albeit not in large numbers, in the vicinity of the
Leppings Lane turnstiles: one at least was arrested for
obstruction.   Touts are a menace because (a) they encourage
fans to come without tickets in the hope of being able to buy
one, (b) they sell supporters tickets for the wrong end of the
ground, thus imperilling the segregation of the fans and (c)
they cause obstruction.   Ideally, they should be barred from
the vicinity of any ground, but there are difficulties in
devising a means of curtailing their activities without
preventing the perfectly lawful and unobjectionable swapping
or selling of tickets other than as a business.
(iii) The presence of ticketless fans.    The evidence makes it
clear that there were many fans asking for tickets.      Police
officers on duty at and near the turnstiles give various
estimates of the numbers, ranging from 200 to 2000.      Fans have
told the inquiry that much more was done in 1988 to try to
weed out the ticketless than in 1989.    Whether or not that is
right, very little was done in 1989.     The police told the
inquiry that there was little they could do, since no offence
was committed in being near a ground without a ticket,
provided there was no obstruction or breach of the peace.         We
do not think the police are so powerless.     Ticketless fans do
cause problems and, in sufficient numbers, are almost bound to
cause an obstruction.   It is in our opinion perfectly
reasonable for a police officer to ask a fan if he has a
ticket and, if he has not, it is lawful to refuse him access
to the immediate vicinity of the ground.     Such refusal can be
justified on the basis of an apprehended obstruction.      In any
event, we suspect that in many cases an indication by an
officer to a ticketless fan to go away would suffice.


(iv) Some ticketless fans tried to get in by bribing turnstile
operators or by rushing or climbing over turnstiles.      Others
with tickets for the Kop tried to get in the Liverpool end.
Both of those categories of people delayed the turnstiles and
affected the smooth running of entry to the ground.
3.       By 2.30pm all pretence at orderly queueing had ceased and
there was a crush of fans at the turnstiles.   Although, according to
the operational order, officers outside the turnstiles had inter alia
to form orderly queues, the Inspector in charge (Inspector Sykes) told
the inquiry that that was an impossible task when a large crowd
attended.   By 2.40pm or thereabouts the police had lost control.    The
crush got worse and worse and the gates had to be opened.   Attempts to
save the situation by the use of mounted officers failed.   Despite the
views of Inspector Hand-Davies, which must be given considerable
weight, it seems to us that the area was too confined to permit of
effective action by horses. They did not have sufficient room to
manoeuvre and were enveloped by the crowd since individuals were
unable to move away, there being nowhere to move to.   Superintendent
Marshall himself was overwhelmed by the crowd and his efforts to
alleviate the crush were ineffective.   At some stage, an attempt was
made to shut the perimeter gates and to form a barrier of horses to
prevent new arrivals coming down Leppings Lane joining the back of the
crush and so making things worse.   This tactic seems to have
succeeded, at least for a time, but it was too late, for, very soon
afterwards, Gate C was opened.   Evidence was given that, despite the
barrier, fans were forcing themselves through, even going under the
horses’ bellies.   The perimeter gates, or some of them, were pushed
open.   The evidence of what precisely happened is confusing.   There is
no doubt that there were fans, particularly among those arriving at a
relatively late stage (i.e. 2.45 onwards) who, perhaps because they
had had too much to drink or because of selfishness or to create
difficulties in the hope of getting an advantage (e.g. admission to
the ground without a ticket) or for some other reason, did push and
shove and exacerbate the position.    But those were a minority.


4.       The manual log kept by Superintendent Murray shows that at
14.17 there was a request to close Leppings Lane.     Mr Marshall and Mr
Duckenfield think the request came later and certainly Leppings Lane
was not closed to traffic until after 2.30.    If Mr Murray’s timing is
correct, the police outside were aware of problems building up at a
comparatively early stage.    We find it surprising that no measures
were taken by those inside the ground in the control box to try to
seek information to ascertain whether many fans were still coming
towards the ground.   It is also surprising that nothing was done by
the Commander outside to deploy officers to try to control the fans
arriving further away from the ground to create a breathing space.        At
about 2.30, Mr Duckenfield, seeing the crowd at the turnstiles, asked
Mr Murray if they would get everyone in by 3pm.     Mr Murray said he
thought they would.   It does not seem to have occurred to them to
check the turnstile count or to find out how many were to come.      It
should by 2.40 at the latest have been apparent that all would not be
in by 3pm and the kick-off should have been postponed.     It had been
decided that kick-off would only be postponed if there were some
reason other than their own volition which caused late arrival of a
substantial number of fans.   This was to adopt too inflexible an
approach.   Postponement might not have eased the crush, but, since it
was accepted by many witnesses that things got worse nearer to 3pm
because fans did not want to miss any of the game, it might well have
done.   If a dangerous situation was created, it should not have
mattered what caused it.     If postponement of the kick-off might
reasonably have overcome the danger, it should have been done.


5.        All the police witnesses concerned in the policing asserted
that they did not foresee that there would be so many arriving late,
and at once.    They go on to suggest it was unforeseeable.   We
disagree.     It is, we would have thought, not in the least surprising
that fans should be     reluctant tospend many minutes standing on a
terrace or, for that matter, sitting in a seat with very little in the
way of entertainment provided.    There was some evidence of knowledge
by the police that fans were developing a pattern of arriving 15
minutes or so before kick-off because, it was thought, they were
seeking alcoholic refreshment elsewhere since they could not get in
the ground: see Doc: 434A.     This wasnot particularly referable to
Liverpool fans, but, on the day, the police were ata fairly early
stage aware of a considerable amount of drinking by supporters.        It
was a fine and fairly warm day, such as would encourage people to sit
around in the sunshine.    It was an all-ticket match, so that fans
would be forgiven for believing that it would not take very long to
get in.


6.        In any event, we do not think that those who arrived £hour
before kick-off can properly be branded latecomers, particularly since
the tickets said spectators should be in their places by 2.45.       It was
taking up to 20 minutes to get through the crush and into the ground.
Once the crush developed, there was more difficulty in getting through
the turnstiles which worsened the crush.
7.         It has been said that, had the fans not pushed, the problem of
crushing would not have arisen.       This is a superficially plausible
view.   But it ignores the reality of crowd behaviour.       It has not been
seriously suggested by any police officer that the mood of the crowd
up to about 2.30 was other than good natured.        It is precisely because
people who are aiming to go to a particular place through a limited
means of access do tend to crowd together that there is a need for
control.     And, as one witness said, once you are in that sort of a
crowd, you only move forwards or sideways, never backwards.        Sideways
was constricted, so all were tending to move forwards.


8.         We should refer to other factors which have been suggested as
causative of the crush.


           (a) Ticketless Fans
           As we have already said, it is very difficult to estimate the
           number of ticketless fans.     It has been suggested that there
           were a substantial number who were determined to get into the
           ground without a ticket.     There is some evidence, notably
           from Mr Taylor, the effect of which is that some fans were
           overheard expressing the intention to get in by way of an open
           gate or to cause a gate to be opened.     Attention is drawn to
           the arrival of large numbers of Liverpool fans at all-ticket
           League matches in the hope of gaining admission.     And it is
           pointed out that at this year’s Cup Final there were up 1000
           fans who had come to force an entry to Wembley Stadium.        We do
           not doubt that there probably were some fans who came without
tickets determined to gain entry.    But we find it impossible
to accept that the crushing was caused by such fans so as to
engineer the opening of a gate, a theory propounded by
Superintendent Greenwood.    (See Day 12, p.95).    That would
have involved a truly amazing degree of preparation and good
fortune.    However, there may well have been a number of fans
who took advantage of the situation and were happy to
exacerbate and make use of the crush.    Opportunists probably
did hope that a gate would be opened and that they would get
in through it. To that extent, ticketless fans may have
contributed to the difficulties at the turnstiles.


(b) Drink
Many witnesses, particularly the police, refer to a large
consumption of alcohol, mainly lager.    Fans arrived in
Sheffield in good time but then stayed outside the ground
drinking, either at pubs or in public places.      Some police
officers suggested that the ban on the sale of alcohol in the
ground contributed to this pattern of behaviour.      It was
pointed out that, having regard to the crowds, those seeking
drink inside the ground, if it was permissible to sell it,
would be unlikely to succeed in getting more than a pint (i.e
a single drink).    It does certainly seem that a significant
number of fans did decide to take advantage of the sunshine
and drink so that they arrived comparatively late and in a
condition affected by alcohol.   The drink had increased
selfish and stupid behaviour, leading to pushing and a
        failure to take any notice of police appeals to hold back.
        There was a considerable amount of boorish and loutish
        behaviour (e.g. urinating in gardens or backyards, throwing
        empty cans all over the place, shouting, swearing and
        chanting) which sadly tends to be associated with football
        crowds.   That sort of behaviour is inexcusable.   But it was a
        minority of fans who were guilty of it and it did not cause
        the trouble.   It probably contributed to the inability of the
        police to alleviate the trouble once it had arisen.


        (c) Hooliqanism
        This is really coupled with the taking of drink, although
        those may well have been fans who did not need drink to behave
        in a thoroughly antisocial fashion.   Police horses were burnt
        with cigarettes, there was pushing and shoving and some fans
        behaved in a thoroughly selfish way, concerned only to get
        themselves into the ground without caring for the comfort or
        safety of their fellows.   But this sort of behaviour was that
        of a minority and did not cause the problem.   The primary
        cause of the crushing was the bottleneck at Leppings Lane, and
        insufficiency of turnstiles and a failure by the policy
        properly to control fans arriving before they reached the
        perimeter gates and the turnstiles.


B. The opening of the gates
1.      At 2.47 Superintendent Marshall radioed the first request to
open gates.   Ground control was focussing on gate C and so it was that
gate that was expected to be opened.    At 2.48 it opened to eject a fan
and some 200 or so outside burst in. This happened before Mr
Duckenfield was able to decide on an answer.     Shortly afterwards the
request was repeated, again that the gates should be opened.     Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield realised that to open the gates would be to
act contrary to all the planning and# would let unsearched and
possibly ticketless fans into the ground.     He had a difficult decision
to make and he took his time making it.     Unfortunately, neither he nor
any of his advisers in the control room took any steps to prepare for
the consequences of opening Gate C in particular.     The inevitable
result would be an influx of fans down the central tunnel and into
pens 3 and 4: this should have been foreseen.     Mr Murray attempted,
he says, to contact Mr Lock, but was unsuccessful.     Otherwise, no
attempt was made to contact or to warn the stewards in the d u b .      The
suggestion that the officers on the concourse ought to have acted on
their own initiative does not bear examination:     they did not know
that the gate was to be opened nor did they know that pens 3 and 4
were already full.    In fact, by 2.50 pens 3 and 4 had reached their
safe capacity.   This should have been obvious to those in the control
box.   Even if it was not, steps should have been taken to prevent the
large numbers who were bound to come through Gate C from going down
the central tunnel.


2.      At 2.54 the teams came out onto the field.     This resulted in a
roar from the crowd, encouraging entrants to the ground to hurry to
their places.    So it was that the greater portion of the 2000 or so
who entered through Gate C went into pens 3 and 4. They came in in an
orderly fashion, glad to escape from the dangerous crush outside.        At
2.58 Gate A was opened, but this time there was some preparation
inside, largely because of the foresight of Sgt. Higgins.     Mr
Duckenfield took additional steps by deploying a serial to the front
of the North Stand to cater for that influx which might have caused
trouble to the seated customers in that stand.     Those standing on the
terrace were left to fend for themselves.


3.       It is clear that the failure to take any steps to prevent fans
going from Gate C to pens 3 and 4 was the effective cause of the
disaster.     The decision to open the gates cannot be criticised:     the
failure to foresee the result can.


C.   Inside the around
1.       It has been submitted that a video shows activity in pen 3
suggesting that the barrier broke before 2.52.     We do not find that at
all likely.     It is contrary to the evidence that is available from
fans who were in the vicinity of that barrier.     It is also less
probable, since a surge in an overcrowded pen was far more likely to
have done the damage.     It was believed at an earlier stage of the
inquiry that the surge of fans coming in from Gate C, coinciding with
the arrival of the teams on the pitch, caused the collapse.     The
evidence now available suggests it may have occurred later, possibly
even as late as 3.05, when the hitting of the bar at the Nottingham
Forest end caused a surge on the terrace.    There is much conflict, but
it seems that by 3.02 or thereabouts, when Gate 3 had been opened
properly, a pile of bodies was already obstructing it.
2.         Since no steps were taken to prevent it happening, the pens
got fuller and fuller.     As they did, people began to be crushed to
death.     Some fell to the ground and were asphyxiated as a result:
others were unable to breathe standing up. Almost all died from
traumatic asphyxia - the crush was so great that they could not
breathe.     As this happened, they began to cry out in distress.     The
police officers at the perimeter fence were slow to react, partly
because they were accustomed to overcrowding, partly because the noise
level made it difficult to hear that the cries were of people in real
distress and partly because they were conditioned and instructed to
 Pu-fcyvi’
pissyswae the integrity of the pitch. PC Hooson told the inquiry that
he came past the North Stand and, as he approached gate 4, he realised
                                       &
that fans were in distress and he tookjjjpon himself to open Gate 4.
This was sometime between 2.55 and 3pm.      Thereafter, Gate 4 remained
open.     PC Illingworth, the officer on Gate 4, does not agree; he says
he opened that gate.     It is possible that it had originally been
opened by PC Illingworth and shut again and then reopened by PC
Hooson.     But insofar as there is a conflict of evidence to be
resolved, we would submit that PC Hooson’s account is to be preferred.
PC Illingworth must feel himself open to criticism; PC Hooson has, on
the face of things, no axe to grind.


3.         Gate 3 was opened, according to PC Smith, by the force of the
fans in the pen.     He shut it again.   The same happened again and it
was only then that he appreciated the need to keep it open to try to
help to extricate the injured.     This account, courageously given, is
corroborated by fans.     Dr Eastwood accepted that, given sufficient
pressure, the gate could have opened in the way described.
                                      31



4.           It is not possible to say precisely when the gates were
opened,      since the videos available were not focussedon the pens at
the crucial time.      The photographs in Composite Album II show gate 4
open at      15.00 and gate 3 at 15.02.    Videos show both gates closed at
15.00:45 (MAP 1) and gate 4 open at 15.00:50 (MAP 3).         The earliest
that Gate 3 is shown open on a video is 15.03: 49 (MAP 8). All this
makes Mr Grobelaar’s timing very suspect and his description of the
various moves in the match is not borne out by the video of the game.


5.        Not only was there a slowness to react to the situation in the
pens, but also, once fans had begun to climb over the perimeter fence
(at about 3pm), the immediate reaction was that it was a pitch
invasion.     This was unlikely for various reasons, not least because
(a) the fans did not go on the pitch and (b) there was no conceivable
cause for an invasion at that stage of the game.        Valuable minutes
were spent while those in the control box tried to find out what was
happening.


6.        Attempts were made by standing on the perimeter fencing and
gesticulating to get those at the back of the pens to move back.
These attempts failed.      This was not in the main due to cussedness
on the part of the fans, but to (a) an inability to move and (b) a
failure to realise what was going on down the front.        No senior
officer thought to send police down the tunnel to haul fans out the
back - that was left to the initiative of junior officers.
7.     There was an absence of leadership by the senior police
officers.     Individual efforts were made to try to save lives and to
evacuate the pens, but the picture was one of chaosand lack of
organisation until Chief Superintendent Nesbitt came on the scene at
about 3.15.    No attempt was made to use the tannoy to try to summon
medical assistance until about 3.20.     Similarly, those not directly
involved, particularly the Nottingham Forest fans on the Kop, were
left ignorant of what was happening.     Chief Superintendent
Duckingfield defended his decision to say nothing on public order
grounds.    We can quite see that fans had to be kept     intheir places to
avoid interference with the emergency services, but       we think that some
announcement should have been made.     Most football fans are decent
law abiding people and, if treated as human beings, are likely to
react sensibly.     When an announcement was eventually made, the fans         "
all behaved well.


8.     The club had an agreement with the St. John’s Ambulance
Brigade to provide sufficient numbers to comply with the requirements
of the safety certificate.     Their members did all they could when the
tragedy occurred.    SYMAS had very prudently, by stretching the
relevant DHSS guidelines, determined that two of their personnel
should attend the ground with an ambulance.    Two complementary tickets
had been provided for league games, but not for semi-finals.       It did
appear that there could be some criticism of the club for withdrawing
the tickets, but we heard from Mr Mackrell, and we have no reason to
doubt,that it arose from an administrative error.       In any event, the
personnel were at the ground and able to react quickly.      There was,
however, a lack of proper liaison with the police, largely because the
police had no plan specifically to deal with a disaster at
Hillsborough Stadium.     The same comment applies in respect of liaison
with the fire service, who were eventually called to produce bolt
cutters to remove the perimeter fencing.     The first fire officer to
arrive was told he wasn’t wanted.     In addition, there was confusion
between the club and Dr Purcell as to his role.     He thought he was
present to administer to the team or directors and was not the
physician referred to in the safety certificate.


9.      Much publicity was given to the attempt by the police to
summon the fire brigade and the conversation seeking to identify the
precise location of Hillsborough Stadium.     It would be unfair to blame
the fire brigade operator for her endeavours to get-the right
information for the computer.     She expected the police to be precise
and there ought to be full briefing so that the police know what is
needed of them.     There was some confusion as to what was needed from
the fire brigade.


10.     Complaints have been made of the lack of proper medical
equipment.   We do not think any football club could reasonably be
expected to carry sufficient equipment to cater for a disaster of the
magnitude of that which occurred.     But there should have been at least
a resuscitator.     The SYMAS ambulance had all necessary equipment and
oxygen was quickly available.     It became clear that a defibrillator
would not have been a sensible piece of equipment to use in the pitch.
 We were not impressed with the complaints made by Dr Ashton and Dr
Phillips in that regard.
11.      Although there was confusion and disorganisation and a failure
to act as expeditiously in summoning the necessary assistance as was
desirable, we doubt that the delays caused deaths which would not in
any event have occurred.     We do think that, had the perimeter fence
been opened earlier and positive steps taken to get people out of the
back of the pens, some lives might have been saved.       But we doubt that
the delays in seeking medical aid and a sufficiency of ambulances made
any real difference.     As was pointed out in evidence, the first 4
minutes are crucial and immediate mouth to mouth resuscitation is the
only really effective and practical treatment.       This was given by
police officers, St. John’s personnel, fans etc.


12.      Much ill-feeling was generated by the allegation made that
afternoon that fans had taken down a fence and thereby caused the
tragedy.    This version was given by Mr Duckenfield to Mr Kelly at
about 3.15.     Mr Duckenfield has admitted that he deliberately did not
tell the truth.     That account had been given to the fire service and
to SYMAS.     There was scope for misunderstanding, since the call to
SYMAS may well have referred to the forcing of a perimeter gate.         That
possibility of misunderstanding cannot exonerate Mr Duckenfield.


D.    Radio Communication
1.       Radio communications were generally poor.     This was largely
due to the fact that over 100 officers had radios and so, particularly
as the situation became more difficult, there was a tendency for more
than one to talk at once.     In addition, shortly after 2.30 a problem
was apparent and the control box seemed to have lost transmission.
The reserve station was brought into use.    This was so badly sited
that it was impracticable to use it.    Hence the control box had to use
a set instead, thus losing the ability to switch to non-talk through
so as to override all other transmissions.    It did gain the advantage
on talk through that it was able to compete on equal terms with the
other officers.


2.       The situation was wholly unsatisfactory.   Many messages did
not get through.   Officers on the perimeter were not heard trying to
announce that there was crushing and asking for ambulances.
Superintendent Marshall could not get through his request to open the
gates and had to route it via the police station.


3.       Since an inspection by a Home Office expert has disclosed no
faults, the breakdown must have resulted from too much traffic on the
air.   Too many officers had radios for the system to cope.     Clearly,
consideration will have to be given in Stage 2 to means of improving
communications and avoiding the problems which arose.


IV.1    As will be apparent, we have not sought to cover all the
matters dealt with in the evidence.    We have not thought it necessary
to suggest the resolution of disputed evidence as to who said what and
when in relation to numbers still to come into the ground.     No doubt,
those matters are important to the individuals involved.      It is
possible that some people ought to have been aware of things which
should have led them to take action which might have changed events.
We are not satisfied that identification of the shortcomings of
individuals in those sorts of respects will help the Tribunal in its
task.   No doubt the parties concerned will, if they consider such
incidents to be important, deal with them in the course of their
submissions.


2.      This was a wholly avoidable disaster, but one which was bound
to occur so long as nothing was done to control the numbers going into
the pens and to provide a sufficiency of turnstiles and
policing to avoid a dangerous build up of fans seeking admission.
Luck prevented it happening before; that luck ran out on 15th April
1989, with the tragic consequences which have led to this Inquiry.     It
is clear that there must be education of all concerned, police,
stewards, spectators, so that overcrowding can be the more easily
recognised.    Ignorance, complacency and lack of foresight, not
deliberate callousness, led to the disaster.    Perhaps the lessons can
now be well and truly learnt and this will be the last of the series
of inquiries into disasters at football grounds which have led to loss
of life and injury.




                                        / ANlJRtW COLLINS Q.C.
                                                RONALD GRIMSHAW



My name is Ronald Grimshaw.                          I   am   a    Divisional         Officer     in     the     Fire

Prevention          Section        of    the         South Yorkshire County Fire Service.                      I have

been with the fire services since 1964.



In February 1985, i                was     appointed          to    the       post     of    Headquarters        Fire

Prevention Officer in the rank of Divisional Officer following a period of

10 months serving in that position on a temporary basis.



One of     my       responsibilities                 whilst       serving      in     that    position     was     to

represent       Fire        Service        Headquarters on all the District Officer Working

Parties set up within South Yorkshire with                                a    view     to    ensuring     that     a

common       fire        service        policy was applied throughout the county.                         The fire

service was also represented on the Officer Working Party by officers from

the division in whose area the respective sports stadia were situated.



It   was      in that capacity that I attended a meeting of the Officer Working

Party (Sheffield District)                 fa n '-                                    along     with     Assistant

                                                     !(Headquarters)          and     Station Officer

representing ' C ' Division.                   The purpose of the meeting was to carry out an

inspection          of     the     stadium in accordance with the policy of twice yearly

visits to football league grounds in South Yorkshire,                                        t have however only

a    vague      recollection             of the reference in the minutes to that meeting to

the provision of temporary .barriers for -crowd segregation ’'behind

stand and that the club were to consi^erv* SCfeewe- -for ■jsgrittaneitfc t
I*: <■-■'a, ..5 in '■ !-   .' '       :   ' ' ;- v>./C'V1 C,,    |. r
                                                                    . •% ...;y- j •
                                                                                  ;                                     ■



                                 1985    ,  following             receipt      of     outline    proposals        for

modification of entrance routes at the Leppings Lane end of                                        the    stadium,

                                 ? along       with       Station      Officer                    ('C'    Division

representative), I attended a meeting of the Officer Working Party at                                             the

Police Sports Club, Niagara, Sheffield, to discuss those proposals.
The   police         were     already          familiar with the proposals and indicated that

they had        instigated         them    because        of    their    desire    fbOi; allow      greater

flexibility          in     the    use    of     the;terrace and stattd M g fcth home and away

                     allowing them to vary the neutral area between                       opposing       fans

as    circumstances           dictated          and    to achieve such arrangements for ingress

that would allow turnstiles to be dedicated to                           specific     areas.

turnstilB'sV;               fitfeed with, counters # greater control              o v e r the numbers of

                              :-teach -area.woal#'have" 'resulted..



At the meeting, the police suggested the provision of two                                 further    radial

fences,        one    dividing        the existing central area in half and running from

the tunnel entrance to the                 pitch s id e security fence with gates to                permit

entry     to     either           section as appropriate,                the     other dividing the existing

north end of the terrace in half and running from the front to the back of

the terrace.



fa                           :'-two      new    pens     cre&tteii by the j»oiri§iQn of -the-;cratfial.

fences were to be             provided with additional                   exit gates       throughthe      pitch

perimeter        fence,           the new radial fence at                the     north end of theterrace to

have two gates and the existing radial fence to                           the     north     side    of   the

tunnel to have a second gate.



The     provision         of two gates in each of the two radial fences to the north

of the tunnel was to allow sideways movement/evacuation along the                                   terrace

should      an       emergency        situation        occur,    the    normal     access route to the

terrace having become obstructed for any reason (this considered unlikely)

and also to allow police access to all parts of the terrace to control any

crowd disturbances.               It wag felt by the fire sertfice                howeverthat            only




If    the      above      features        were        implemented,      the    proposed radial barrier
running parallel and 2 metres from the existing barrier at the                          north        end

of    the terrace could be dispensed with W: :
                                             t&e. police felt                       at: they would

                                                or segregation purposes, with the creation

of .the /j.smaller              .    The creation of smaller pens was also seen by the

police to be a bonus in that by having smaller sections                       of     crowd,        their

job in maintaining order would be made easier.



At    the    meeting,     the       proposals     outlined     above were sketched in to the

drawing and on seeing the resulting layout, the main concern of myself and

Station Officer                 were (a) whether the external gates and exit routes

created at the rear of the stand would be                    adequate   for   the      numbers        of

spectators       in each section of the west stand and terrace, (b) whether the

numbers of spectators being allowed into each section of the terrace could

be    controlled      to prevent overcrowding, and (c) what arrangements were to

be made to ensure that the gates in the radial                    fences   would       be     readily

available for use should lateral movement along the terrace to alternative

exits become necessary.



Items (b) and (c) above were spec if xoallf;igttfc €©                              -as .they, along

with    the     club*; were         responsible f®r eSsariaf fcliat': emergency evacuation

procedures were adequate and controlled, aud h a # w i t t v                                the     club

of     ensuring correct crowd density packing. 'We were assured by the police

that all the gates included in the proposals for the terrace part                             of     the

scheme       would   be   manned       by them at all times during games in order that

evacuation procedures could be initiated should this become necessary.                                As

far     as    correct     density      packing     was    concerned, the police stated that

arrangements that they had with the club were satisfactory and                          they        felt

that     the provision of smaller sections on the terraces would make overall

control of the terrace easier.



With the knowledge that in              addition     to   the    police    manning      all        gates

through       the    pitch   perimeter      and having good and close contact with the
whole terrace, there would be additional police manning all gates                                    in   the

radial        fences,      that police controlling the area had direct communication

with the police control room, and those manning the                           police        control       room

had     direct      vision       of    the   terrace      on    closed      circuit television, the

proposals were accepted in principle subject to                          closer      scrutiny       of     the

means     of       escape     arrangements        behind       the west stand referred to at (a)

above, the capacities                 of   each   section      of     the terrace      and          thus the

anticipated numbers to use those exit routes behind the west stand.



On     examination         of the plans, it was found necessary to indicate that the

exit gates behind the west stand needed to be of a specific width to allow

for     the     number of spectators that had been calculated would use them and

to     specify that the gates would be supervised by                        either     the     police       or

club     officials.           With     regard to the terracing arrangements, it was felt

that the proposal for the new radial fence                       at    the    tunnel        position       had

little        effect on the existing situation, the capacities, travel distances

and exit arrangements from the two new central pens                           did     not     change.       In

fact a new gate through the pitch perimeter fence was to be provided. The

new radial fence at the north end of the                       terrace did         actuallyslightly

increase the travel distance to the normal route of exit i.e. the way onto

the terrace otherwise there was no change.



There were no exit signs at any point                      along      the    terrace    when        the    new

proposals          were    being      considered.         With the police control of the gates

through       the       radial     fences, and      the    pitch      perimeter       gates,          police

surveillance          of the whole of the terrace both close at hand and by closed

circuit television; the use of a public address system to give                                 directions

to     the     whole or certain sections of the stadium during an emergency; the

easy identification of the normal routes of                         ingress     and    thereby        normal

routes        of    exit      i.e. around the ends of the stand or through the tunnel;

and the       fact that this was an open concrete terrace                     in     front     of     a    non

combustible          stand,      it was not considered necessary to make any provision
for exit signs.



The gates through the perimeter fence were                    considered        to   be    essential,

this     being reflected by the request for two additional gates in the newly

created pens.             The use of the gates was under the direct              control        of    the

police     and       was     to   allow their        access   into   the     terrace      should       any

disturbance arise and to relieve any local build up                        of   pressure        at     the

front     of        the    pens   or     allow     any person becoming ill or overcome to be

removed by that route.                 The police, who had     control     of    the      gates,       had

always been happy that the gates were adequate for these purposes.



Because        of     the lack of any risk from fire in the whole of the west stand

and terrace, and the measures that were in being for preventing ingress in

to the ground of numbers of spectators greater than that calculated for in

each section of the ground i.e. high                   perimeter     wall,      substantial          gates

that are stewarded, computer controlled turnstiles providing a smooth flow

into the ground, plus the presence of police and stewards and provision of

closed     circuit          television facilities, it was never considered necessary

that the gates through the pitch perimeter fence onto the pitch                             would       be

used     for evacuation of the total capacity of each section.                         It was always

felt that should any situation arise that necessitated total evacuation of

any     sections,          evacuation would in the first case be by way of the normal

ways on to the terrace i.e. the tunnel and around each end of                             the     stand.

Should any of these routes of exit be obstructed for any reason, the gates

in the radial fences and under police control would be used as directed by

the police using the public address system



Forward        evacuation         on    to   the    pitch by large numbers of spectators was

considered to be unnecessary because of the provision of alternative means

of     evacuating          each area, therefore the marking of the gates as exits and

the improvement of the stepping arrangement though                       the     gates     were       also

considered to be unnecessary.
With    regard     to    the    gradient        of     the     tunnel access to the terrace, as

referred to above, it was never envisaged that a                         large     crowd       of        people

would     pass down the tunnel on to the terrace as the rate of entry to that

section would be at a rate controlled by the turnstiles.                               To    plan        for    a

large     number    passing        on    to     the    terrace       would   be    impracticable and

undesirable due to bottlenecks caused by crush barriers in emerging on                                         to

the     terrace.        As   far      as the effect of the gradient on people egressing

from the terrace, it is totally                  under       cover    therefore        not    subject          to

becoming slippery in inclement weather and as it is at the immediate entry

point to the escape system, what slight delay it may cause is at                                     a    point

where     people     are      still      held    in     a     relatively safe place, i.e. on the

terrace but once entering the escape route there                         are      no    further          points

that     may   hinder        escape flow.        Had the gradient been at the other end of

the tunnel then          a    hazard     would        have     undoubtedly     been         caused       in    an

undesirable        position        and    therefore          measures   would      have been taken to

rectify the situation.



AS/DG

25.05.89
DCPO Hewitt


ACO Seaman
                                        205


Hillsborough Inquiry - Interviews of Officers by             20.06.89
West Midlands Police



At 1445 hours on 20th June, 1989, I received a telephone call from
Chief Inspector Ross of the West Midlands Police.          He said that
although they had interviewed the firemen and junior officers who
attended the Hillsborough incident, they had overlooked the interviews
of the middle and senior management which they are required to do for
the Coroner.

The following is the list of personnel still to be interviews:-

               Rank              Name          Location

              ACO              Seaman          CHQ
              ACO              Hornsby         CHQ
              DO               Hildreth        CHQ
              T/ADO            Green           CHQ
              ADO              Robjohn         CHQ (Training Centre)
              Stn.O.                           CHQ
              SDO              Smoothey        North Div. HQ
              DO               Lockwood        West Div. HQ (Retired)
              Stn.O.           Fletcher        Central
              Sub.O.                           Central
              L.Fm.            Housley         Central
              Stn.O.           Swain           Rive1in
              Stn.O.                           Ringinglow
              Sub.O.                           Lowedges
              T/Stn.O.                         Darnall
              Sub.O.                           Darnall
              Fm.                              Darnall
              Stn.O.                           Mansfield Road

I have arranged    to    be interviewed at about 1100 hours on Wednesday,
21st June, 1989.




Assistant Chief Fire Officer
                                                                       n
/?. I                                                                         occuf<W W                                                  h d rfA /J fa o J h e .
                                                                                       \J L ,'x J '^ J 'r - A s    O sJ \ a A    c    l^ J k > u t/K j       u j i i- ^ C h 'J % t f 'o {


   |k<^                                                                J\ Cfc£ fyJfcaJL                                                            CAwxii^yt
   i lir J 'o hAcci^s<                                        2"
   j Cl) /?© | ) < W k J S t v V e ^ r c W ^                              / I^O l O X Vj                                 f l t 7M , ^ W S ^            0"W /X ij < a a I f f

                             A A A & f j - l i C f a / V<Jl             * l^.   ^V v T f^T « -T       %           Itjl    ^ /]       U    v   i    c     f    o     j    l-^ x
             Ce'-'fC^^ P^>a^j^vw^jL 4 i^vuav12^>                                                                           Ifc-bO^ko
   |0           TToz. ^p z ^ xj u ^ c * cfl                              d>jfesu«<>c                                        'c                     G t * J l- tif & k e
                ^    (   X         p i/J O c f" ^                $ 0 w > jl       *S               /to iv w U o                 k J I w - o 'W ,       U i A : 4^ ^


   !        c ^ i c M ’t e ^ a J                              7 & c < o -eloc?<3                                                         /U^vcj^ ^ K f i w
            WOuVl^,                    flvs/W                                                              Cfi^%t\v-C                j^&^sQ            A^J\               tvAZ/O h~

                                    * ^ T K /L o              U j 6 k J \ c f hi/X'JUL C ^uc^JQ .^'A m a .iv>_ska/^--C                             j ) i<£^—/y^'^~L'^

            W 4 t ^ w to, C w J ^ jOiVoQ k/3 &JL                                                                                     fD Astj^-MJl^-e © W O
             tfc& bUsjouCjg, .
   j (jftl) W k ii^ v tM                                             h<^\QlL Uti2 ^ W >                            .jjJ /i
   \                biji(j~*zh b\j^ j^thjpAc ^Lfi'KtvM^ ifijL'\^~ o^xA c$h^\cA HcTV
   i                            f}JZ ^JjL h A l\{r\(i [*^j\<A ftPc hbfan(f\ ^ C d w W                                                                          S |A ~ < -
                 ($<i\u^dl ^s£w*x. K A ^ (yuz^\ ^A M aJ                                                             A/) f r r ^                           ~^1
                /uvNi'Wf                 *
    i
   i (joj ^                  CLt                        64w>cj W o t ^ , 0 U / l e W ^                      to o c c w <9^^ a / w u ^ h G v N u j
                    fa-iStuzes M ajcL ®4 (A/uioJV- ex                                             tu^K.                                  p jj i ^ u t x j | w t £ .
                ^vcl               a fa<uj / a ^ k ^ T W : j f e s g d b s j f x ^
                $1 c4ik;c'\jKo We\ j \o l O C X ^            ^       ^        vm(i%.A^ ^cicv Ifc^Ytd
                «2v^<x p r & ^ N A bt^c^zd fcjiojcJt - ^ e^ J- c^ i         ^ M                      •^M "UA^ e
                cfcti^ivt^o vs-e, £yy tcte4^ iaj »v Ic< W.-       M . i=c/ /t>oC ^ i^~c       fc
                                                                                         (AcLCgJ'JC^^ C1) 'T(ii£f\^>h U ^                                            fs^s/ ^OKkaJLi


            /kiwx.                                                               C f v i ^ i-


        (y»\j            O K ^^jL ^j^'i i j ^ i ^                                            ^


        i^l j S/^(XiL ^ U m x J \ A € ^ t ^ V                                          ^         ^ /You£ ^o/jr' SjO&cfafef^ CtsjlM
               >'                          -                      ■           -




                           -."'l                                                                                                                ''-'xy:I'i;                         ::iv ‘
                           v       - j .   w e s t       .■>s t a n d ;


                                                                                                                                                                                                       'c             -V;


                                                                                                      :,
                       j
                                                                                                       K       ''■>   . .- ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                       .. . .   - .




            148                HP fe'S^                                                                                                                                                                    IDZfesl
                                                                                                                                                                                                    H r — +— :        4



                                                                                                13Tq&li-.- fes33p4




\j = 2 6 0 0 persons               CENTRAL           PEN= 2 2 0 0 pe rso n s                                                                              N. W PEN= 1 6 0 0 per
                                                                                                                         ---------------------- -------       ------------- - _ j — r J _   _   ;

                                                                                                                       U                                                         / : . ,, . K.ir- — .
                                           ■ ,              ,   !'■■   \ ..       ■.   ..
                                                                                                                       f, ■                                               ■ ■•■ ■ ■■■•■.. .         .■ • . .
                                                     ^ v'&                   .                    •
                                                      ... .                       :. -■■ '' _ _ ;''
                                                                                            '                             ~

                                                    ' - ■ 1"'c- ; iL?’
                                                                   ^           :           f-- ': V ■'
                                                 ■' / ■. - :A.f        '■ ; 'v : v. '',u:.:c ;;:'          .
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘:                    ’
                                                                                                                       "U '                   '           ;                          '
V <‘r. -




                                                                                                                                                                    ' .• C        ~~l              y“     ^         }                1                             **   *   \              i" '   £   ~   *


                             ; 3 ,    v' ■   -■ " \   .      r    .


                                                          -• V*-■■4:-,
                                                                         ’/   :


                                                                                  -™';.■■
                                                                                                  -■   v. - .   .   ' :   -.   *

                                                                                                                                                                     m\ffo
                                                                                                                                                           ’V;yM';v Mm- £ h ?                  ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                   p\           '         ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         xv Y " ': . . . . . . . .'.'. . . .*•. .' . . . . . . . . v-

                                                                                                                                                            'f' '                       ~*                              f      -                 \                                                            ^ *




                                                                                                                                                                                         H2,                                   3 \2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -THE OWL SHOP.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               X 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 U D IE S TOILETS.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     am      0

                                                                                  EXISILN5 R E F R E S H M E N T AND BAR.                                  GEHIS     TOILETS.                           EXISTING SUBSTATION.
                                                                                                                                                                1            >-     .




                                                                                                                                          W EST   STAND.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        is X           l . f t 'K M T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L&€ P\iiGr*> U A M e

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DRAWM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -r   t                     SCALE
                        E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS
                        Consulting    Engineers
                                                                                                                          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB P.L.C.                                                                                                                  1:250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHEC KED
                        St. A n d r e w s House
                        2 3 King field Rosd
                                                                                                                          EXISTING LAYOUT OF LEPPINliS LANE ENTRANCE.                                                                     APPROVED
                        Sheffield    S11 9A S                    t»i. (0742) ss387i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DATE               12- 7- 85''
           G£X8. Ltd.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2007
         rTu f f^ c ^ \xsiaA. 1 ^-o <i.c4>k ^ j Vyt^j -f
                                                                                             3 3>’T y£f?S4 <U*y'li>0 “




                                  NEW W A LL M u PARAPET
                                  TO M A IC T EXISTING-.'

                                                                           SHEETED FENCE, ACCESS
               SEE 0R& 6 7 0 5 / 1 2 . .                   v<2             GATE TQ BE MAIHTAiHED.
                                     V                JX                                                        HOME     SUPPORTERS

                                                                %
                                          ^                  DEMOLISHED \
                                     W X                     TDHNSTiLES,>C'
                                                                                           S rSr '                       .       '
                                                           /fa n                N          's?/*5»»t» '; wn»

                                                                               ratoceated gohz..
                                                                               CHARCOH SAFETICURB.                        RE-USE EXISTING
                             EXISTING M .H .
                                                                                                                        r-&ATE. —       \
                                                                        HEW TURNSTILE BLOCK
                                              ifJ-                      TO HATCH EXISTING                                ■LINE OF RBDCATED:
                                                                                                                          FENCE.* " 7 "                       THE OWL SHOP.
           Jv-;'. ft?! v v >a
              "■    '   i                                                                                                                                       0 ol/CX. tyv-jvs
                                                                                                                                                                 to f* r* 4*uv»c<
    O ^ /.*        "I       •T.O'f W '*-"* ^                                                              k / 4 ^ / b r t OHE NEW PANEL                          W hSYOtJ0L
                                                                                                           /*/.^vv
                                                                                                                          REQUIRED
           j 1 v“O oc. T c „ , L 4 , * ^ y \ 5                                                            *'I
                 %$ ^ 9 Ouo.*- i o ^ c J /                                          , .PERSONNEL ACCESS
                                       /                                               DOOR.
     w                               (              SEE D R6 6705/14.
5 ^I-SKas>/W ^XW~ILKWAvv ^

 J?C\!iA,k:x                                                                                                          REFURBISHED LADIES TOILETS.                                 \
it . <1 <tf                    H2fi »j tMW,ju ~ w \ 6<iTaj j'                                                         SEE DR& 5 7 0 5 / 9 . A

              u/\ I'-tJ f W fx^^xj\AtL »v/W«*e*M
   wkst^j?:—^ ^ u i yc^--^>p ^x^wEsW"
                              r n     rr= r n >1 r                                                                                                   u. „.c

              U D IE S                                           REFURBISHED                 REFURBISHED                 EXISTING SUBSTATION
                                                                   ITS                       SEHTS TOILETS        C
           i d i a
                                                                    /                                       '     ,
                                                                                                                             w fti ^ s , 4 A - 4 h
                                                                                                                                                                         NEW REFR
    SEE DR& 6 7 0 5 / 1 0 #                              SEE DR& 6705/10./*            •                                                                                 UNDEK EL
                                                         ,. »                    ^ ky}A               ^          , -•,                                                   NORTH WE
                                                         " ‘",.' H m ..- ch’cJIfvrtaj^Ja                                                                                 SEE DR&
  s ^ I ^ c j r«n?ctrt-4                                                         &
 •f %     . rtT. i m                      u                                     ^ >!<KA
 .SI STAND.                                    Qj *'.■Cr    '-V^ ’•*•]■••- ■, ; . ,     ... . ,
                                                                                                                                                        .3


                                         If*t<--i          i - Jr & S C &M^.v,:W   'JWv :stJ S^ J

                                                                                                                                                        DRAWN             /. rrr,uj>i
         WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB P.L.C
  i f c t V ' C j U 1—    . iO     O -L j C '     ( lb     fc fc O a l A i & f c ~ U e y i“


 tv x X -fla t           tu v fa J fe —         l" f o    ^

 i & i n ’c ^ b     4ccix j-tte S o o tk -y e J ^
S o l u ^ 0 4 C f r ^ U Y e ^ ,C b J t* -o


bd^bk.                             CU
                          iy_^ -    N 0         i^ CV/ i c r v / \ _    C jh ^ —>-c^j2o   /" ^
                                                   u j J L o \i ^A -4   l'\CsJ\^X   G?~\J \ Q-\A~^-


 &             i ' X                    .
  ^           iA   /L (I£ c / f 'f lc C \ C d /> C ^
  City of Sheffield            Metropolitan District

  Roger Pensam, FCIS, MBIM, Solicitor                                                        Administration and Legal Department
  Head of Department
                                                                                             Town Hall,
                                                                                             Sheffield S1 2HH


  Our reference     GP/262/DMB

  Your reference
                                                                                                           SO U TH       YORKSHIRE
  Date
                     24th February, 1986                                                                COUNTY



The Chief Fire Officer,                                                                               REC’B
Fire Service Headquarters,
                                                                                                      C .F .O .
Furnival House,
42-46 Furnival Gate,
                                                                                                      D.Q.F.O.
Sheffield,
SI 4QP.                                                                                               C A .O .

Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

As you probably know the City Council will take over responsibility as the
Licensing Authority under the above Act from the South Yorkshire County
Council on 1st April, 1986.

I think it would be of considerable assistance to both the Council and
other Authorities for an informal meeting to be held to discuss both the
existing and future arrangements for administering the 1975 Act. To this
end I have arranged for a room to be made available in the Town Hall on
Thursday, 13th March, 1986, at 9.30 a.m..

Please contact my Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Bownes, as soon as possible
with a view to indicating who will be present at the meeting on your
behalf.  I have also invited representatives to attend from the South
Yorkshire Police, the Health and Safety Executive and the Council's
Department of Land and Planning (Building Surveyor's Division).

Please bear in mind this meeting will be informal in nature and any
constructive comments which you wish to make will be welcome.

Yours faithfully,



                                                                                                  "X>0
                                                                                                  -rjv>o / H u a c A
                                                                                                              -fa                    .
Head of Department.                                                                                                                      v'~^2

                                                                                                                                 sr.s.Jte
JH



                                                                                           734690 - Mr. Bownes

                           For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring..........................................(STD Code 0742)
                                                          Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
                 ^£«(W^V\ ^                  1                                                    i
                  P Uwjag f\^ * b ^ lO ^ I $ A S K © w e^ a C«®wvjVbfe4,s *sfi\A. Ssi^X 1(h           fe
                   Jpto'-A0 W?O^I’X           .                 ,              ”   i       "'"'''   *
                 WKac/a. ft^»^Olav>&C!L_.tkG f^«w a wi K4~,^£k . ./Qj._p^&vf3L fu/A^lrio, VjekjW !»•€_-
                                                               .     o     \
                          AeAJiri^x ,•:.                      ^4 4tl» b J fO ^ X -   ! ^ *W4fcL«*N«/
                           U                                     &
                Scj(,Sr, 'SJtJli S/s t4 & J J k J ^ < ^ ^fe,r\ts{ . A OivJ W«JA
                rL/iA/NA^.t^.                                           A^ci i A j - £ L . ^ £ ^ - ~ r _ —.&/ « *                    ..




                         1 . /i*j>                      1cAw*VS.I*I.l                                 ®^-£-         IMM'W-vij Sv^0\»J(*d?!
                \itc \.lW ^Qx/H~^t'mA €) &-jl u l o U A * A y a t e O o                                       it> K i^ M 4 * ^ i^Oo
                ItJ., /I vj tfc. U,x,;f' (i-j 1oyr^C dv^c4 !U '- ll© tAAyftS                                     4 <5^0
                                                                                                                  U     ;
                'fuft'vifoU -5 n -                  MO-j\ddjdWl i^ lr, tkj2                       ft. S' ^ &L*U, W^Ffe-tevxc/
                ^vA.o4 %5\^'"*» 0- 3s W\            ^wf.,          ;-*.^’ii(i. i           bO/ Cu<i«^C.• ^                        CoCCa»^o
                                                                                   v                                       ^       f
                         tiJfj /^                 <ajk fej>,            vJfr-A A       *                  AO y i     0   C // L f*4 M c iw te
;       (   )   VhjtJc                     bJ<*-o * \   tik^JcuU     c Io s J T        $ 1 ^ k a *a     k/te4>C     1© t>-6 \oC /& J& rJ

                (p,r™
                    V.,,w
                       vAn^5C™
                             j-^>
                                „w     v#w*~
                                       --------      fu { K /^K A , (r'l 0C
                                                                          --^£
                                                                             ^?
                                                                              M#    2>4 vJ
                                                                               ,.,,.—                 H<Tfc>A o / A
                                                                                                                  U--&X-fetyJ-s T
                                                                                                                   . .~™        S>/5&cJc2ShA
                                                                                                                                 “1"..... -I™
                                                                                                                                            ..™
                                                                                                                                              ,™-.
                         Kl® (a?7 0 ^ j D AK-e^jktA | k ^ D o 4 ® . J (CxjylikJ
                d jJ ’'i&*.Jld,      i-4«>Wv itiL    4(kl\                    0'/Op\5^&-f.                                       J
                    11               0                  '                     i i                                                ]
                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                 i




                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                 i

                                                                                                                                 i
I




                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                 f

(

    j                                                                                                                            £




                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                 i




                                                                                                                                 ?




                                                                                                                                 J
           i

                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE & CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY

                                 SOOTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


                                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT
                                  SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
                                       HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD


               SAFETY ASPECTS

               Responsibility for crowd control is by Condition of Safety   Certificate
               delegated to Police and Stewards.

               Any matters concerning means of escape would be examined by the Fire
               Service in respect of fire related matters and would be adjusted where
               necessary to take into account any observations made by the Building
               Surveyor, then put to the Police for their observations on the way they
               would control the crowd in the various sections of the ground, whether
               they could foresee any crowd control problems and as to whether the
               control would be by Police, Stewards, or both.          If the Police
               considered that the arrangements were satisfactory and that they could
               maintain control over the crowd, then the arrangements would be
               approved by the Working Party.

               With respect to the Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough Ground, the
               Police requested the original radial barriers to the West Terrace in
               1981 in order that the maintenance of crowd control would be made
               easier.   This followed their experience at the 1981 Semi-Final held at
               the ground.

               Their experience in subsequent seasons seemed to justify the provision
               of these barriers. The Fire Service at that time would have assessed
               the proposal in respect of area capacity, exits available, travel
               distances and fire risk and subject to the proposed gates in the
               barriers being stewarded and the fact that the arrangements^ was to
               assist the Police maintain crowd control, would have recommended
               approval of the scheme.

               In 1985, the Club and the Police made further proposals of segregation
               to allow for the occupation of the West Stand and Terrace by home and
               away supporters.

               The original proposal was that certain turnstiles would be dedicated to
               each of the areas served. This would have provided greater control of
               the numbers in each area and meant that overcrowding in any of the
               sections would be unlikely subject, of course, to correct use of
               internal gates and stewarding.

               The means of escape arrangements to the rear of the West Stand were
               assessed on the basis of the capacity of each section served and
t fU j i t )   subject to the conditions specified in correspondence to Eastwood &
Hsu            Partners, the proposal was approved by the Working Party. This scheme,
               however, was not implemented and a revised scheme was put forward with
               only one segregation wall to the rear of the West Stand. In addition,
               the new central, radial barrier on the Terrace and a second radial
               barrier to create a 2m segregation gap to the North end of the Terrace
               were proposed. The aim of this scheme was to allow home and away
C>b            supporters the use of the West Terrace, each having turnstiles
               dedicated to segregated areas. The segregation could be varied by use
               of fences, gates and the creation of sterile areas to suit the needs of
               the situation.
Again the means of escape from each area of the Terrace and the Stand
was assessed in the same manner adopted for the 1981 scheme. The main
alteration on the Terrace, i.e. the new central barrier, did not cause
any increase in the capacity of any section of the Terrace, did not
change the ingress or egress arrangements to that already existing or
increase any travel distance to an exit. From a Fire Service point of
view the means of escape arrangements were not affected by the
provision of the new fence and subject to any observations of the
Building Surveyor as to structural matters and the provision of
adequate control by the Police and Stewards, the scheme was considered
to be acceptable. The Police, who had initiated the proposals were
quite happy with the arrangements and felt that the smaller areas
would, in addition to greater flexibility of segregation, allow for
even more control over the movement of spectators in the area. As
there was no significant change to the arrangements that had worked
well since 1981, the scheme was approved by the Working Party.




Command Headquarters,
Wellington Street,
Sheffield SI 3FG

RG/

15th May, 1989
6th May, 1986      Report of Head of Admin         and    Legal   Department   to
                    General Purposes panel.

                   Refers to proposals to re-draft Safety Certificate
                   Conditions which appeared to be      inadequate  or
                   inappropriate in some areas.     When approved, the
                   Certificate issued to Sheffield Wednesday would be
                   replaced   and a Certificate would be issued to
                   Sheffield United.

5th June,   1986   Copy of report and    panel's      resolution    received   by
                    Fire Service.

7th July,   1987   Draft conditions     for Safety Certificate received by
                    Fire Service for comments.

                   Cond.2 - The Holder shall take      all   necessary
                   precautions for the reasonable safety of spectators
                   admitted to the stadium....

                   Cond.3 - The maximum number of spectators that may
                   be admitted to each part of the stadium at any one
                   time shall not exceed the number specified  in the
                   schedule.

                   Cond.4 - Arrangements   to   be  made with Chief
                   Constable .....  for sufficient number of police
                   officers   for the purpose of maintaining lawful
                   orderly behaviour among  persons   attending the
                   stadium.

                   Cond.6 -     No   spectator   to      be   admitted to stadium
                   unless -

                   a)    method of admission
                   b)    methods of segregation of spectators have been
                         approved by Chief Constable.

                   Cond.10 - (Duties of Stewards)
                   (a) Prevent overcrowding by ensuring that crowd
                        limits in various parts are complied with.

                   (i)    Comply promptly with any emergency instruction
                          given by a police officer, chief steward or the
                          safety officer.

13th August, 1987 Fire Service reply to            letter      enclosing   draft
                  Certificate Conditions.

                   Ref    to    Condition  10(a)   requesting further
                   consideration as to how     stewards   can prevent
                   overcrowding   by ensuring that crowd limits are
                   complied with.

30th March, 1989   Letter to Fire Service enclosing revised          Certificate
                   Conditions.

                   The   condition   requiring   that stewards prevent
                   overcrowding had been amended to read:- "Under the
                   direction of the safety officer or the chief steward
                   or an authorised officer prevent overcrowding by
                   ensuring the crowd limits in various parts of the
                   ground are complied with".   This is now Condition
                   12(a).
In the Section    "Guidance   for   Safety   Certificate
Holders".

"The Chief    Constable and his officers     have   a
particular important role inrelation       to "public
order” situations the correct handling of which
should reduce any risk to spectator safety".

      consultation with Chief Constable on methods of
admission and     segregation      of     spectators.
Consultation     must    also take place  if advance
information is such that public order difficulties
may arise.
If there had been no gates        in    the   perimeter   fence    in     1986     they        would

certainly have been requiredyto-eater for oomo-tnorG ooriouo omougeneyr                          This

is shown by the fact that extra gates were asked for by the Working Party

the   pitch     perimeter    fence in 1985 which was prior to Popplewell.                     But the

gates already existed and the question which had to be addressed was whether

in the light of all the circumstances of the case at that particular part of

the ground the existing gates were adequate as they were.



After the issue of the revised Green Guide in November 1986                  and        inspection

of the ground was made and a report sent to Sheffield City Council dated 7th

February 1987.



The South Yorkshire Fire Service took a number of factors into consideration

in determining this.        They were as follows



 1.   Proper stewarding to ensure the capacity of each area was not exceeded.

      This would be by club stewards or police officers as agreed between the

      club and the police.



2.    All   gates to be                 by stewards/police at all times - (see 1981

      and 1985 correspondence and minutes)



3.    The ground had CCTV fitted linked to the police control box                       and    there

      was   communication     between    the police control box and police officers

      inside and outside the ground and also with the             Chief      Safety           Steward

      appointed    by the club.     Any build up of over crowding would be spotted
                                                                        tiwvcl (X T 0
      and action taken.       The turnstiles were linked by computer^to the .peli.cc

      control i s i x ^                                       i/v'UL             P fifa U s




4*    Revised    Green Guide emphasised management responsibility and contained

      a specific section on stewarding which covered duties of                   stewards         and
indicated that the duties of stewards should be agreed with the police.



The     terrace      was        in the open air, the stand above it was of brick and

concrete construction and was not regarded as a                        fire       exposure           hazard

and means of escape from it was good.



The     terrace          was not deep being only about 14m front to back and had a

friendly slope.



On the capacity of the terrace it could be emptied in                             much        less     than

eight    minutes          by      escape      routes    to the rear and laterally along the

terraces via the gates at the top of the radial fences forming the pens

which would be manned by either a police officer or a club steward (see

1981 and 1985 correspondence and minutes) at all times.



There was a full fire rated public address system which could                                   be    used

from    the       police       control box to give instructions to the crowd in any

section of the ground should                    an     emergency   arise.         In    the     case     of

emergency,         this     would be used from the police control box which had a

good view of all parts of the ground to give                        appropriate           instructions

to the crowd, police and stewards.



In    the        light    of    the    lack      of     fire   hazard, the provision of CCTV,

computer monitoring of turnstiles, police control box with                                 PA    system,

communication             links     between police control box, police in the stadium

and the Chief Steward, it was concluded that the                           existing        gates      were

reasonable          in    the      case of any reasonably foreseeable situation which

might arise.



It was never anticipated that (i) major over crowding                              of     the    terrace

would       be     allowed        or   (ii)     or     mentioned that a gate might be opened

allowing many additional spectators to enter                        into     an        already       packed
terrace.



It    was     considered that the nnmhniT af height and strength of walls and

gates outside the Leppings Lane end leading into the terrace were                                such

that    the      risk of a door being forced or walls scaled and fans thereby

entering I111 ni'auinl in large numbers was ue*-                             At no time was it

ever suggested otherwise by anybody.



The    pre-match planning between the club and the police would cater for

emergency action bearing in mind crowd safety including                          the        necessary

arrangements for the safe entry of spectators.



At no point was it suggested that an exit gate might be opened to allow

spectators into the ground.



Terraces themselves properly packed and with                    the       correct      number     and

siting      of    crush      barriers    and   fences,       are    generally recognised as

relatively safe areas.               (Green Guide     1976   Para        6.3).      Problems     are

likely      to    arise      at the time of leaving and exit routes must be clear

and without obstructions and allow a steady flow of spectators off                               the

terrace.         It     is   often    the practice for the police to hold back away

fans on the terraces whilst home               fans     leave      the     ground      to    prevent

mixing at the end of matches.



The    police         had    expressed their satisfaction with the ground and said

that they would police it.
                             CAPACITY OF CENTRAL PENS BASED ON EXITS



With an exit flow rate of 60 persons per minute and an                   evacuation       time     of

eight minutes, one unit of exit width (i.e. 550mm) would exit 480 people.



Exit Time Using Normal Tunnel Exit Only



The    tunnel exit is of six units of exit width, accessed via exits from pens

3 and 4 which are each of three units of exit width.                    Each   of    these       three

unit     exits       are     capable   of exiting 1,440 people in eight minutes.                (1,000

people from each pen could therefore be evacuated                 via    the     tunnel     in    5.5

minutes).          It    was     considered    most unlikely that the tunnel route of exit

would not be available.



Exit Time Using Radial Fence Gates Only



The alternative exits to the wing ends of the terrace, through gates in                           the

radial       fence,        are each of two units of exit width therefore are capable of

exiting 960 people in             eight     minutes.     1,000 people    could      therefore      be

evacuated via one of these exit gates in 8.3 minutes.



Exit Time Using Both Tunnel and Radial Fence Gates



If     all    five       units    of   exit width available from each pen were to be used

simultaneously (i.e. three units via the tunnel and two units via                         the    gate

through      the        radial    fence),     then   these would be capable of exiting 3,680

people in eight minutes.



1,000 people could therefore be evacuated using both exits in 3.3 minutes.
Pitch Perimeter Gates



The pitch perimeter gates were not included in       calculations    for    means    of

escape purposes because they were less than 1.1m wide and not considered for

mass evacuation.    The exits from the two central pens, 3 and       4   were     820mm

and   755mm respectively in width.      With these gates open, calculating on the

basis of one unit of exit width and using an exit flow rate         of     40   persons

per   minute,    each   exit   could   have been capable of exiting 320 persons in

eight minutes.



RG/

pencapcit
                   "oaa.   J
                      oaj^v*.   T b ^ r &vr ox* <£.


H^ecfeJl     1^' 8 T
   \HrV-e^   “■^
                                                                                                     Copies      to:    ACO       (pp)             (T p
                                                                                                                        DO I       (PP)
                                                                                                                        HQ    FP    S e ct i o n




Divisional             Commander
Xll'     Divisions                                                    Div.    P.P.O.


Chief        Fire O f f i c e r                                                                                          FP19/2/3
                                                                                                                         RG0
Visits         to F o o t b a l l       Grounds             on M a t c h     D ay s                                      20.11.85




A recent            v i sit      to O a k w e l l       football           ground        carried      out    jointly         by    Officers
of     the     Fire       S e rv i c e ,       P o l i ce    a nd    Building         Control        departments         immediately
p r i o r to an e v e n i n g m a t c h ,                     highlighted             the     value     of    carrying            out    su ch
v i s i t s on a r e g u l a r b a s is .


The v is it was m a d e     to c h e c k  th at  the                                     a r r a n g e m e n t s s p e c i f i e d in the
grounds       Safety   Certificate      were   being                                     complied with              and r e v e a l e d a
n u m b e r of faults.


It     has    now been            decided           that       similar        visits        should     be m a d e      to all       grounds
designated under  the                             Safety         of     Sports         Grounds        Ac t, 1975, w h e t h e r a
Certificate has b e e n                           issued         or     not.          Wherever        possible arrangements
s h o u l d be m a d e for I n s p e c t i n g O f f i c e r s to v i s i t g r o u n d s d u r i n g t hei r
e v e n i n g c o m m i t m e n t as a n d w h e n e v e n i n g m a t c h e s oc c ur . Inspecting Officers
taking     part     must        be f a m i l i a r                   with         the g e n e r a l        conditions       contained
in a S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e a nd a n y                    other        c o n d i t i o n s a p p l i e d loc al ly .


L i a i s o n w i t h the r e l e v a n t D i v i s i o n                    of    South      Yorkshire          Police      must        tak e
p l a c e p ri or to su ch v i e i t s .


Any     faults            found         should          be      dealt        with        immediately         whenever             possible
a nd    followed            up     by      a    letter        detailing            the     faults     to t h e    club    concerned.
A    co py     of     this       letter           should        be    forwarded            to t he    Chief      Executive,             South
Yorkshire            County        Council,            for      the     attention           of Hr.     D.    Vaughan.



    (Signed )        H.    E.    Wright



Chief        F ir e O f f i c e r
Divisional Commander
'AH’ Divisions                Divisional FPO

Chief Fire Officer                             .          FP19/2/3



Visits to Football Grounds on Match Days                  28.8.19S6


With the commencement of the new football season I would remind you of
memorandum   19/2/3 dated 20th November, 1985 regarding visits to grounds
being made during evening commitment work when an evening match is taking
place.

The same procedures and liaison should be made again this year and it
should be noted that the copies of any letters sent to the football club
should be sent to the local Safety of Sports Grounds Officer.




Chief Fire Officer
                         3      S)        f     C                    W      'lolS


                    6/"aV             ^ t"CX/VV cl               -. V'€/W o 0 « J k


-To \—      i\ C      O               e^-wv- c v n ...............................

                          ^-0 \ 4r\            V-eiv                ce.                                     o Jo c      \K_ .. ...t^^..... . ^ s> A W vs>.'/VV^-_
           <XAr^r         VA. ^           ...^COft.     <^Cucv-A \ —

                          W oJe                 erv     I O • 7 ~ S ’ £>                ~1_         <xc                o m ,v e^ Jl                    0 : 0 . ^ m /v ^ V c u ^ -
_ _ _ _ _ _ <4^vvc^          U/\*V-                     O t ^ A ' ^                     pc^^j'                C o iVl f/W t                                   Jh «
       _ _ .>*           _P~ C.            -V" o          c<Mrv-cA^ o-w'c'                    ol          *i>i                             ^         ^vc«            ° ......
                      ^ © >VV vT^
                              v^       V                S-^. I                  .                                           _          .           ..... .       ..... .......

                                     >V               « -?-€ -        >0>«-                        C v w . vw V                 j     i^ tv C                (U ils e J i         bu

           k        U        v 02.              «-e/> ■‘S'vvisvy^-c.             VV                                     CO <sy%                0-^W\                 O^s^aVvL
           ■V o       <X-       \ o o A N^ l e ^ -        b e < /w -e ^         V ^ v a . o -\)~ -e JL            <^C               l~ W              U 3 W t “ ..
          '^^iyr\~xy/X-Sssfl**<?\^                  V-g                                       coo^        ^           vuCk^vC-^                                          \        if
           £V                        v^V O v —'trV ^ M V €-K3 -e-J^                 ^                                                          un tb.                   V^w\1
           o4r                  Wo^r                              c-e.j €S4->t-",                   -L-    W s A \>*v^-                    ’C^-^/C              tW.
            'r^CK> t/vv-                              ^T'U'C~ v€/vw o\J -aa^c^,                    tW
            \V"     V^vvv.jLo^r-e<iL           \\\£                       <!V       0                     S^aA X w v u ^^.                           V fiiS-OVv-eA               fcW...

            iX/v-e-a..
                    ’'"\<\^q           CL/VhC-CL-         u^ct/^         ’
                                                                         W i | fe'tA.6 ^                  b       i     A       v     w        u      l

           ^V.vci\. ”V<»                           \*e/VT                         ie'<^rei^2- ' /XV                **v
           V^^«4</S'€/v\\.<A.v')-€»                                  u A l - W-e^ C<rvCi-^f-0^ ^ CkM- A- _.a Y \ . ^
                               i^c^r'              vV        ccu<X<V                               \i'e/v*VQ \>&Jl (.................
fe IaA
 p.jt-
            SAFETY OF SP03TS GROUNDS A.'.D DL'TIES OF STEWARDS


            1.         The prime r e s p o n s i b i l i t y              f o r the arrangement o f a f f a i r s            at
                       s p o r t s grounds l i e s               v ith    the c l u b .       To t h a t end they should
                       ensure t h a t ste w ards are s u i t a b l y q u a l i f i e d .


                       O u a l l f i catio ns :
                       Stewards should

                       •!        Be t r a i n e d and i n s t r u c t e d to              d e a l    v i t h any
                                   emergencies r e l a t i n g               to f i r e    or e v a c u a ti o n .


                       b)        3e g iv e n w r i t t e n i n s t r u c t i o n about the a c t i o n
                                   t o be ta k e n in cases o f emergency,                            in clu d in g
                                  fcrrangeffients f o r c a l l i n g               the emergency s e r v i c e s .


                       c)        Receive p r a c t i c a l             i n s t r u c t i o n and    tra in in g
                                  app ro priate              to t h e i r r e s p o n s i b i l i t y .


                       d)       . Should n o t be eraployed as a ste w ard unless
                                  *© i n s t r u c t e d and t r a i n e d ,           and


                       «)        Be a dequate I n number, p h y s i c a l l y                       and m e n t a l l y           (
                                                                                                                   _   y
                                  ca p a b le o f p e r fo r m i n g t h e i r d u t i e s ,              e ffe c tiv e ly
                                  d e p lo y e d , e f f i c i e n t l y      s u p e rv is e d and r e a d i l y
                                  l d c n t l f^)jj.bl e .


                                 Nf:       Ste wards sho uld not be l e s s tha n 18 y e ars
                                 ©r Btsre t h a n SO y e ars o f age and sho uld wear
                                 d i« tin e tiv e        dress such as f l u o r e s c e n t j a c k e t s
                                 s u i t a b l y i n s c r i b e d f r o n t and back.


         2.           On th e o cc a s io n o f each match stewards should a t t e n d a p re-m atc h
V I u C t i j t M t u i b r l » f inf         be made f u l l y aware o f t h e i r r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s and
                             l o c a t i o n o f members o f S t . Johns Ambulance and p o l i c e i n
      ■,A     •
                  . t b f a re n f o r which they are r e s p o n s i b l e .
                                                                                                                                                               .•'* t :
S tew a rd s     s h o u ld    be      d; t v r i l - t e i   t . w. r : ; j *           nc    gro un d    in                                                       l .~:
                                                                                                                                                    „,-r"            } *|

accordance            w ith    a    d e ta ile d       p re -a rra n g e d          sc h e d u le      agreed                          <71                           P.]
                                                                                                                                                    '                k\.i]
b e tw e en    th e    p o lic e       and      o-.anagen.ent.               T h e ir    num bers       and     lo c a tio n

s h o u ld    n ot    be   le s s      th a n    the    m in im u s,         s ta te d    in     the    s a fe ty .,                                S              l l
c e r t if ic a te .       T h e ir     d u tie s      may    be* d i v i d e d          in to    fo u r   m a in
                                                                                                                                                                     |Cj:
                                                                                                                          \\
c ateg ories:                                                                                                                                                        t:1
                                                                                                                           Ai
                                                                                                                             JcU U*
a)       C o n t r o l l i n g o r d i r e c t i n g members o f the p u b l ic
         who are e n t e r i n g o r l e a v i n g                  the ground.
                                                                                                                                         X
b)       P a t r o l l i n g the ground t o d ea l w i t h any                                                                     '                                 :
         emergencies.                 Eg: r a i s i n g a la rm s ,
         extin gu ishin g f i r e s               e tc.                                                                ^ j, .« r       4 t     u ...
                                                                                                                                       r-k
c)       Hanning e n t r a n c e s ,             e x i t s and o t h e r s t r a t e g i c
        p o i n t s , p a r t i c u l a r l y e x i t doors and gates
        which a re n o t c o n t in u o u s ly open w h i l s t the
        ground i s            i n use.

d)      U n de rta k ing s p e c i f i c d u t i e s r e l a t i n g                     to
        emergencies and e v a cu a tio n p ro c e d u r e s .


Emergency P r o c e d u r e s :
The importan ce o f t h e p r o v i s i o n o f fo rm a l emergency procedures
a t each ground can n o t be o ve r -e m p h a s iz e d .                                     J o in t con s u lta tio n
i n t h i s r e s p e c t should be taken between th e p o l i c e ,                                       th e management
O f th e ground,              fire ,      ambulance and o t h e r s e r v i c e s .                        It    is
e s s e n t i a l t h a t s te w ards and t h e i r s u p e r v i s o r s a re f u l l y                            aware
o f the p a r t they have t o p la y i n t h e p la n s which a re pro duced,
and t h a t they have ready access t o loud h a i l e r s                                           to f a c i l i t a t e
communication w i t h the crowd.


Management should ensure t h a t w r i t t e n                                   in s tru c tio n s d e t a ilin g
the a c t i o n to be t a k e n i n the e v e n t o f an emergency are serv ed
on a l i s te w a r d s ,       and t h a t s t a f f and stewards r e c e i v e p r a c t i c a l
i n s t r u c t i o n and t r a i n i n g a p p r o p r i a t e t o t h e i r r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s
i n th e e vent o f an emergency.


Bodies such as the f i r e                       service,          the p o l i c e and S t .               Johns Ambulance
                                                                                                                                                         ' tV
                                                                                                                                                        p,*-
Brig ade have e x pressed a w i l l i n g n e s s t o a s s i s t i n such t r a i n i n g                                               L’
                                                                                                                                             .v .           C  ^




and club s are urg ed t o take f u l l                             advantage o f the o f f e r ,                                                         ^c\l“
       ■"                                                                                   | '              -   (. -C. w
                                                                                - ..                     •   -


  E x e r c i s e s f o r s t a f f and stewards should be c a r r i e d out
  re g u la rly       t o ensure the smooth o p e r a t i o n o f the pro cedures'
  f o r dealin g v i t h        an emergency.            A re c o rd sho uld be k e p t
  c o n tain in g d e t a i l s    o f the t r a i n i n g and i n s t r u c t i o n g iv en and
  exercises h e ld ,           and sho uld i n c l u d e the f o l l o w i n g a a t t e r s : -


  a)         Date and tim e o f the i n s t r u c t i o n o r e x e r c i s e ,           —i>


  b)        D u ra tio n .                                                            ^              ^                  ^

  c)        Name
             Name ooff th
                        thee person
                              person egi v
                                         i vi inncg the
                                                     the Iim
                                                           n st m
                                                                t r ur e
                                                                       c ti i o n .

  d)         Najnes o f the persons r e c e i v i n g the i n s t r u c t i o n .               JL
  *}         Mature o f i n s t r u c t i o n o r e x e r c i s e .


  C o n t r o l o f ste w a rds should be from a c e n t r a l p o i n t c o n t a i n i n g
 e f f i c i e n t Beans t o communicate w i th stewards a t key p o i n t s
  Id e n tifie d      i n d is c u s s io n s between nanageaent and th « p o l i c e .


 C h ie f Stevajrds :

 Clubs should a p p o i n t a C h i e f Steward r e s p o n s i b l e f o r c o - o r d i n a t i n g
 th e d u t i e s o f stewards and t o be i a s e d i a t e l y a v a i l a b l e f o r

 d is c u s s io n s v i t h   the s e n i o r p o l i c e o f f i c e r p r e s e n t c on c e rn ing any
 probleia i n the ground.


 S p e c i f i c D u t i e s o f Stewards

 S p e c i f i c d u t i e s t o be u nd ertak e n by stewards i n c l u d e :


-a)         P r e v e n t in g o v e r c ro w d in g , e n s u rin g t h a t crowd
            U n its    i n v a r i o u s p a r t s o f tn e ground a re com plied
          With and t h a t gangways and e x i t s w e k e p t c l « a r .

b}        P re v en tin g ,    so f a r as p o s s i b l e , s ta n d in g on s e a t s ,
         *n d th e c l i m b i n g o f fen ces and o t h e r s t r u c t u r e s .
         Where by v i r t u e o f the s c a le o f the i n c i d e n t
         s te w ards a re unable t o comply w i t h t h i s r e q u i r e m e n t ,
         th e y sho uld w i th o u t d s la y r e p o r t the m a t t e r t o th e
         nearest p o lic e o f f ic e r ,         o r,   i f no p o l i c e o f f i c e r i s
         present,        to the C h i e f Steward or d e s ig n a t e d c lu b
         o ffic ia l.
                                                                                      >

                                                5-                                        !

  Trainin      !£
  T r a i n i n g o f stewards sho uld be completed p r i o r t o the
 s t a r t o f the season t o g s ta n da rd a c c e p ta b le t o the
 P o lic e ,     fire    serv ic e   and Local A u t h o r i t y .


 R e f re s h e r t r a i n i n g should b« g iv e n by a competent
 person d u r in g the months o f O cto ber and J anu ary .


Stewards should be s u p p l i e d w i t h a handout d e t a i l i n g
th e ir re s p o n s ib ilitie s       in general           terras as s e t out
ebove.


The above l i s t o f d u t i e s         i s by no aeans e x h a u s tiv e
and c lu b management sho uld l i a i s e                   c lo s e ly w ith
a p p r o p r i a t e s e n i o r p o l i c e end f i r e    service o f f ic e r s
to a r r i v e      a t a f i n a l v e r s i o n t h a t takes account o f
lo c a l fa c to rs .
  e)    The i n v e s t i g a t i o n and i d e n t i f i c a t i o n o f any
         i n c i d e n t ' o r occurrence r e p o r t i n g t h e i r f i n d i n g s
         t o p o l i c e o r Ranageraent in accordance v i t h
         i n s t r u c t i o n s given a t the pre-match b r i e f i n g .


  d)    Being aware o f the l o c a t i o n o f f i r e              fig h tin g
         equipment i n the a re a f o r which they a re
         r e s p o n s i b l e and b ein g capable o f e f f e c t i v e l y
         o p e r a t i n g the same.


  e)    Being f u l l y      convers ant w ith the methods and
         s i g n a l s used t o i n d i c a t e an emergency s i t u a t i o n
         which should have been p r e v i o u s l y s e t down in
         w r i t i n g and served on them,


. f)     Being c a p a b le o f r e c o g n i s in g p o t e n t i a l     fire
  —    ‘ hazards and suspect packages.                       Such f i n d i n g s
         t o be r e p o r t e d to the n e a r e s t p o l i c e      o ffic e r
        o r i n h i s absence the s e n i o r steward                 or
        d es ig n a te d c lu b o f f i c i a l .


 g)    Except i n an emergency stewards sho uld n ot
        le a v e t h e i r pla ce o f duty w it h o u t the consent
        o f th e s e n i o r steward o r s e n i o r p o l i c e o f f i c e r
        p re s e n t who should,           if   it   i s c on s ide red n e c e s s a ry ,
        arrange f o r a re p la ce m e nt.


 h)    A l l e x i t g ate s should be manned w h i l e t h - ground
        i s used by the p u b l i c ,           and be capable o f being
        opened i m m e d i a t e l y , from i n s i d e *      by anyone i n an
        emergency.


 i)    R e p o rtin g t o the C h i e f Steward any damage c r d e f e c t
        lik e ly    t o cause i n j u r y or danger t o persons in
        ftttend&nee.


 j)    I n the e v e n t o f an emergency or i n c i d e n t the s e n i o r
        p o l i c e o f f i c e r p re s e n t w i l l   take command and a l l
        stewards should pro mptly comply v i t h any i n s t r u c t i o n s
        g iv en by him e r by any p o l i c e o f f i c e r a c t i n g on h i s
        b eh alf.
                                       o4     cIgj^oaA>                     O^jjv          Pr                      A P P E N D I X 'I

                                                    EMERGENCY PROCEDURES


          In t h e e v e n t of a n y e m e r g e n c y i n c i d e n t or s e r i o u s t h r e a t w h e n c o n s i d e r a t i o n
                ! ? ^ v e n to c l o s i n g / e v a c u a t i n g th e g r o u n d , t h e n th e d e c i s i o n will be
              at of th e S e n i o r P o l i c e O f f i c e r on d u t y in c o m m a n d on t h a t day. T h a t
          o f f i c e r will n a t u r a l l y c o n s u l t w i t h c l u b o f f i c i a l s .

                       T w ? o f f i c e r s will c h e c k t h a t e a c h e x i t is m a n n e d t h r o u g h o u t the
oHle-etetc! 4          m a t c h by a S t e w a r d w h o has th e a p p r o p r i a t e keys. T h i s pa t r o l will
                       continue th roughout the match.
lot                   S h o u l d it a p p e a r n e c e s s a r y t h a t a c t i o n m a y be n e c e s s a r y , t h e n th e
                      f o l l o w i n g wi ll be i m p l e m e n t e d .
W h       <b)         Th e S e n i o r P o l i c e O f f i c e r w i l l , f r o m t h e P o l i c e C o n t r o l R o o m , b r e a k
                      in to th e p u b l i c a d d r e s s s y s t e m an d c a u s e to be e m i t t e d a d i s t i n c t i v e
                      o s c i l l a t i n g to ne , f o l l o w e d by a c o d e d m e s s a g e - "WILL T H E M A I N T E N A N C E
                      S T A F F P L E A S E R E P O R T T O B E R N A R D B E L L A M Y . " T h is will be f o l l o w e d by
                      th e s a m e o s c i l l a t i n g tone.

                      Each of th e e x i t s on t h e J o hn S t r e e t side'-of the g r o u n d is a l s o
                      f i t t e d w i t h its own i n d i v i d u a l a l a r m w h i c h will be a c t i v a t e d
                      simultaneously.

                     T h i s will a l e r t t h o s e S t e w a r d s m a n n i n g e x i t ga te s to o p e n them. All
                       o l i c e O f f i c e r s on d u t y at the g r o u n d s h o u l d a l e r t t h e m s e l v e s to the
                     p o s s i b l e e m e r g e n c y and t h o s e o f f i c e r s i d e n t i f i e d m u s t c h e c k t h a t
                     S t e w a r d s h a v e o p e n e d t h e g a t e s f o r w h i c h t h e y are r e s p o n s i b l e .
                     O f f i c e r s r o u n d the p e r i m e t e r t r a c k s h o u l d d r a w th e bo lt s on the
                     p e r i m e t e r f e n c e ga te s, b u t a w a i t f u r t h e r i n s t r u c t i o n s b e f o r e o p e n i n q
                     th e ga t e s .                                                                      a

                     S h o u l d it be d e c i d e d to p r o c e e d w i t h e v a c u a t i o n , t h e n the S e n i o r
                     P o l i c e O f f i c e r will g i v e i n s t r u c t i o n s f o r all p e r s o n s to l e a v e the
                     g r o u n d by th e n e a r e s t exit.

                     In th e c a s e s of e m e r g e n c y , w h i c h o c c u r b e f o r e th e m a t c h , t h e n S t e w a r d s
                     will be i n s t r u c t e d no t to a d m i t f u r t h e r s p e c t a t o r s .

                     S h o u l d a c t i o n at (b) a b o v e n o t be n e c e s s a r y th en a m e s s a g e w i 11 be
                     given - "M AINTENANCE STAFF ARE NOT NOW REQUIRED."

                     F i r e a l a r m a c t i v a t i o n p a n e l s are s i t u a t e d in the P o l i c e C o n t r o l R o o m
                     s h o u l d a n y of th e a l a r m s a c t i v a t e . T h e S e r g e a n t in c h a r g e of M a t c h
                     C o n t r o l w i l l , u n l e s s t h e r e is an o b v i o u s fire, i m m e d i a t e l y d i r e c t
                     th e S e c t o r S e r g e a n t to i n v e s t i g a t e in t h e a r e a s u b j e c t of th e f i r e
                     alarm. He w i ll a l s o i n f o r m W e s t Bar S u b - D i v i s i o n a l C o n t r o l Room,
                     w h o will be i n s t r u c t e d to c o n t a c t the F i r e S e r v i c e . Th e S e n i o r
                     O f f i c e r in c h a r g e of th e g r o u n d s h o u l d be t o l d f o r t h w i t h . T h e r e
                     s h o u l d be no h e s i t a t i o n or r e l u c t a n c e in i m p l e m e n t i n g th e f i r s t
                     s t a g e of e m e r g e n c y e v a c u a t i o n a r r a n g e m e n t s . (See (a) and (b)
                     above.)



                    T h e R e f e r e e and L i n e s m e n m u s t be i n f o r m e d of t h e s e p r o c e d u r e s p r i o r
                    to t h e m a t c h by the S e n i o r O f f i c e r in c h a r g e of the game.
                                                                                                      (■M v2                      0,     \J tVv.'       VVcV^y ("



                                                           0 U C i                         V i3 1t\/\ I S                          i€^y \
        u                                 hcvsjdl.. 0vv\(t\2V                             C -uJ‘P' ^IA/> A c2°| I                                                                b'-'' 1\/, cX, \ Ki

             /f -.
                          c^^tk-xcUc/, j b, o* , ^ .•€ c u > ^ M OQeto
              V»0 I f . r ~ t
                                                                         d j '* k * K n  i
                                                                                                 ^ M
                                                                                           \ | # (<K > W oa-C A X
                                                                                                                  Ji
            ^                 O                 Tj.JuTOl.yi it Nt'l^iUojk) bVU/^A^aCUXd MrCwP<VM.t- «Xa2A|7^I
    a » ' T w - f W W l o ' S j ^ . ^ 4 P£'i l                       i<»V fto jfc& O c/- H c < 4 | t « . f *
            lo (^-|l|Vv\C^O                                                                       (".<9^^ C o ^                                                                           £wM.$»S^K>c/
                                    li'CvCO’V \ tX(JLo /» ^T^L—
                                                              c iSK/lk^ C /^ k A & s                                                                                        (f?"\A j\ t^X £:VX
            .•^'C4x)v\to'\ j29C^^--^icSiwv                                                            Cj { C t vac4                       *   f^2C^ev/tLo <^\ ft^/<3uy(A6oK
             y| ^ V Q L ^ > ^ r-£_ ft                                s V © v n / A .1 — ^ - \aJj2^ G v J ^ tA^^-
             M o b t"                                               6K^2_ ^IC^wjK^i l o ( 4>(Cyl'Uo-


•                    *)*~^ J ljU r J ^ o f e h S \JL / U \3 ^ J \jr^                      Aa,          V                  \   .    I''                                                   c l    & tJ Z t \/jv t A < _

            ^          (to6 fV ^ - A \ l                                                    j) < b ^ o %(xJy^ (Xx) i ^ ^ ^ A M s j \ h c ^ f
                                     0\/\cA               -ivxC^V^HX C&J& j)                                                              Su^JM.t^^C/                               Sh&^yJ           6H^\
             l A A ' W t , C>-0-x5_a _^>                                      txy'bwOi—                                           6Cc</*                           <X) ^vyi Cnj                  r
            'I 'O      / < \/3 f f l i i            ^ \ j / o—                                                      »•

                                    u O X - fv tu                     ^       W e J i( £ O t ! j - •

                 (^I 'j C q ^D o ^ca X c ^
                 / .v ^     ”■Q        /
                V.     ij   M   a   C'I/O &L'C    j) |£   v v   3    f-’ ^        P t^    CAa^c^o                             I                             pC<^<£.co~/j        I   ^ r jk j^ ^ )     4 <swj{
                ( l (' \ )          H x a S u th Q .                ^C    x CkA   : o-v> \f ^ O ^ A J                         c    V ^ 4 jU y ^ c /rd i C k^sP u;                                 r ^ i ^ < rf.
                                                                                  ^             -----------------------




                                                                                   f ^ T ( c ^ L c ^ k ^ t cLo t-K/C OC-t^ /vsco/ C vlv& ^cj/^ btCjJv^
                                                                                                                              ^                         ,                                            v/     v;
            \ij\g_j ve, r

            ( £ jb pSlZot p u                                                                     (W , b l o ^ J l L f - j                                        k ^ i
            0^2 txi'Cw-cs to W _ 1\AcA->M ^HvjC^vVj j > r ^ 0                                                                                                   ! £\}Cl O                        KV\$y/\f-irt
                                                                                                                                                                                                          l* v       \

                     t is o J -          b v j    X L j ^ - c t'C\J{~o-J S - ^ / v ’t< J M k - o L i »                                              /

                      W ^ K ^ V o ( t o ^ v O x ; ' < ,v > d u c t ^ j                                             C M p M rtV o /()                        l S (/ f l

    ^        PoLCc^L i\A /w LC tvsJIGv CA£-*e-j                                       O » l/O ,p . f^\.S'V\_o 13>|I                                                      Ajl\j^s\f^> s 4 j ~ ^ ^ k. \ H _

                                                                                                                              L y'& ~ - J L '    ^^ Ic c X                 AJup-s^-j p         ( 5 iS v \V - m v w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     v3
            I rAsWft                       Cw^ci^j                           AaOc^<Vo|                                    ^2sJ^fa'bcj\i>,
                                    \ T i — fv|                                           ^ fe
            I^ ^ ^ C            lq   ^    a .o^                                          •^9C c/c C j( L '( X o                          £aJ k x > o - s .

            ^'Vv\J4Oyt^Myv                         ^ v u € v C>^‘lri&~^ ^ t) H ^U'^fcfto SvJ'T /'c^l          ifau&JC V*}JL-cA\l ( tl*h
                                                                                rKjtdv^o ^ < ^ C o ^ u ^ e L ie rf^ i. <V^^2) jOjuj^U^:
            On! {© ^UxX^i’Vi                                          iS-^- tllvv^                     fM                         ^ tfvJM U ^ P                                ((kA /\           V                        ;>
            V. 0V\v.(/iC^                                            fejL Clcvbi.^ *                                                                                                 P"f~ O
c& vxY
   £b, ^wse> 6          s o o   K       j o   «>c I   o                                          ^       O fcx ?                 )e u >
           KJl b b ^ ' P i t a -                               /OilJo 0                                    (C* ) ijJ k x ^ X ^
                 ^ 1-0 C J / V C s / ^ C y Z o \j[^L^J [v£_ C^luO-o.,,
         llJt®           O ^ o ■'f'd vc‘\ f e                       O .u j .(A M          iyvo    w ky'ti v dSUxA u j ) 1^1
                                                                                            y-J 1 ._
                                                                                            /ftiycfaT*Je
         iivJ2, p 3 1 L<_J^ I c l L - c c ^ ^ £ ”|^ 1o-GJca_A C i u S k w c ^ - C i ( ^ t x j u J c - ,
         O X o o l u ^ v h ' ^ ^ e i CL-ocv"\                                (\cvki\M. 9 l0 s 4 ^ i^ *- fcJkiu^ c^ tCA^
         CjM j KacJ^C^                                        Cjp^'                  <s-u K


    (p, % L A i i j ^ j J c /                               f e b i < w u L ^HV42 ^^JkiV lOc lxQ,                               K^^wACi-vCL/f C.^
          C^g         i3UT\>J                   tOJiL iAu^ir' C « ^ o i c W                            ^t^-o^vvt,               t i v L ^ C<sxw$£
          u f        M o J          ^                               Vcb^p       b                      ’S i d b ^ t ^ s i o —


   ~7»    P>Slt<-£ L o ^ U _ 4/V\CW^li'C/                                                      W ^ v v O d v l& jf ilo M , p3-p^(ii,a^[
          A/W >oC^ 6 v v f fU /V i v v^                                               ^          (r-LC_ S > k w ic{ ^ V ^ U ' l X j Lv\ClVi^
                           WAfiwMv3                         f(-o & v a s i ^ >                    tta ^ h k ^ l                      k'vJ^-l i


    U- ^'V\c/              ^VuUC^p-vACv^ JI\JIXCJCkA 14^\^. \Hd(Xc4Aj'f^                                            jp           ^
         C~uL^ cd cljJ.                             ^        ,          ,

                   ^                          A.CC’ Ueoao^^v|iJvAiici 6 *>(o e V
    ^ * fiOO        WlSw\C^3 OvJ\J^U/\C;U/^iC\ (V\^tt^vcj (k,^J l|W/ivAfrOsijV\_,C.if} pi    S>^V ^ l. V
         . i _ 1 ,1; -*s .         . ;•           .    J /         ,        , ,        _ , I
        ^\ \ Hi] ^6 * ”D (^ A 0         \Xk/o di,i1xAcltc^ ^h/vO-fiM^ ikjb                 ^Uve£^J y\,u2.'
          iA U o l      '.to -A O             v ^ e - i'd                   v H i t C w t c j ^ ia A     0 ^<               ^ 0 O $ M k w i /

                         iJo^ oi^cA (Aiit \jt£ ©4cX. U/viL ^\liLtwvc.jtf Q^vI £Wa(aJ (<Vv£l 0^^O O
                          iL'Ll {-(rtDtA\i-                            0^\o\ 0)> Ciy^AO CevCti'i 'tt'O '^^O ^v\ <
                                                                                                                $oo&. ^Ik -^cJ
         ha ^vCo. r c ?             G&'\te^c/^ l"t?' ^a^U)'jVcvvu>cC^va-^                                    ^ I" U/Cv^.                           $Ji
         ^\f^L ^ j J iCX                         i(06K> ^ (/\>t/tlv'ci               t'kt      \dkij) h              ib Lt < 0-^'b2^5 cfiht&cAf
           to LKSl i^'A.t\Afiy^/uW'c£                       c£o^v_£. c^ Ci v . A' W- i                        Cco /^CrW©t> <^0                   liKiS*
           |j /O          «?-C |) *1^-. ' Csi'i                       f tfvfe^°              \c| (mL               WAr^SsJa,
            A lo     t'v9n\)U'vtk             f 0 w-Ji-S ChJ r        lA~X3         l/*v\^0ctJ^K>r^i UsKC^k. ^VXpc^,                          ( / flA ^

          f c k ^ i X c ^ c / C i o c o A ’t o ^ (| d v ^ j                                   /iwC^^vf
                   fiv<xZ3i'WU Q ^ U ' ^ V X ^
          f l n^sO ^ iv io p C-                                          W-A^A k A ^ o ^ a i ^                           (f^to M          h ilsv^%4~
          f{% dl k          OflJ^vCi                            -
L   uikcA/t           | i*dc-;Ui'voa: V--'V.
      - ■'1   i   ^
-WuL0'/ffe
                                                                                            M a fe li'ii....
 I 0        ( a J A jj        0 - yiLyC^H#i-v,.-'-v t‘cc * O u i A C ^ i & U . ^ , V i . v 4                                          ij'ijfc
                                                                                                                                                                       /IT? -
                                                                                                                                                                 m2, p'j v i
                                                                                                                                                                                * -



            | 1?5^Juil               I'l0 l#ilw{y              ^                    IxJlk^MA hckii^JCAjhc^/2,,, &Jr                                                             ^ t., ifkio
           *1=* kivKSl€clc^J- Clfctt-t                                              fcfi fOCcU Jji\JLS(Caa^ 4                                                                    C/i,li)
                                                                                                                                                             '" 1i\A„A p-C&b (A-wv.
              0 C ( , u4'('&c/l         CK./V c \ |'lc-n ,"'lk iU c i^                      O C fQ ^ K v .^                     h t f i )(Jcc, ./ h ^ €3<J i ^ LjeX k j h
       ’
                                                                                             ,


o)»              ’ -                    ' • 1f‘"                                                                  — £ ovt Bam-i „o f\o
                                    I C^^vAVv/ 'r’
                                                 4;C C.cX/^
                                                          ;
                                                          ?                                          i^ \A                       J C^'                 j^!           ^ 6^/Ia/ C.--4

                                    CU4    K ijjL ^ i^ c to                                 fe-e- to      M-cJaZa ^ [16fe-ic/                                      ,Ix-vt bus fZisces*j[




dy               $£r6H>Us.£rO                                                                     _
                     oe

             ..^h D ^     v
             MiHyLt)             'J 'ij ' . ' 1                ■• , \      SY‘CC- - 1)• tAi4/G|Kt-'-'-< ft;* £ /"'C?                                                     c,|    cch.

            tiWij rli,w ifcu*4i t\yf J^wce,? wu.,4 <ax5<a!^fec|!|_/-*-^ floCC p^'j i\A>
 it. • ( Q .ffx ,« d ) C t ' ( j                    i/K I ft)            ^ ilU - v Y U           c a /\       ‘^ "y   Qyff (kA.£-' - \ H M s / \ I ~* *>' ( o i A tXj Oc^f v-
             v   ^       . ;    m


                                                                                                 o
     I# W i ’ti'*!/)           M~d j)l AX)(hU f, c J  i f
                                                                   t v \ f.*| r^i'-"--"'"3        ’.      *'l'"f.^i'iX'i''*' SkH^'v          IL f ' ()
                                                      y, r , :J .                       a            , ./ ?           ^eJ                                    lfcl^ j * K d r r p r
  ■ •' Ji'it’                       ^^M yi A                                                                 *•                  U A I li- t J   1 o -^s     T



 •is* 04y^|^>--i'Vvi I ( / i f [J ) iA /lJ , ^ ''%i 1                                                  U '^ ^ c 4 f 'O      ^                                    IX/C&o/ ^%a                ^

           <J-Jt ( a      i ^--j (J',J5 j, ^ L iZ - C tSH,^x                                                 ' f i j f f m k b H l%J^afUt\py\ fli
           'f          rl^flia/li > W pjCcOL,*                                          'ix4,|^4^/'0 c^va                            PuiAot; f ^ j S ^ v c w t ft^kat-a-o
             C \(xAj7,-kA b t i             O -vx/.P - 'H « \ / )                 I f       3 | l c1 , ' A x ^ t e                     Q -\j j l o H & ^

                                                       'i-€.A,.-'v:£ l\SL,~l\,^-{'-( (X/\X/j                      |/\'&'v'v'1                     ■•

                                                                                                                                       |vkcC) f^b0v\.vn#;4 Cjca/1a{ .
                                        >                                  .,s„
   t»        M- -fcr.                       S {f\C||x£!^,.--'3
 ^           CIPO Hi,<!lC|Vv|7
  |I ,%' _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ J^ ^ 'Tu^ri^hU.                                           j1 9 ^ ^ ^                     ^      e t U i WClAA                           kJv’'y ^              -*
 |4_, 4                   (c\^| |                                  Pylijcii i C j & . A j i                                                  iJixJp M i v * "^1^1^%
0,u J,P -
Q.C            U u 2 c| & A P o fT w ^   ^ O L ^ ^ e J i/X h ^


      ^ C 0->-<7 £t> Pltok^ ^t5U ^W/AiUr^ j L ^ V A U ‘
                                                      J-'i'V\V^o

          OJ^oQ I 0 ! ^ ^ Q K j P ^J2£y!b f< ? C l(Ji/QT~<6   ^ C G *-o ~ 0
a .s »
J eL

                         HEW W A LL m PARAPfT
                         TO M A I & f EXISTING-.
                                                                                   0        ^
                                                                SHEETED FENCE, ACCESS V
            SEE D M 5 7 0 5 / 1 2 . .                           &ATE TO BE MAINTAINED.
                                                                                                    HONE     SUPPORm




                                        *tfjm   <_ft. TURNSTILES
                                                        / .■y                   s S/ '
                                                                                                             I        mot      aura



                                                                    txztooated g o « 2 ..
                                                                    CHARCOH SAFETICURB.                          RE-USE EXISTING
                    EXISTIK& M J .                                                                               frATE. ~
                                                            NEW TURNSTILE'BLOCK                              UNE OF RELOCATED
                                                            TO NATCH EXiSTIHS
                                                                                                             FENCE.’ ’ ” 7                   THE OWL SHOP.

                                                                                                             ONE NEW PANEL
                                                                                                             REQUIRED
                                                            A ^
                                                        /     \ "          .PERSONNEL ACCESS
     •                                          /         \
                                        SEE DR& 670 5/14- Y
                                                                       /    DOOR.

                                                                   \                                      REFURBISHED LADIES TOILETS.
                                                                                                          SEE DR& 6 7 0 5 / 9 . / }


                   +IT
                    -*                                                                                                     n          3 —g
                                                                                            t n
                i n                                                                 REFURBISHED       p      K ,ST IM G SUBSTATION
                LAOIES |
                                         n       . glfUS^lQliEIS— ^ -r r            SEHTS TOILETS
                     7 _

                                                                                                                                                       NEW REF
     SEE DR& 6 7 0 5 1 \ W                      SEE DR& 6 7 0 5 / 1 0 ^                                                                                UNDER E
                                                                                                                                                       NORTH
                             4                                                                                                                         SEE DR&

 3   T STAND.
                                                                                                                                        DRAW N
         WFHWRnAV                       pnnTPM r                 rnip            di    r
C\lel   I$                             jS L '             < ^ ,» » 6 u to 0 f v y s 4                         H e c t < 'isjt'jtfLr* ~ h u L
        2- C c ^ jk b U J fc> & .’0 <w c^k/iw -\ ^            * S b |'|td c / u A t (X c /    njl                 c^             Gu*~
                                                                                                                                        4rtkZZ>‘S
                 ^ C C I V \ o W ( A & O |\ ( Qvj \   ^   I       S     i    ^      C c ^ iL 'C /fc c ''’     ^   VS


             "iKLo i/vTW ’l d [)-£ It-t ' j \ ^                         Vvu-jkH- (|o^ CrH2 KJcMApcj M&vi'feJSi ^ ^o-OlM.
                                        '^jc— x.      4 i j i (c^ vjtorl Cx^c4 6te P J W _ e *                                      j 4iy7
             ( ^-Cl^csK/'V - ^ K <wO<?» W'oo C^-^'C/Uivi-ci /]<£ Jjy                                        A £ ^ v l|vi'ty .
                                                                                      vV.'.A
                                                '\”'''" '"'             ;V -
^    1

         S HE F F I E L D W ED N E S D A Y F O O TBALL CLUB
         VERSUS
         WEST HAH         UNITED
                                                                  r ^ ,;
         B A R CLAYS LGE DIV 1
                                          •-V
                                                                 C-T
         02/04/88
         SATURDAY
         3 -00

         1 SPION KOP

         GATE           CHECK    GATE             GATE                  GATE
                        TOTAL    TOTAL            PRICE                 V ALUE

          37               0       500              2. 00       1000.00
          38               0       286              3 50
                                                      «         1 0 0 1 00.


          39               0       285              3. 50        997.50
          40               0       264              3 „50        924.00
          41        .      0       517              3. 50       1809.50
          42               o       520              3, 50       1820.00
          43               0       378              2 „00        756 0 0  .


          44               0       391              3 „50       1368,50
          45               o       208              3 „ 50       728.00
          46               o       324              3. 50       1134.00
          47               0       291              3. 50       1018.50
          48               o       270              3 50
                                                       .         945.00
          49               o       328              3 „50       1148.00
J         50               0       226              3. 50        791.00
          51               o        91              3 50
                                                       r.        3 1 8 50 .


          52               0        98              3, 50         343.00
          53               0        67              3. 50        23 4 . 5 0
          54               0        65              3 50
                                                       „         22 7 . 5 0
          cr sr.-          0       238                            476.00
          U                                         200
          56               0       262              2„ 00           24
                                                                  ..J      a O    O


          57               0       197              3. 50         68 9 . 5 0
          58               0        88              3 50
                                                       «          308.00
          59               o        62              3. 50         21 7 . 0 0
          60               o        45              3 ,, 50       157.50
          61               0        95              3 . 50        332.50
.r        62               0        55              3. 50         192.50
          63               0       292              3. 50       1022.00
          64               0       304              3.50        1064.00
          65               ■0      362              2. 00         724 . 0 0
          is6              0       283              2 -00         566.00
          67               0       4U               2. 00         806.00
          68               0       344              3. 50       1 2 0 4 00    .


          69               0       385              3. 50       1347.50
          70               o       419              3. 50       1466.50
O         71               0          0             3.50              0 00    .


          72               0          0             3. 50             0.00
          73               0       191              3 . 50        668.50
o         74               0       166              3. 50         58 1 . 0 0
          75               o          0             3 50   ,          0 . 00
          76               0          0             3. 50             0 oo
o
                                                                              .




         T OTALS           0      9300               3 .03     2 8 1 8 7 . 00

o

o
                                                                                         ";>•              %
                                                                                                           ?rs:
                                                                                                       ••••>"•■:■•



"H STAND

    CHECK              SAT E                       GATE                            GATE
    T OTAL             TOTAL.                      PRICE                           VALUE
                                                               *
           0            361                          6 ,.50   2346» 50
           0            290                        ■6. 50     1885, 00
           0            410                          5. 50    2 255.00
           i            3 12                         5. 50    1716.00
                          ~T •
                             —>
           o                                         5. 50      176.00
           0                y,V\'             *      5.50       181.50
           0              32*                        5» 50      176,00
           0              36                         5. 50      198,00
           0               0-                      * 5 „50         0. 00
           o               0                         5 . 50        0 „ 00
           0             154                         5. 50      847.00
           0             186                         5. 50    10*23. 00
           0             207                         5. 50    1138.; 50
           0             214                         5,50     11 5 % . 00


     •
           0

           0
                         325
                         454
                          86
                                                     5 ,50    1787**50
                                                     5. 50 •, 249^7 „00
                                                     5.. 5 O    473-,, 00
                                                                                                                     \
           0              62                         5 „50      3 41 v 00
           0              44                         6.50       Z-S6 . 00
           r>             58                         6 „50      377.00
                                                        nr   -7
3          1           3296                         -   U >, / .u-L          18881,00


.SlfcCQ^EggD^                                rr;    . ' '" - -.v.. . .   .


    'c h e c k :       GAT E                        GATE                           GATE
     TOT AL            TOTAL                        PRICE                          VALUE

                0        393                         6 *50                    2554« 5s.)
                0        323                         6 -50                    209950
                0        140                         5 „50                     770„00
•1. - . ; .     0        1 10                        5.50                      605, 0 0 .
        r,      0        144                         5., 50                    792,00'
 \ :    :A c           . 297                       ' 5 „50                    1633,50;
            w o          309                         5. 50                   .1699 „50-
             .,-0' ■       95                        5,50                    -'■522.50|
    :'          o        ■
                         —1o o                       b ..50                   1606,, 0 0 }
                0        2 4 0           -           5., 50                   1320,00
                         - T '- i ir_”
                0        •_;> .c l O                 5, 50                    1787. 50j
                0        175                         5, 50                     962,50
                                                                                                r


S          0    ;.     2843                         " 5 „ 18                 1 4 7 4 6 , ,5 0 . ;




                                                                                                    i-s"
gate:    CHECK               GATE     G AT E       GATE
         TOTAL f             TOTAL    PRICE        VALUE

 19          0           208           5 . 00   1040 „00
 20.         oy f       ■(
                         213           5 00     1 0 6 5 ,, 0 0
 21         0            156           5 . 00     7 8 0 . 00
                                       cr 0 0    9 5 0 . 00
 22         0         •- 190           ■-J
 3 7r,    ^ O ....       3 / 6         5 . 00   1afciO,,0 0
 34         0   ;’:'r    y / --r j'    5 « 00   1655, 00
 35          0                171      5 « 00     355, 00
 36          0                205      5 . 00   1 0 2 5 . 00

TOTALS       0               1850      5 . 00   9 2 5 0 . 00



5 LEPPING LANE

GATE     CHECK               SATE      GATE        (3ATE
         TOTAL               TOTAL    'PRICE       VALUE

 A           0                 S3      3. 50     290.,, 50
 B           0                 94      3. 50     329,00
 C           0                 49      2. 00       98. 00
 D           0                112      3. 50     392„00
 E           0                 69      3. 50     241„50
 F           o                 36      3 .50     126.00
 G           o                 18      3. 50       63,, 00

TOTALS       0                4 61      3. 34   1540.00


6 WEST STAND

GATE     CHECK               GATE      GATE         GATE
         TOTAL               TOTAL     PRICE        VALUE

 9           0                  w       5. 50    137.50
 10          o                 11       5. 50     60. 50
 11          0                 16       5. 50     88. 00
 12 -        0                 38       5. 50    209.00
 13          0                199       5. 50   1094.50
 14          0                196       5. 50   1078.00
 1h          0                200       5. 50   1100.00
 16          0                  0       5. 50      0. 00

TOTALS       0                685       5. 50   3767.50
S H E F F I E L D W E DNESDAY F O O TBALL CLUB
VERSUS
WEST HAM          UNITED
v ' "".I          ; v
B A R C L A Y S LGE DIV 1

0 2 / 04/88
SATURDAY
3. 00

1 SPION KOP

GATE      CHECK       GATE         GATE            (BATE
          TOTAL       TOTAL        PRICE           VALUE

 37             0       500         2. 00        1000.00
 38             0       286         3 .50        1 0 0 1 00.

 39             0       285         3, 50         99 7 . 5 0
 40             0       264         3.50          92 4 . 0 0
 41             0       517         3. 50        1809„50
 42             0       520         3. 50        1820„00
 43           ■ 0       378         2„ 00         756. 00
 44             0       391         350          1368.50
 45             0       208         3 „50         728.00
 46             0       324         3. 50        1134.00
 47             0       291         3 «50        1018.50
 48             0       270         3. 50         9 45.00
 49             0       328         3. 50        1148.00
 50             0       226         3 „50         791.00
 51             0        91         3. 50         31 8 . 5 0
 er             o        98         3. 50         343,00
 nr“r           0        67         3 „50         23 4 . 5 0
 54             0        65         3 „50              / 50
                                                    .L..   a


 55             0       238         2 „00         476.00
 5 fa           0       262         2 „00         524,00
 57             0       197         3. 50         689« 5o
 58            Cj        88         3 50
                                      .           30£3. 00
 59            o         62         3. 50         217 „ 0 0
 60            0         45         3 „50          157.50
 61 „ ■        o         95         3 „50         332.50
 62             o        55         3. 50          192.50
 63            0        292         3» 50        1022.00
 64            0        304         3. 50        1064,00
 65            0        362         2. 00          724.00
 66            0        283         2. 00          566.00
 67            0        403         2 .00          806.00
 68            0        344         3. 50        1204.00
 69            0        385         3, 50        1347.50
 70            0        419         3 50
                                      .          1466.50
 71            0           0        3. 50              0 00.


 72            o           0        3 50
                                      .                0. 00
 73            0        191         3 *50          668.50
 74            0        166         3. 50          581.00
 75            0           0        3. 50              0 00    .


 76            0           0        3. 50              0. 00

T OTALS         0      9300          3. 03   28187.00
H STAND

    C HECK         GATE            GATE           GATE
    T OTAL         TOTAL           PRICE          VALUE

              0     361              6 ,50    2 5 & 6 .50
              0     290            • 6 .50    1885.00
              0     410        *     5» 50    2255.00
              1     312              5 „50    1716.00
              0      32              5 „50      176.00
              o      y,y,            b .50      181.50
              0      TO*
                     w'Jl-           5 „50      176.00
              0      36              b „bo      198.00
              0         o-         * 5, 50          0 .00
              o         0            5 „50          0 .00
              0     154              5. 50      847.00
              0     186              5 „50    ltf£3. 00
              0     207              5.50     1139.; 50
              o     214              5 „50    1 1 ^ 7 1 00
              0     325              5. 50    17S7t*50
                    454              5 „50 ■. 249”?,, 00
     9    ?   iI     86              5 „50      473»„ 00
              0      62              5. 50      34’ '! *00
              0      44              6.50       286.00
              Q      58              6 .50      3 7 7 ,00

;             l    3296             •5. 72    18881.00


.SXfeCa^EiiP,..

’C HECK            GATE            GATE            GATE
 TOTAL             TOTAL           PRICE           VALUE

      0             "r,9."T,         6. 50     2554,50;
      0                              6. 50     2099, 50-
V. "0               140 '            5. 50       770.00
;.,g. o             1 10             5 „50       605,, 00,
■-3a| o             144              5 „50       792. CO-
                    297              5,, 50     1633. 50'
              o     309.             5. 50      1,699. 50;
         . .-0         95            5 „50     .'-522. 50*
::         0        -u.“>
                        7^           5. 50      1606.00:
           0        240 - -          5 „50      1320,, 00
         ; o'       ■2'x: vh         S. 50      1 /8 7 ,.5 Of;
          ,-0        175             5. 50       962,, 50

5             0    2843            '5.18      14746. 50;




     -A
GATE       CHECK    GATE      GATE          GATE
           TOTAL.   TOTAL     P RICE        VALUE

 19           0      208        5 .00     1040.00
 20           0      213        5. 00     1065.00
 21           0      156        5. 00      7S O .00
 ,,'1.2.      0      19 0       5. 00      9 50.00
 y-?t         0      376        5. 00     1880„00
 34           0      331        5. 00     1655.00
 35           (IS    171        5. 00      855.00
 36           o      205        5. 00     1025.00

TOTALS        0     1850        5. 00     9250.00


5 LIEPR IMG LAME

GATE       CHECK    GATE      G ATE         BATE
           TOTAL    TOTAL    •p r i c e     VALUE

 A            0       83        3., 50     290 ,,50
 B            0       94        3. 50      329„00
 C            0       49        2. 00       98, 00
 D            0      112        3. 50      392,, 00
 E            0       69        3. 50      241,, 50
 F            0       36        3. 50      126.00
 6            0       18        3. 50       63. 00

T OTALS       o      461        3.34-     1540» 00


6 WEST STAND

GATE       CHECK    GATE      GATE          GATE
           TOTAL    T OTAL    P RICE        VALUE

 9            0       25        5. 50      137.50
 10           0       11        5. 50       60 . tS0
  11          0       16        5, 50       88. 00
  12          0       38        5. 50      209.00
  13          0      199        5. 50     1094.50
  14          0      196        5. 50     1078.00
  15          0      200        5. 50     1100.00
  16          u        0        5. 50        0. 00

TOTALS         0     685        5. 50     3767.50
v'" I *   (                     P- M uvo          < x ^ ix ^ o U d ■ $ 'z y ‘ ^ •
/X        ' ■            f ' i ^ ^d/o/Svc h aw0 t O n 11 i
                          -
                                                                                         $ r o a ^ v ^ o Ax

SI                       to                        c!| £j~/$0 4"          Q <>Jj ^~LjZ
/O c       M itvi o w p
  *D ,     Uln/3 OwO

  4'      A y / i i / e v A ^ /^jteWotbtlifc* ' O ^ c ^ o o 6 ° v \ ^ ( ^ u J                 {'ML - - W u l ^
          ( M ^ p s x ^ A {b(ji /^c9~/^ 4 s A c ^ r ^ o   fo       (j (             f\
            c f           SfczXlLv^u^t'
     L                                                            iblapf -          no
     2 ^ M M n S U ^ rt                       -iW-                                       -+f S p t f
 a       $~h\c\ ^\u^r>       I y Io I I x. A ^ o? s( A j          4 flj £>4 j ^ Aj ^ j c] 4 j <1 ClwH I'X.           c = ^ /-
         W U L ^»j2. ^uiv'ici ^3^^i>Jvvvxv\^6o                                           5 Ct'tixJ tb j'S j'l^
 3.      H iW v o   ^ J tW v D '\} c^ j(j \ \ ^   tL f'l& jffj)    ML L iv w j^ c c ] •~£^fw.uxA %^wv\ £ iv \c \/[ — S^xsva/^,

         0 •iM- A    K/CvM                   Uv\e/U-f fcevi-W i* -0 \ 0 • 0* ^S^VuZyO $^bW||u^c/ ?
 4'      F«AGl4 P ^ C ^ ' T C a ^ W                                                             FkcJc F t ^ ^ A j v 4 c C
         h x d kioj) ik.x.A tb (I vLG^,                    i\4j2^a^> c ^                      rtXtr    1/iCj r ^ o     -



 *5.                1/-I •                    SIa^Zw^^o            # U ( \J iS & ^ ^
                                                                        ^
^           uJK.0 CA^cJ ir^JL                         ^l^pCKf^ox^A-'i ^)<>-^                            7
        ^        i       )       ivAVt'2\A~c^           fh_,o^tV^Y»bv\\^^ O - ^          —'SsBtr
         \s I" DfGv/Jj't t i h flM v ien                ^ ' - ' f ^ f y i _ 0 4 a & \,
J2. ,M ‘»vo £>.vJ'fl ■ ")| VI    i f        & lH k #
    i   M^wo 0 ^                 1 ? -r,tfXA^ fU T t hJL Div/                /3.<3^S^

    *fc ^JKo vS\)4^U'd o U \~j£-t (\°               k(jvJ?~S£^ \
        Picv^     U    i     l         4 C V C ^ '• tc\“ l C1 .
        O ,vj-.fi. tyUv^o   /JL.jx j / ‘i       ^      tAc(jL^t'Aiof-^sjVcc/c-e
7       O . x p ^ «HiCv/3              ~tC\ ‘
8.      &<oj$. t A , ^ 3l /
        £w/f     Mt^vo
t       U lks)         Q> K/.P-
J~.     Q * j p. /jf\i*v^o            i x l x j ~IH    r AccxfW                           IaJ\&o("              ■
?>.     O, co P M v.l/'-o          ^ro
                                         fM W
4v      a w i- M t ^             K| <5j | | . ( w W d a f a j J l - U o h W




 I # Dvi(^Qv» JVW^CK^Jt^H.                                                      v,*0 6tg 0 tfUw ?
2*     0ldt^)O t.OvJ*K<hJ'$&&&&] ~
      1 "TU^e.             yvo        kc^unyl t^ o i/U *J ijjf4 < z Ho naecf ^                   <        s         J        ' S>
          PtlSCo ,                     K^ttm «^eiX5U (JkLcAr*. 4XJUo(EcJ <Wl<M W, u ~&cA yfioJC* U^uiuJ

                       ujv Ops & A u ^ h < J o ^ jy jp /e ^ ^ U 'lx                            — €-^j-
       C{0*uck                  p i t c C / W ^ u 4 CtMJCy^Ch^ifT
      2 . fW t/C x A te-e - w u ^ h J ^       « A M < ? ffo ^ (k ^ 6 v y tc ^ ^ /a x jL t o - (1o4mo^4 w>cn/ j& x k & s

         ^KacI Q(x£i~~ c^A Ctv£                                \aJ<j~^ cJ (Wc             OA>fcuiMRc,
      ^"'tWkCv                           p e c c ^ d fez/'y^. t^A/Lt- C ( V c * k b c i f A j »J S ^ 1 * ^ °
          GjoiJlci AA/jjJ^V^ C’tKAtCU^- CvvA-V^ p *JlLS)<Sr-^ C^£rr^JbJjLci                                                  ^
                            p j L C ^ C l/v/^-J^        CaJL            -

                                                                                      ^                                  *

      4- S a C ^ O c U j J ^             b*vJb 4C<?-t-€y f | © i M ^ v £ ^ i ^ 3 k / V ^ ’C/ M . <X\i(uA(yiftC-


                        oUo(                    &JfK(cyv/>
        ksfosu^c v
          6 ) <r\'^J       IU < V u l4    t& J r      ( ^ jl    j'l^o-T^t   fs ^ o u t t - J ^ / \ d o        Ig ^ fo ^ J L ?

          0                    t^r~£> Oj C^-^'*3                  \f(xofloA                          '•
         ( f \ \ ) (9 w C x ^     f t h o k A jlJ ik m A O

       C&v \c A aX' "
         0 fecvVraJUU                                          fe j ^ e ^ ^ W ^ c e h ^ e ^ v y i c v t o — fcJfcfctatffotg
                  W>-o                                 ^                             -      o,ap|
           . .         Cy^L'^cMj£/POC^<5L^*'-«X^cJ «?V^ »| j^LCpi- ')« I     _.                                                     O
         0 vj b ? ^ c v A \\TIlc& \h $ J [ c( 6 « k a ^ - A frK<£~*J2 PjgU^o                                             "*1 ^ )
        ( \ \ \ >) ^   M (W > ^vb-Co^H>~~ v/lcv /)ttc tv .                      C v/lU ^lA ^lr                          ^JiC<XJ^rt

                 fcliJc tx/6-o lA^O           rLCo^ t fe kftA^t 4JUUc/ t x i ("^Cj^vo W ^ v l c/ / u W L C
                 biLt2w Cffi^Vtjtw Cj                               .Vo\yid  6^u^c^-acife/ to^A/l-^AJiJj^
                                                c ^vfQTStvJ\ I f-»A
      £       ¥-0
V                    Q*<jJ P '     " i j u Jl f ^ Q\\o\ |“) f
<*X   ( j u j () r\. \ 1a^-)     !> ^ " 1 *
              O uO
     X        o ^         rn t           u p p ^ l.

     3- W w ufsji'i-
               O ia/P- /vjit^         a/nh^
     5*        i( f~ tk $ £ \ I f ° \ T O      ^^<Wv^S>trvo^^'/ fePStCj^
     (L       ^6^fei             6 /v w W ^ a ^ v j P { C C t £ ^ ^ V ^ . 0| / Y "j | A ( P ^ V
               O-IaJ p HhVD 7 * 4 fe i            l^ \ $ I . ' ^^ouai> £ J 4 g /W M»C££ti fJTTH-PoUc6 ~CcP^ ?

 2        *         fr£&&\iCM &/ACt$1(0v^ P & C & O                             .    13-1 £ /<? )
                                                                           ^           11
^ c j,        <0-\aj.P-   imaa / )   ~               £   a   C o p k w ' r P rc H T IjW w         ^ j b f i PI
  jO. ^.oooH^oocto                         3 j0! S I - P A > p s ^ « ^ /^o/(o4 i>c/f/uds*
       VC ■


I *■   0 lAiP w   I O / if ' I   $ O '~ 'f£ a j£ \u S l C v J t ^ o ^
         t- O w P                      ^                 ~'KS>pJ%i'd Q$6\&*a                      ~CiiJ3(j^y(bJi>~<j QltzlcAri*^}
     cl     fel^b^uoeta W f c J a h m -                                &/             <€v ^c £o
     i-     VjOwJvso                                ^ V i/v ^ J ^ SCeCvJc-joto feotffe£*/£“•,—                                       cAj/a
               ££> C(jtffZ]                             {&^l*^^$Jt'CLSC\A~u*s^ fiCeC&cA-V& di(AV\A£jy60
            £ ) « U /.p .- M t* V O     \   ^   j    f    \    o                 2 ^ /© ^ v v t x /        fy&AZe   J c f & W Z & d '


            %j   u   M      x j       h? ^ y c c f f               r vm \j
            tl£JL                                             'h f 4 - £
    7>      W .       $ ^>\fCC < ^ L f 3 fi]# £ 0                                            h ^ c o 3o/^ / ^ S


|                                                    2 > j s ) ^ 7 - f (uv-4, An3*ivv\^ jt\£,l        P\0 KAJ2>            ^
    |(9> <-\0u/ n J b ^ o i C t l c                  *                       c£ rl/JrpNto^hv                                   i/j
            t^CjftAjb qI lcJ iA ' imm ^ o ^                        ^   6    * v > T \ y               o    UaAaJ * ^

                                        Oo-^otV%
    11,                ( M / W t ^ tf/i/f^-
    j j , ^ x t M w i o te J5(VS K L C j M > v » ^JJVAJ- (^LuiVsy/J
       O         y> ,

[.     6 , w .P* (VjU V O
CL    C PO'^iW/vwc          Ibjcf j f j . <lJa<A,tcJjiu^ ${QCicfc'S'*Jt
3    » ^VjJ^nA^                           ^OOOct'vM-i dLoJjtl ^><0*il* fo-' ^ 1d
      ^€>0 C I W t w v O OAvS^VS----         PlOytvH^^ K0ebJ'fc*O              ~ Mv
                                                                                                   " &jks\
                                     ■ tc^(V.ai^, D^jfi|<f( ^tc. a£jl(U                            p    1 ’ acfoety't>*£ •
         Cg*a\^&-o ir4c<X,vl (ivw^                                                    fcN, flp A fr\4 ifa £C=t
         p 0 0 l} lL ^ ^                     f A Cup                     C \v \M N U s 4 t t - 4
         V & ^ U L M{Xi?U:t|tw s^x-isi fotc-1" M e v ~ L i W U ' t v J 0 dt'1-c.o ic'^r^’c ’
         •U tc-yvtr M l              'j w ^ l k £ Jf>lhx^ jCkjivvAivt<j,|^vCto^


     W   io^vv   test,' ^C l©((«l4 •^JU,o C£>*
                                      ii!                                *
                                                                                                       v/    ldV'Cfej’C'w4
     ^           VA*.■>*»,] ^ iC'LX-lfWWV^'^ uWi*»—--vv_,.{W*-*.   \ i^ 'C'-K. .
                                                                               ,
                                                        :1
$r
       L & A X jf Z - f   * I LL| ^ I                    C iw — .(^ (itK )   ^vvvji/^W^|'f0 ( X d M - ^ ~ l\/lbi.0 0 \r~



^                  t [ u J ^ c u v ^ A - i w - f f v > -o ^ v / ^ "jfylLcJ ^ilfc. 1              k fic^v
c*> ; o .u   a   P-Mu     vd
 I.    (sUfcJ L               i      ce/'? 14~j i v |         1 M2-<Tp>/Uw % f c o U ^ o -
2,    jjrffcj           D Oiua, Cjtvi—    Jijixj^')      w,                 —    -
^    L ttO p
U( ► 0*^'P* Mtvvo l ^ j x j i ) >~Ul hcJc cfach^ o J ^iL i/ oM~v~J              ?t~Ji ^a/5""0^   /&^eX*
       ^t9W vf (fiiC O ^7j l o j $ ?>" U o ^ j Z Avv|3TW tt^--^X^ M c^oO- 1 il^v^ k/i it=. /^TU ix ^

 t     ^io ^           A o o w ^     rvowvo/i^W          ^lofSV
    I*           K\lv\yO Lf~jX,j ^ X " -    fcjfOx>^ ifcc-cilt-Jl ^a.CLO.
d        Q\.vs0 ■ M W 1      i f f I? $ *
                      fo<£ LE(*AL-€eP!>
I        D\/i&^/^        b o o ld b i't-' O wj P                 & jt\ |     ~ Co/Vy
V 5 Jo



         tW $
            ^ .-1                       — *- ‘O
                    L^ ^ i', j . a y(rU)-      ’CQCt P“/t\yv ^ . — C o A a
                                              pcoC^c'Xvr^,
         flJUVJ^    4 - / ^ p 6 u 2-0p f f            7   ,
  LC    o   (>(a ^
y & jG jiu P   M t v v s '" 7 ^ J   v^Q (Lob&oi   ifcJL   Ae^jc^cjj^   *M   (k f» v \£ A ^ ? ^ o v c e '
                     0 ’ £ /& a /C j6 a t —   UlKJj   tc   tujobtJ   00f   ^ °   (J^   .


%    (IajulAZ^^ ^ A jL U % v\ $ ^             u r & il'T l€ A-A v'ic*w2£ kcH/uJc^s. b ^ f u ^ t p U w e
                                                   6 (^ g Z C S fc v * ^                    tfy^/Ps i
       UiKfeAiv'X'oO <SCU>ci ?.
£*» 0 . W « P * M » v x S a ^ | ( ( ^ < >
 n 1   f£ -
  P in
o?0
j,     t) ^ P m iw ^           i^ I
                       yjjuiP         ML- j$ I Lj^l ^ 0 *J f tyjt£,bc~xj
^X,    $Ub& ^ f 1-2,            M.       l/\j2xZCvcj W a / U -        b p C t v W U 4 f~ hb CU,^>£aJ^>\ Iks. CLboA-iy
                          ^                                                         \~ £ £ f c £ s & & r
/f>     kitofc         S ’^ c     clc'M < j 3 o ^ < p r ~            D f o f ^ e c ? * a < w k*^ m - «-*.
       fi^cJr t k A ^ a o ^ iAJLic/ fo                           c i e c A 3 & o fl^ c lw j hc^Csf\Xj% c^ ^    m A~
                                                                 U
      ffiUxC ui>^iW (U^a IZJl                    •




<X    w k ^ o ' oj£)U C « w ,tt^                <H^ &     cu ^cl^     ^A ^ -
        (J y C | C l t ^ v x PtbcXv ^ u ^ J L u e s C c fttrffo I
        CC 0           f'3-^1/l/KX/^ 5Cl                  *1
      i $ i 4 | W t a * A V"                 ti'tvj ^ c C fe6c»-oKjgoc(/^ 2 j$ l< f>$~~$c{<su?^ A*,l~
       ^jzjL^v Vo                 &j C{2o (ife^vttx- fkxio^A |aaC&-o« &*-& P ^ c \                   < w f Ct^vw.|3tf-^-C/
       C ^M /tyf)va/G vfclU oliX’t J c i ^ o j t-f-(4 fS -


           W c t O v V H o u c ^ - G f e ^ Mr«^cSfcJ ^ n o X c ^ 6 ^ v I 'f f ^ f ^                         IfctoAr
         fc.                             (xN bxJi M u b r b ^ L P S k l^ J a j ^ i ^ c ^ c i e ^ ^ t c u ^ A

        £fcvv\jil/0 -
    I■                               S' $ 1 -         0"<? Zv-vJ/3 1 / W - e o H 4 c |- ~ ' ■
         i w t e , ^ / ^ u (I. c - r ?             • 0K^$k^t^wvCT<3su«^(7? 5) /-& vc-^- •‘-3
V        A S is I ^ V ^ u .                    —      "           —         ,.J t >             ,   .
                                                          %   P
6C       l-0Jl\0uO (“('CiuAlA^ Cl((^tj|5C? 0 ( ^ / ' £ '
4-,      (tCQ                  W /l- in            fe D
*S.      (V\l '
 t,       >. . . . . . .      /6/rf f <
7-                "    -•     "S ' f r i t ?
U'iCvl   Qu^JS^T      ~ k W o tr~S       fccf/“ ${c^vj <~uJk\^o(iU tj O U i l f l r
 Cuoty, ^c-_f   ^ c C j t v O /fj"aWv,    {/^’i>'0/”"    /c^c^,
                           'fkinc'jp    X                1

i> i   f   ^   1M ^ t   '. ' ■^W '' ^ C { Ij S.Ki.V :.       l~
                   Date of        Available for                     Available for Interviews next week
                  Involvement     inspection of
                                    Files and                May                    June
                                    statements       29th   30th     31st     1st          2nd    Major Involvement
                                  Thurs.    Fri.     Mon.   Tues     Wed.,   Thura         Fri.
                                                     Bank Holiday


Mr K Jones          1979


Mr H B Dunston      1979          not available


Mr A Ryder


Mr S Allcock        1985                    0930


Mr J Ray            1981                    0900


Mr M Johnson        1981                     PM


Mr B Ellis          1981       24.5.89       PM


Mr D Binnington
                     /lot-
Mr W May


Mr                  1979                     PM


Mr                  1981                   AM/PM


Mr                  1985         Unable to contact


far |_             -rstrr

Mr


Mr                  1985/6                 AM/PM


Mr B Copley         1985         0900         PM


Mr H E Wright       1987


Mr R Grimshaw     1981/85/87
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE



INCIDENT:   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY PC, HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD, SOOTH YORKS
            LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST - 15TH APRIL, 1989

REPORT OF CHIEF FIRE OFFICER H.E. WRIGHT, QFSM, MIFireE, FBIM


A brief factual report of the events which involved personnel of the
South Yorkshire County Fire Service is submitted, as requested, for
your information.


1.    Time of call was 1514 hours from Police Control     and   the   County
      Fire Service reacted to the information -

      " There's been a major accident at Hillsborough Football Ground
      where the semi-final is. The crowds have forced their way in
      they've broken fences and the gate down. I don't know exactly
      what it is but there are people trapped. "

      Appliances attending
                                                  Time           Time in
                                                 Mobile         Attendance

      Water Tender Ladder    Rivelin              1517            1522
      Water Tender Ladder    Central              1517            1522
      Water Tender Ladder    Central              1517            1522
      Water Tender Ladder    Ringinglow           1517            1527
      Water Tender Ladder    Darnall              1517            1526
      Water Tender Ladder    Darnall              1517            1526
      Emergency Tender       Central              1517            1524
      Control Unit           Mexborough           1519            1608

3.    Actions of crews on arrival.

3.1   Rivelin WrT - StnO Swain in Charge

      Attended the Leppings Lane side of ground and encountered       severe
      congestion that prevented immediate access to the ground.

      An immediate request for the use of a resuscitator on a casualty
      in the rear of an ambulance was answered.

      Rivelin 1 was made Contact Point in Leppings Lane for the incident
      with StnO Swain OiC.

      A request for resuscitation equipment inside the ground was
      received from a Police Officer. In view of this a "Make Pumps 10
      for resuscitators" message was sent. Crew members were despatched
      into the ground in an effort to make contact with Senior Police
      Officers, and ascertain the extent of the incident.




                                     1.
3.2   Central WrT 1 and 2 - StnO Fletcher and SubO         in Charge

      Attended at the Riverside Entrance off Penistone Road at the rear
      of the South Stand. The crews were not met or directed by the
      Police so the officers made their way onto the pitch to the area
      immediately in front of the West Stand where they found many
      casualties on the pitch who needed first aid treatment. No
      rescues as such needed to be undertaken but it was obvious that
      bodies and casualties needed to be attended to.

      The crew members were then directed to perform mouth to mouth
      resuscitation and first aid. Two resuscitators were used by the
      crews.

      A casualty receiving area was set up at the rear of the West Stand
      by so directing T/StnO      and casualties were moved from the
      pitch to this area by crews, police and spectators.

      Approximately 20-30 persons were moved to this area. The obvious
      dead being located in a holding area at the rear of the West Stand
      and   the injured removed by ambulance to        hospital.   Later
      information received by StnO Fletcher told him to evacuate
      casualties to the Gymnasium at the rear of the North Stand.

      The crews of Central 1 and 2 were joined and assisted by those
      from Darnall 1 and 2, Ringinglow 1 and the Emergency Tender from
      Central.

      When the pitch had been cleared of casualties all crews were
      directed to the Gymnasium and carried out further assistance.

3.3   Central Emergency Tender - LFm Housley in Charge

      Attended at Penistone Road but could not gain access to the ground
      because of height restriction for the appliance. Proceeded to
      Leppings Lane and the Contact Point.

      The crew then proceeded as directed into the ground via the North
      Stand and onto the pitch with a resuscitator treating casualties
      both on the pitch and later in the Gymnasium.

3.4   Ringinqlow WrT- StnO           in Charge

      Attended at Leppings Lane entrance.

      The crew then proceeded as directed into the ground with a
      resuscitator and gave assistance to casualties on the pitch in
      front of the West Terrace together with the crews from Central 1
      and 2 and Darnall 1 and 2. When the pitch had been cleared of
      casualties the crew was directed to the Gymnasium.

3.5   Darnall WrT 1 and 2 - T/StnO         and SubO      in Charge

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance.  Crews entered the ground as
      directed and gained access to the pitch via the West Terrace
      rendering assistance to casualties with two resuscitators and




                                     2.
mouth to mouth resuscitation. Working with other crews casualties
were removed initially to the casualty receiving area which T/StnO
Clay had been directed to establish at the rear of the West Stand
and subsequently to the gymnasium.

On instructions from ADO    Robjohns, SubO          and his   crew
undertook a circuit of      the pitch to ascertain if any further
injured people needed assistance and get them to the Gymnasium for
treatment.   All crews were eventually located in the Gymnasium
rendering assistance to casualties.

The "make up" message from StnO Swain was receivedin County          Fire
Service Control at 1528 by Brigade radio.

Additional appliances attending

                                                   Time      Time in
                                                  Mobile   Attendance

Water Tender Ladder   -   Mansfield Road           1529       1534
Water Tender Ladder   -   Lowedges                 1529       1544
Water Tender Ladder   -   Stocksbridge             1530       1539
Water Tender Ladder   -   Stocksbridge             1532       1541
Emergency Tender      -   Barnsley                 1522       1537

Actions of crews on arrival.

Mansfield Road Wrt - StnO             in Charge

Attended Leppings Lane entrance. As directed the crew proceeded
to the pitch giving assistance to casualties using a resuscitator
to injured persons on the pitch and later at the Gymnasium to
which they had been redirected.

StnO         ]organised the removal of casualties by ambulance from
the Gymnasium.

Stocksbridqe WrT 1 and 2 - StnO            and SubO        in Charge

Attended at Leppings Lane entrance.       As directed both crews
proceeded to the pitch and were redirected to the Gymnasium where
they rendered resuscitation, first aid and were used for the
transferring of injured persons by ambulance to hospital.

Lowedges WrT - SubO           in Charge

Attended Leppings Lane entrance. As directed the crew proceeded
to the pitch where some resuscitation was given before further
proceeding to the Gymnasium with a resuscitator. In liaison with
the Assistant Divisional Officer in that area the crew undertook
further first aid and resuscitation work in addition to which they
were involved in the transfer of casualties to hospital via
ambulances.

Barnsley Emergency Tender - LFm             in Charge

Attended Leppings Lane entrance. The crew entered the ground as
directed and administered resuscitation with a resuscitator to a
casualty on the pitch before assisting in the movement of injured
people at the Gymnasium.
                                 3.
6.5   Control Unit Mexborough - LFm          in Charge

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. On arrival the crew contacted
      the Senior Officer in attendance (DO III) by fireground radio and
      were instructed set up Control Point. A DO I attended and took up
      the duties of Control Officer.

      Liaison with the Police at their Control Box in the ground            was
      transferred from a DO III to an Assistant Divisional Officer.

      An advance control point was eventually set up in the Gymnasium
      with a Senior Divisional Officer in Charge and an Assistant
      Divisional Officer assisting him.

7.    Senior Officers attending

7.1   Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns - in attendance 1529 hours.

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. Confirmed Rivelin WrT as contact
      point with StnO Swain in Charge and proceeded into the ground.

      Unable to make contact with any senior Police Officer on the pitch
      he liaised with StnOs Fletcher and         and having been assured
      that all casualties on the pitch had received attention he
      proceeded to the Gymnasium to co-ordinate crews and equipment at
      this casualty receiving point. Contact by fireground radio with
      DO Lockwood who had arrived was obtained and further provision of
      personnel and equipment was requested at the Gymnasium to assist
      in the first aid treatment of casualties and their transfer to
      ambulances.

7.2   Divisional Officer Lockwood - in attendance 1547 hours.

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. Informed StnO Swain to assemble
      all available crews and resuscitation equipment at the contact
      point to await further instructions.    DO Lockwood entered the
      ground via the West Stand tunnel, contacted StnO Fletcher on the
      pitch, was briefed and then set up direct liaison with the Police
      at the Control Box situated adjacent to the South Stand. From
      this point movement of personnel and equipment were co-ordinated
      until the arrival of the Control Unit at which time he was
      relieved by an Assistant Divisional Officer to enable him to make
      a report on the full situation.

7.3   Additional   Senior   Officers attended as         follows   before   the
      situation was considered to be controlled.

        (i)   Chief Fire Officer.
       (ii)   Assistant Chief Fire Officer Hornsby.
      (iii)   Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman.
       (iv)   Senior Divisional Officer Smoothey.
        (v)   T/Divisional Officer I Hildreth.
       (vi)   T/Assistant Divisional Officer Green.

All but four WrT appliances and crews were released from 1651 hours,
the remainder being retained in case of further incidents and very
heavy traffic in that area of Sheffield due to spectators leaving the
ground.

                                      4.
All appliances were released     from   Hillsborough   at   1720 hours and
returned to their bases.

A map of the area of the ground is included for clarification purposes.




                                  5.
INCIDENT - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND
SATURDAY, 15TH APRIL, 1989
TRANSCRIPT OF INITIAL CALL FROM FIRE SERVICE TO POLICE FOR
FIRE CALL AT GATTY ROAD, SHIREGREEN, SHEFFIELD AND THE CALL
FROM POLICE FOR HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND
Police:      Hello Fire.
Fire:        Hello love, we're going out to Gatty Road.
Police:      Spell it me please.
Fire:        G A doube T Y.
Police:      P A double T Y.
Fire:       No! Gatty.     Gatty Road junction Dunning Road.
Police:      Junction with what?
Fire:       Dunning Road.
Police:     D U double N I N G.
Fire:       That's right.
Police:     Yes, that's at Shiregreen.
Fire:       We have a house fire, possible persons reported.
Police:     Christ, house fire.
Police:     (Indistinct male voice from background) "tell       fire
            brigade" or "who is on to fire brigade?"
Police:     Me.
Fire:       All right love.

Time:     15.13.45
Police:     Can we have cutting equipment please to
            Hillsborough straight away.
Fire:       Just a minute love.    Right, what's the address?
Police:     Cutting equipment at Hillsborough Football Ground
             straight away duck.
Fire:     Right, what ... Hillsborough Football Ground?
Police:   Yes, Hillsborough Football Ground.
Fire:     What road is that on, do you know?
Police:   There's been a major accident         love.   All   the
          ambulances are up there.
Fire:     Yes, what road is it on love?
Police:   Er, I've no idea - Hillsborough Football Ground.
Fire:     Well, what road is it on love - do you know?
Police:   (To someone in background) Hillsborough Football
          Ground - what road is it on do you know?
Fire:     Penistone Road?
Police:   Penistone Road.
Fire:     Penistone Road.
Police:   OK?
Fire:     Just a minute love,    and what's   exactly   involved
          there?
Police:   It's a football - the big match - Liverpool v Notts
          Forest.
Fire:     Yes, but why do you wantus love? Is     it    ...   you
          said it was an RTA.
Police:   No, no,     no -   a major incident inside the ground
          love.
Fire:     A major incident inside?     Do you know exactly what
          it is?
Police:   No love, I don't.     They want all the cutting gear.
Fire:     For what?
Police:   Hang on a sec.
Fire:     What are they cutting - do you know?
Police:   (To someone in      background) Fire Brigade says for
          what?
Time:     15.14.40
Police:      (New voice)   Hello?
Fire:       Hello love. Now you want some cutting      gear,   what
            exactly is it for?
Police:     There's been a major accident at Hillsborough
            Football Ground where the semi-final is.     The
            crowds have forced their way in - they've broken
            fences and the gates down. I don't know exactly
            what it is but there are people trapped.
Fire:       Right love.    OK love leave it with us.
Police:     OK duck.
Fire:       Thank you love, bye.
Time:     15.14.58
                                                                               (\fx)



                       HILLSBOROUGH - 15TH APRIL, 1989

                SELECTED ITEMS FROM BBC MATERIAL ON VIDEO



1440      West Terrace Centre Sections already                   appear   to    be     full
          (496236).
          Surging in crowd taking place (496236).

1446      Gaps on West Terrace in o/s sections to L & RHS (496236).

1449      Swaying in crowd (496233 - Reel 8).

1449      Spectators climbing out              of   centre   section to RHS (looking
          towards pitch) (496236).

1451      Still reasonable packing at front of centre sections West
          Terrace as teams introduced (496236).
          Spectators jumping up and down in centre sections (496233 -
          Reel 8).

1455      Teams come onto pitch.         Swaying in centre section West Terrace
          (496236).

1457      Match officials come onto pitch (496233).

1459      MATCH COMMENCES

1500      Spectators    coming    over    perimeter track fence (496233 - Reel
          8 ).

1500 25   Spectators coming over perimeter track fence               (496233     -     Reel
          7).

1500 43   Screams heard (496233 - Reel 7).

1501      Screams heard (496233 - Reel 8).

1501      Spectators    walking    on    perimeter       track    - West & North side
          (496212).

1503      Spectators with Police on perimeter track fence trying to                     get
          crowd in centre section to move back (496011).

1503 30   Individual on perimeter track in front of North Stand appears
          to draw situation to the attention of Police Officer.

1504      Man collapses as he walks in front of West Terrace (496011).

1504      Commentator MOTSON recognises "seems to be a problem                           at
          Leppings Lane end" (496212), (496233 - Reel 7), (496236).

1505      Gate open     on   RHS of West Terrace - still space in that area
          (496011).


                                          1.
1505 20   Gate in RHS ofcentre section        (looking        towards     pitch)       open
          (496233 - Reel 8).

1505 45   Gate in RHS of centre section (looking towards                  pitch)       open
          (496233 - Reel 7).

1505 30    Police Inspector on pitch - game stopped.
          Centre section of West Terrace packed.     (Can                 hardly       hear
          MOTSON for noise of crowd).

1507      Spectators still entering centre section of West Terrace by
          passageway (496233 - Reel 8), (496236).

1509      Spectators still standing       in    passageway        to     West   Terrace
          (496212), (496236).

1510      Supporter taken from ground by Police (496212).

1511      Gate from RHS of West Terrace to perimeter track OPEN
          (496212).
          Spectators leaving West Terrace by passageway below stand.

1512      Police attempt to pull down    wire       of       perimeter    track    fence
          (496011).

1512      St. John Ambulance bring        large      cylinder of oxygen to West
          Terrace (496212)(496236).

1513      Situation easing on West Terrace (496212).

1513 50   Publicity hoardings taken     down      by     Police    to     be    used     as
          stretchers (496212).

1515      1st ambulance (St. Johns) arrives (496212- Reel 5).

1515      Police on   West   Terrace    and    in    passageway         beneath    stand
          (496236).

1517      Spectators leaving   West Terrace            in orderly fashion          using
          passageway beneath stand (496212).

1518      Police reinforcements brought onto pitch.

1518      Police assist to      break wiring from perimeter     track fence to
          give access to West   Terrace (496233), (496236).
          Large number of casualties in front of gate in perimeter fence
          of RHS of Centre Section of West Terrace (496233).

1519      Notts Forest supporters       chanting         -   not aware of degree of
          situation?  (496212).

1519 27   Announcement - unintelligible.

1520.13   Child casualty taken by Police to below South Stand (496212).
1523.38   Casualties taken towards East Terrace to gym (496212).

1528      All casualties apparently out of West Terrace (496233).

1530.10   Announcement by K. Dalglish.

1534      1st ambulance leaves area in front of West Terrace (496212).

1537      Notts Forest supporters chanting - reaction.

1538      2nd ambulance arrives West Terrace   (496212).

1540      2nd ambulance leaves area (496212 - Reel 5).
                     HILLSBOROUGH - 15TH APRIL, 1989


                SELECTED ITEMS FROM BBC MATERIAL ON VIDEO



1526.24    StnO and SubO in front of West Terrace (496212).

1526.30    Fm in centralposition in front of West Terrace near St. John
          Ambulance (496233)(496236).
          SubO pulling casualties from perimeter track gate area of West
          Terrace (496236).

1528      All casualties apparently out of West Terrace (496233).

1529.26   More Fm seen (496212).

1530      1 SubO, 1 Fm in front of West Terrace - assessing situation(?)
           (496233).

1530.10   Announcement by K. Dalglish.

1534       1st ambulance leaves area in front of West Terrace(496212).

1537       Notts Forest supporters chanting -reaction.

1538      2nd ambulance in attendance West Terrace.

1538      Gathering of FS personnel -     ADO(?),   StnO,   SubO,   LFm,     Fm    +
          Police (496236).

1538      Fm move towards gym.

1540      2nd ambulance   leaves   area   in front of West Terrace (496212-
          Reel 5).

1541      Fm in front of West Terrace (assessing situation?)(496236).

1544      Junior Officer + 2 Fm with cutting gear or 0^ cylinder           (?)    in
           front of West Terrace (1 becomes detached).

1549      1 x Fm returns towards West Terrace (496233).
          2 x Fm moving towards East Terrace and gym (496233).
           1 x StnO + 6 Fm moving diagonally across pitch thro' Police
           line towards gym (496236).
          4 x Fm move towards gym (496236).
           3 x Fm move towards gym (496233).

1550      StnO + 2 x Fm with resuscitator and ? (para stretcher) thro'
          Police line moving towards gym (496212- Reel 5).
           SubO    + 2 x Fm moving towards gym with resuscitator and first
           aid kit (496236).

1601      Crews move towards gym (496233).
1615   Fm move towards and others return from gym area   (496233).

1639   ACO Seaman + DO Lockwood looking at West Terrace (496212 - Part
        3).

1641   Ground clear (496212 - Part 3).

1644   CFO and ACO Seaman viewing West Terrace (496212 - Part III).

1646   Still 2 tone horns audible (496212 - Part III).
                      THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                             LIMITED
                                             Founded 1863
                              Patron: H e r M aJESTY T h e Q UEEN
                            President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e OF KENT
                                  Chairman: F. A. M lLLiCHIP

   Chief Executive:                                                              Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
                                                                                        Telex: 261110
R. H. G. Kelly fcis                                                                Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                       16 LANCASTER G ATE, LONDON W2 3LW
 OurRef:      RHGK/MD/PFS/80            -YourR ef:                         17th April 1989.



 To:       All Member Clubs




 Dear Sirs,

                                       Re: Ground Safety

      Following the tragic events at Sheffield Wednesday F.C. last
 Saturday, you are instructed to undertake, in conjunction with
 your Local Licensing Authority, an immediate review of ground
 safety.   This should include the perimeter fencing installed, the
 agreed capacity levels of all standing areas and the routes to and
 from the ground.

      A report should then be forwarded to The Football
 Association, stating any immediate action taken to implement
 changes and any longer term measures that you have initiated.
 You should also advise us if no changes have been found necessary.

                                       Yours        faithfully,




                                     / Chibf Executive

              County Football Associations
              All Senior Leagues




                           Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W 23LW
                           Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
                                                                                       FILE


                           Copy   sen t   to;    S i r Regi nald Doyle,           HK Chief    Inspector
                           P A X to t h e Horae S e c r e t a r y ., Rt,   Kon.    Douglas Hurd




       HEW/MS                                                                          24.04.1989
                        Chief Fire Officer                                                   201




Home Office,
Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON
SW1H 9AT


For the attention of F.J. Archer, Esq.
Fire & Emergency Planning Department


Dear Sirs,

I refer to your letter dated 20th April, 1989 and enclose a factual report of
the actions of the County Fire Service which has been produced from
information obtained to date.

Should any point require clarification or expansion please do not hesitate                         to
contact me.

Yours faithfully,




Chief Fire Officer.
                   SOOTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE



INCIDENT:   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC, HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD, SOOTH YORKS
            LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST - 15TH APRIL, 1989

REPORT OF CHIEF FIRE OFFICER H.E. WRIGHT, QFSM, MIFireE, FBIM


A brief factual report of the events which involved personnel of the
South Yorkshire County Fire Service is submitted, as requested, for
your information.

As yet all personnel who attended have not been debriefed and            more
detailed report may be possible when this has been completed.

1.    Time of call was 1514 hours from Police Control and the County
      Fire Service reacted to the information -

      ” There's been a major accident at Hillsborough Football Ground
      where the semi-final is. The crowds have forced their way in -
      they've broken fences and the gate down.   I don't know exactly
      what it is but there are people trapped. "

2.    Appliances attending
                                                  Time         Time in
                                                 Mobile       Attendance

      Water Tender Ladder   -   Rivelin           1517            1522
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Central           1517            1522
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Central           1517            1522
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Ringinglow        1517            1527
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Darnall           1517            1526
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Darnall           1517            1526
      Emergency Tender      -   Central           1517            1524
      Control Unit          -   Mexborough        1519            1608

3.    Actions of crews on arrival.

3.1   Rivelin WrT - StnO Swain in Charge

      Attended the Leppings Lane side of ground and encountered severe
      congestion that prevented immediate access to the ground.

      An immediate request for the use of a resuscitator on   a   casualty
      in the rear of an ambulance was answered.

      Rivelin 1 was made Contact Point in Leppings Lane for the incident
      with StnO Swain OiC.




                                   1.
      A request for resuscitation equipment inside the ground was
      received from a Police Officer. In view of this a "Make Pumps 10
      for resuscitators" message waq sent. Crew members were despatched
      into the ground in an effort to make contact with Senior Police
      Officers, and ascertain the extent of the incident,.

3.2   Central WrT 1 and 2 - StnO Fletcher and SubO_______ in Charge

      Attended at the Riverside Entrance off Penistone Road at the rear
      of the South Stand.      The crews were not met or directed by the
      Police so the officers made their way onto the pitch to the area
      immediately in front of the West Stand where they found many
      casualties on the pitch who needed first aid treatment.         No
      rescues as such needed to be undertaken but it was obvious that
      bodies and casualties needed to be attended to.

      The crew members were then directed to perform mouth to mouth
      resuscitation and first aid. Two resuscitators were used by the
      crews.

      A casualty receiving area was set up at the rear of the West Stand
      by so directing T/stnO          and casualties were moved from the
      pitch to this area by crews, police and spectators.

      Approximately 20-30 persons were moved to this area. The obvious
      dead being located in a holding area at the rear of the West Stand
      and the injured removed by ambulance to         hospital.    Later
      information received by StnO Fletcher told him to evacuate
      casualties to the Gymnasium at the rear of the North Stand.

      The crews of Central 1 and 2 were joined and assisted by those
      from Darnall 1 and 2, Ringinglow 1 and the Emergency Tender from
      Central.

      When the pitch had been cleared of casualties all crews were
      directed to the Gymnasium and carried out further assistance.

3.3   Central Emergency Tender - LFro Housley in Charge

      Attended at Penistone Road but could not gain access to the ground
      because of height restriction for the appliance.     Proceeded to
      Leppings Lane and the Contact Point.

      The crew then proceeded as directed into the ground via the North
      Stand and onto the pitch with a resuscitator treating casualties
      both on the pitch and later in the Gymnasium.

3.4   Ringinqlow WrT- StnO _______ in Charge

      Attended at Leppings Lane entrance.




                               2.
      The crew then proceeded as directed into the ground with a
      resuscitator and gave assistance to casualties on the pitch in
      front of the West T e r r a c e together with the crews from Central 1
      and 2 and Darnall 1 and 2. When the pitch had been cleared of
      casualties the crew was directed to the Gymnasium.

3.5   Darnall WrT 1 and 2 - T/StnO          and SubO             in Charge

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance.      Crews entered the ground as
      directed and gained access to the pitch via the West Terrace
      rendering assistance to casualties with two resuscitators and
      mouth to mouth resuscitation. Working with other crews casualties
      were removed initially to the casualty receiving area which T/StnO
      Clay had been directed to establish at the rear of the West Stand
      and subsequently to the gymnasium.

      On instructions from ADO Robjohns, SubO                   and his crew
      undertook a circuit of the pitch to a s c e r t a i n i f any further
      injured people needed assistance and get them to the Gymnasium for
      treatment. All crews were eventually located in the Gymnasium
      rendering assistance to casualties.

4.    The "make up” message from StnO        ]was received in County Fire
      Service Control at 1528 by Brigade radio.

5.    Additional appliances attending

                                                         Time         Time in
                                                        Mobile      Attendance

      Water Tender Ladder   -   Mansfield Road           1529           1534
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Lowedges                 1529           1544
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Stocksbridge             1530           1539
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Stocksbridge             1532           1541
      Emergency Tender      -   Barnsley                 1522           1537

6.    Actions of crews on arrival.

6.1   Mansfield Road Wrt - StnO             in Charge

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. As directed the crew proceeded
      to the pitch giving assistance to casualties using a resuscitator
      to injured persons on the pitch and later at the Gymnasium to
      which they had been redirected.

      StnO         organised the removal of casualties by ambulance from
      the Gymnasium.

6.2   Stocksbridge WrT 1 and 2 - StnO            and SubO           in Charge

      Attended at Leppings Lane entrance.      As directed both crews
      proceeded to the pitch and were redirected to the Gymnasium where
      they rendered resuscitation, first aid and were used for the
      transferring of injured persons by ambulance to hospital.



                                   3.
Lowedge3 WrT - SubO         in Charge

Attended Leppings Lane entrance. As directed the crew proceeded
to the pitch where some resuscitation was given before further
proceeding to the Gymnasium with a resuscitator. In liaison with
the Assistant Divisional Officer in that area the crew undertook
further first aid and resuscitation work in addition to which they
were involved in the transfer of casualties to hospital via
ambulances.

Barnsley Emergency Tender - LFm           in Charge

Attended Leppings Lane entrance. The crew entered the ground as
directed and administered resuscitation with a resuscitator to a
casualty on the pitch before assisting in the movement of injured
people at the Gymnasium.

Control Unit Mexborough - L F m 1       in Charge

Attended Leppings Lane entrance. On arrival the crew contacted
the Senior Officer in attendance (DO III) by fireground radio and
were instructed set up Control Point. A DO I attended and took up
the duties of Control Officer.

Liaison with the Police at their Control Box in the ground was
transferred from a DO III to an Assistant Divisional Officer.

An advance control point was eventually set up in the Gymnasium
with a Senior Divisional Officer in Charge and an Assistant
Divisional Officer assisting him.

Senior Officers attending

Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns - in attendance 1529 hours.

Attended Leppings Lane entrance. Confirmed Rivelin WrT as contact
point with StnO Swain in Charge and proceeded into the ground.

Unable to make contact with any senior Police Officer on the pitch
he liaised with StnOs Fletcher and ]      land having been assured
that all casualties on the pitch had received attention he
proceeded to the Gymnasium to co-ordinate crews and equipment at
this casualty receiving point. Contact by fireground radio with
DO Lockwood who had arrived was obtained and further provision of
personnel and equipment was requested at the Gymnasium to assist
in the first aid treatment of casualties and their transfer to
ambulances.
7.2   Divisional Officer Lockwood - in attendance 1547 hours.

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. Informed StnO Swain to assemble
      all available crews and resuscitation equipment at the contact
      point to await further instructions.       DO Lockwood entered the
      ground via the West Stand tunnel, contacted StnO Fletcher on the
      pitch, was briefed and then set up direct liaison with the Police
      at the Control Box situated adjacent to the South Stand.      From
      this point movement of personnel and equipment were co-ordinated
      until the arrival of the Control Unit at which time he was
      relieved by an Assistant Divisional Officer to enable him to make
      a report on the full situation.

7.3   Additional Senior Officers attended as            follows      before    the
      situation was considered to be controlled.

        (i)   Chief Fire Officer.
       (ii)   Assistant Chief Fire Officer Hornsby.
      (iii)   Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman.
       (iv)   Senior Divisional Officer Smoothey.
        (v)   T/Divisional Officer I Hildreth.
       (vi)   T/Assistant Divisional Officer Green.

All but four WrT appliances and crews were released from 1651 hours,
the remainder being retained in case of further incidents and very
heavy traffic in that area of Sheffield due to spectators leaving the
ground.

All appliances were released      from   Hillsborough    at   1720     hours   and
returned to their bases.

A map of the area of the ground is included for clarification purposes.




                                 5.
                                                                                      ADO.
                                                                                      DO.
                                                                                     Rivtil/o-!    linrni-iSl"!
                                                       Holdinga r a a        \      Ringing low I Darnull-2
                                                      f o r fo ra lth a s            Low„Jqas-l              C ontY-i*! - 5
                                                                     \               Mani <
                                                                                          <
                                                                                          rIdf?ti•I Snjek’sbndUu: ■ I
                                                                         \           5 liic K 's b r t c J ^ - 2   fk irn sli^ - S

                                          Iniha I casual ty
                                          nzca.iv/nq a r a n




                                                                                                                                     L a n e.
                                                                                 Poll'dI /
                                                                                 Firsf Aid—
                                                                                 Reoma '




                     PznisFona.              Road




SCALE            DRAW N       TRACED         CHECKED
  /: 12.50        M.C.B.     H.D.                                                 S ite    Plan
S h e ffie ld     W ednesday F.C.H i l l s b o r o u g h ,
P e n isto n e    R oad,
S h e f f ie l d ,
S o u th Y o rk sh ire ,      5S ISW
    SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                          COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                                                            C. 2086
    H O M E O FFIC E
    Queen Anne’s Gate London SW 1H 9A T
                                   Direct line 01-273 3 9 2 5
                                  Switchboard 01-273 3° ° °



Mr H E Wright MIFireE                                Your reference
Chief Fire Officer
South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence               O ur reference
  Authority, Command HQ
Wellington Street                                    Date
SHEFFIELD
South Yorks    SI 3PG                                 20 April        1989


Dear Mr Wright

In his statement to the House of Commons on 17 April about the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster the Home Secretary said that he had
asked for factual reports from the Police and other services, the
local authority and the Football Association.  A copy of the page
from Hansard which records the Home Secretary's statement is
attached.

We have   been in touch with you by telephone to request that a
factual   report be provided to the Home Secretary and I am now
writing   to formally confirm this request.  It would be helpful to
receive   your report by 28 April.

You are aware that the Home Secretary has sought a factual report
of the part which your service played in the events of the day:
he does not ask that you make in the factual report judgments
about the issues which arise from the disaster. ^




                                                      F J ARCHER
                                                  Fire and Emergency
                                                  Planning Department




enclosure
    19                   Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                           17 A P R I L 1989                   Ilillsboro-.igh Stadium Disaster                          20


                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                                               L o r d Ju stice T a y l o r will visit Sheffield to m o r r o w to begin
                 *                                                                          his investigati on. I am g ra tefu i to him for agreeing to
    3.30 p m                                                                                u n d e r t a k e this task.
                                                                                                 H o w ev er, we need also to ta ke a wid er view. T h e
          T h e S e c re ta ry of S t a t e for the H om e D e p artm en t (M r.
                                                                                            G o v e r n m e n t believe th a t the fu tu re o f football in this
     D ougla s H u rd ): W ith perm is sio n. M r. S peak er, I sh o u ld
                                                                                           c o u n t r y lies in a n a t io n a l m e m b e rs h ip scheme in
     like to m a k e a st a te m e n t a b o u t the dis aste r at th e Sheffield
                                                                                           d esig n ated g r o u n d s — { Interruption. ! — a n d now, it ssems,
     W e d n e s d a y fo otball club g r o u n d a t H i ll s b o ro u g h on
                                                                                           also in p r o v id in g all-seated a c c o m m o d a t i o n at m a jo r
    S a tu r d a y . E v e ry o n e has been horrified by this incredible
                                                                                           fo o tb all clubs. T h is w o u ld involve the d i s a p p e a ra n c e o f
    tr a g e d y in whic h 94 lost th eir lives a n d 174 were injured.
                                                                                           terraces at those g ro u n d s . It m ig h t also involve
         S h o rt ly a fte r the st art o f the m a tc h , there was a surge o f
                                                                                           a m e n d m e n t s to stre n g th e n the F o o tb a l l S p ec tato rs Bill so
    s p e c ta to r s o n the L ep p in g s lane te rrace, whic h cr u sh ed
                                                                                           th a t its p ro v isio n fo r the licensing o f g r o u n d s m a tc h e d this
    m a n y at the front against the p e rim e te r fence. This
                                                                                           co n cep t. W e shall be c o n sid erin g these m a tte rs urgently.
    a c c o u n t e d for m o s t o f the d e a t h s a n d injuries.
         T h e m a t c h w as d u e to s ta rt at 3 pm. T o help ensure                        A n a p p e a l fu n d is being set u p by the civic a u th o ritie s
   o rd e r ly access, the gates o f the g r o u n d were op en ed at 12                   o f L iv erp o o l, N o t t i n g h a m a n d Sheffield. T h e G o v e r n m e n t
   n o o n . A t 2.30 p m m o s t o f the N o t t i n g h a m fans were in the             will be c o n t r ib u t in g £5 00,0 00 im m ed iate ly , t o w a rd s this
   g r o u n d , b u t m a n y o f the L iverpool su p p o r te rs were still              fund .
   arr iv ing. It w as clear to the police officers in ch arg e that                           T h is w as a d ev astatin g tr ag ed y . O u r deep s y m p a th y
   th e r e (was a m p l e c a p a c ity still to be filled in so m e p a r t s o f       goes to th e families o f those w h o died, to those recovering,
   the enclosure allo cated to Liverpool.                                                 a n d — p a rtic u la rly m o v in g y esterd ay — to those y o u n g
        A t a b o u t 2.45 p m there was a large c ro w d o f L iver poo l                p eo p le w h o a re still fighting for life a n d health . We ow e a
   s u p p o r te r s a t the turnstiles in Lep pin gs lane beh in d the                  d u ty , it seem s to us, to these p a ss io n a te su p p o r te rs o f
   west s t a n d . T h e re w as difficulty in c oping with the pres sure                fo o tb all to e x a m in e u rg en tly a n d t h o r o u g h ly the causes
   on the turnstiles, a n d the police used loud hailers to urge                          a n d th e b a c k g r o u n d , a n d to d o all in o u r p o w e r to p rev en t
   the c r o w d to be patie nt. A t a b o u t 2.50, m o r e L iver poo l                 su ch a thing fr o m h a p p e n i n g again. W e hav e to set o u r
  s u p p o r t e r s arr iv e d a n d the n u m b e r s in fro n t o f the               sights high a n d find a better w a y for British football.
  turnsti les in creased. S o m e s u p p o r t e r s started to cl im b the
  walls a n d turnstiles, a n d those a t the front o f the cro w d                           M r . Roy H a tte rsle y (B ir m in g h a m , S p a r k b r o o k ) : M a y I,
  o utside the s t a d iu m were u n d e r c o n sid e ra b le pres sure fr om           first o f all, offer the deepest s y m p a th y o f m y right ho n . a n d
  those behind.                                                                          h o n . F rie n d s a n d m y s elf to all those w h o were injured in
        T h e senior police officer pres ent considered th at there                      o r b ereav ed by this :errible tragedy. Little th a t we say will
  was a possible d a n g e r to the lives o f the spectato rs at the                     help th e m at this m o m e n t , b u t I h o p e th a t they find so m e
  front o f the c ro w d o u ts id e th e s ta d iu m . In o r d e r to relieve          c o m f o r t in the k n o w le d g e th a t the whole c o u n t r y sh ar es
  the pressu re, he a r r a n g e d fo r a n exit gate n ear the                         their g rie f a n d suffering. W e also offer o u r hopes for a full
  turnstiles to be o p e n e d to let a section o f the cro w d                          recovery to th o s e 17 p atien ts still in intensive care.
  th r o u g h . T h e re latio n sh ip o f th a t a c tio n to the disaster o n              M a y I also express o u r g ra t it u d e to a n d o u r a d m ira t io n
 the terrace sh o r tly a ft e rw a rd s is clearly a cen tral qu estio n                for all th o s e in divid uals w h o d id su ch re m a rk a b l e w o rk
 to be investigated .                                                                    sa v in g lives, c o m f o r t in g the dy in g, a n d helpin g the injured
       M y ri ght hon. F rie n d the P rim e M in ister an d I                           — police, fire officers, the a m b u la n c e service, St. J o h n
 y esterd ay visited the football g r o u n d a n d the tw o Sheffield                   A m b u l a n c e Brigade, d o c t o r s a n d nurses, the staff o f the
 h ospita ls w hic h received casu alti es. I s h o u ld like to p ay                    club , a n d th e fo o tb all s u p p o r te r s w h o acted with such
 trib u te to all those in volved in the rescue o p e ra tio n s at the                  g reat discipline a n d co m p a s s i o n ?
g r o u n d , in c lu d in g the m a n y sp e c t a to r s w h o gave their                   M a y I go o n to w elcom e the H o m e S e c re t a ry ’s decision
 help, a n d to those othe rs, inc lu din g the hospita l staffs an d                    to set u p a pu b li c inquiry , a n d expre ss o u r h o p e th a t its
v o lu n t a r y agencies, w h o .have since been w o rk in g so h a rd                 re p o r t will lead to im m e d ia te a n d decisive actio n? M a y I
 tr eatin g .th e in jured a n d co n so lin g the bereaved . We heard                  ask the H o m e S ecre tary a b o u t the police in quiry th a t is to
m a n y a c c o u n t s o f c o u r a g e exerted on b e h a l f o f others.            be carried o u t at the s a m e time? C a n we be assure d th a t
      I have asked for fu r th e r fa ctual re p o r ts fr o m the police               neith er its p ro ceed in g s n o r its co n clu sio n s will d elay o r
a n d o t h e r services, the local a u t h o r i t y a n d the F o o tb all            inhibit the p ubli c in q u iry th a t he h as a n n o u n c e d to d a y ?
A ssociation. Inquests will be held in d u e co urs e. But over                         W e need a n u n eq u iv o cal an d a u t h o r it a ti v e a c c o u n t o f
a n d a b o v e this, there is clearly need fo r a full an d                            w h a t h a p p e n e d at H illsb o ro u g h , w h y it h a p p e n e d , a n d
in d e p e n d e n t in q u iry to ide ntify the ca use s o f the disaster              w h a t m u s t be d o n e to prev en t su ch a th in g fro m ev er
a n d to ex am in e w h a t needs to be d o n e to prev en t such an                    h a p p e n i n g again. O n the face o f it, tw o paralle l inquiries
accident h a p p e n i n g again. I have there fo re asked Lord                         are no t the best w ay to achieve th a t result.
Justic e T a y l o r to c a r r y o u t a n in q u iry with the following
                                                                                              T h e re p o r t e m a n a ti n g fr o m the p u b lic in q u iry m u st be
te rm s o f reference:
                                                                                         follow ed by a re o r g a n isa tio n o f fo o tb all g r o u n d co n tro l,
      “ T o i n q u ir e in to the e ven ts at Sheffield W edn e sd a y
f o o tb a ll g r o u n d o n 15 A p ril 1989 a n d to m a k e r e c o m m e n d a ­    whic h m a y ta k e so m e time to achieve. I refer, for e x a m p le ,
tio ns a b o u t the n eeds o f c r o w d c o n tr o l a n d safety at sports           to the re p la c e m e n t o f terraces with seats. Hut so m e action
grounds.”                                                                               m u s t be ta k en at once. Will the H o m e S ecretary issue an
M r . Brian J o h n s o n , the chief c o n s t a b le o f Lancashire, has              im m e d ia te instruction to th ose saf ety co m m it te e s a n d c h ie f
agreed to assist the inquiry as an assessor, an d                                       co n stab les w h o h av e insisted u p o n fo o tb all clubs installing
a r r a n g e m e n t s will be m a d e as necess ary for o th e r qualified            p e ri m e t e r fences? M a n y fo o tb all clu b s hav e w a rn e d for
assessors to be a p p o i n t e d a n d for the inq u iry to be                         years th a t p e rim e te r fencing is a p o te n tia l dan g er. O n
p ro v i d e d with te ch nical advice a n d s u p p o r t . I a m asking               S a t u r d a y it p ro v e d lethal. It m u s t n o t ' b e m a in ta in e d w here
th a t the in q u iry s h o u l d pro ceed with all possible speed.                     lives a re p u t at risk.

    20 CD39/1 Jo b l-l
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE


          SUBMISSION BY CFO H.B. WRIGHT, QFSM, MIFireE, FBIM




I am Henry Edward WRIGHT appointed as the Chief Fire Officer    of   the
South Yorkshire County Fire Service on 14th December, 1982.

Previous to that date I held the appointment of Assistant Chief Fire
Officer of the County Fire Service with the main reference of fire
prevention from 1st September, 1978 when I transferred on promotion to
South Yorkshire from the Leicestershire Fire Service, until March 1981
when I transferred to other responsibilities.

During that time I was involved in discussions on the safety aspects of
the Hillsborough stadium, Sheffield occupied by Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club Ltd.

Just prior to my arrival an order had been made under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act, 1978 which designated the ground of Sheffield
Wednesday FC by virtue of its quasi international use. This order
required an application for a general safety certificate to be made
before 1st January, 1979 when the designation order become effective.

The requirements of a general safety certificate with regard to this
stadium was considered by an Officers' Working Party chaired by Mr.
David Vaughan of the Administration Department, South Yorkshire County
Council with representatives from the South Yorkshire Police, Sheffield
City Council Building Inspection Department and the South Yorkshire
County Fire Service. This working party was responsible to the Fire
Service Committee who had delegated responsibilities from the South
Yorkshire County Council.

To assist officers a Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Football) was
issued by the Home Office. Local Authorities were reminded that this
non-statutory document was not a set of requirements to be rigidly
applied   regardless   of individual circumstances.     Indeed maximum
flexibility was to be maintained to take account of      thedifferent
circumstances at individual grounds. Particular attention was drawn to
the Act which provided that the terms and conditions should be such as
"necessary or expedient to secure reasonably safety" and that it would
be unreasonable, even if it were practicable, to seek the absolute
safety of everyone attending the sports stadium.

In order to avoid duplication and division of responsibilities a draft
of items relative to the safety in sports grounds had been prepared and
discussed prior to my arrival. This division of responsibility wa»f
checked and approved in April, 1978 at    a meeting attended b y : iu».i
Dunstan andK. Jones.
                                                                           r h
At an initial meeting with the Club officials on
Sheffield Wednesday FC, Hillsborough it was agreed that Dr. Eastwood
would prepare and submit a comprehensive survey report on matters
relating to the above Act. This was submitted on 17th January,
and   provided Dr. Eastwood's opinion       regarding the West Terrace
(including the lower level at North West Corner).
It was determined that a comprehensive survey of the ground be
undertaken by the Officers' Working Party and a report produced by each
department for discussion prior to meeting the Club officials to
discuss Dr. Eastwood's report.

This meeting was held on 12th February, 1979 and was attended by H.B.
Dunstan, K. Jones,          and          of the County Fire Service.

Due to delays in meeting with the Club officials a further meeting of
the Officers' Working Party took place on 30th March, 1979 to review
the position prior to meeting with the Club.

The main point made regarding the West Terrace was by the Building
Authority that the crush barriers were below the height recommendation
of the Guide.

At the meeting between the Club officials and the Officers Working
Party on 2nd April, 1979 the reduced capacity of 7,200 spectators as
suggested by Dr. Eastwood to compensate for the lack of gangways was
agreed. The height of the crush barriers was to be subject to detailed
discussion between Dr. Eastwood and the Building Inspectors.

A letter from Sheffield City Council dated 1st May, 1979 confirmed that
the major points were acceptable including the barriers.

On 16th May, 1979 the County Fire Service sent to Mr. Vaughan the
improvements considered necessary at the ground.     This letter was
originated by Station Officer Davis and was sent by the Divisional
Commander. This letter states that the exit routes from the West and
North West Terrace were satisfactory.

The positioning of required EXIT signs as detailed on the plans sent
with the letter (1610/1 x A; 2 x A; 4A; 6A; 7A; 8A; 9A; 11 and 12).

These improvements were apparently collated into a schedule to include
all requirements of the working party and sent by Mr. Vaughan to the
Club. Although a copy of the schedule was provided for the County Fire
Service no plans were included.

At the meeting between the Club officials and the working party on 12th
November, 1979 it was reported that the work required on the       West
Terrace had been carried out.       EXIT signs were to be erected after
decorations were complete but their positions not identified in
writing.

The general safety certificate was issued by the South Yorkshire County
Council to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. for their ground
situated at Hillsborough, Sheffield on 21st December, 1979.

Prior to the FA Cup Semi-Final match scheduled for 12th April, 1980 it
was suggested on 14th March that the members of the Working Party
review the situation at the ground and make comment on outstanding
matters. This inspection was undertaken by Station Officers
and        and comments made. Their comments were forwarded in writing
to the Chief Executive on 26th March, 1980.      These in turn were
forwarded to the Club on 31st March.

As the Assistant Chief Fire Officer responsible to the Chief Fire
Officer for the satisfaction of the statutory responsibilities of the
Fire Authority as delegated to the Chief Fire Officer I attended
necessary meetings and provided guidance and advice to officers under
my direction whenever required or requested.
I neyer considered that the provision of reasonable safety on the West
terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield had not been provided
for and in saying this I was aware of the guidance given by the Guide
applicable at that time and the conditions applicable at this area of
the ground for which the County Fire Service had responsibilities, eg
means of egress.




H.E. Wright,
Chief Fire Officer.




Command Headquarters,
Wellington Street,
Sheffield SI 3FG

HEW/MS

26th May, 1989
           STATEMENT BY H B DUNSTAN (RETIRED FIRE PREVENTION OFFICER)



re. Inspections         or   Deliberations           of   Working       Party      on    Application         for

Certificate       by    Sheffield       Wednesday         Football      Club under Safety of Sports

Grounds Act 1975.



I began working for the Barnsley Fire and                       Ambulance       Service        in    1954.        I

transferred       to    South    Yorkshire       County         Council      in     local government re­

organisation in 1974.            I assumed the position              of    Divisional          officer       with

responsibility for certification.



1.   I     attended      a   meeting      of    the       Officers        Working       Party       on the 21st

     .September                                                                                 between

                                     divided                                                    I scb©ett*!©:»;




2.   The    Act     -    being    new    -     all    the       Working Party members drew on the

     experiences of colleagues in the other Authorities,                                used    Home     office

     guidance and their own experiences to formulate standards acceptable to

     the South Yorkshire Authority.



3.   All Working Party members               agree that         their      approach       to    an     existing

      sports      ground     would      be tempered with reasonableness in regard to the

      exacting standards of the Act and that - in                          some     cases       -    compromise

      would    be       necessary.       However,         new    grounds      or     any       alterations to

      existing grounds would be required to comply fully with                                  the    standards

      laid down.



4.    A    survey report by the Consulting Engineers, Eastwood and Partners was
      enforced,       whereas     compromise        -     as in the case of the west terrace -

      i.e. in the reduction of capacity - was accepted.



5.    Means ofEscape in case of fire or other emergency                           was considered         by

      the     fire    service, in the case of the west terraceand on reduction                           of

      crowd capacity to 7,200 - a eduction .'of .10%                     giving an

      of    Just     over .€ minutes - the existing means of escape was considered

      satisfactory.       At the time that I supported               that       decision       there   was

      total    movement       laterally       throughout         the terrace and three entrance/

      exits from the terrace were well situated.



      As the west stand provided a minimum of fire risk it was accepted                                that

      these     routes     would    be available and adequate in an emergency and the

                     gates ;in the perimeter fence, werediscounted                       for   means     of

      ewesjpe"..jmiqaoges.       At that time I considered the gates in the perimeter

      fence as        there for the convenience of the                   police   for crowd      control

      purposes.        Neither     was   it    considered         necessary to identify exits as

      these were the ones used for normal entrance and exit from the terrace.



6.    Even at this        early     stage     in    dealing       with    the     application      for     a

      certificate        it   was    agreed        that    any    alterations       to     the   existing

      conditions would require reappraisal of the situation.




AS/

25.05.89
                       I M P L E M E N T A T I O N OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                •                               A re a Officer Working P a r t i e s

           In o r d e r to avoid duplication and division of r e s o u r c e s , the p rim a r y authority has b e en ..
           d esignated f o r the c a r ry in g out of In s p e c tio n s ,. reinspections,- and making final
           technical recom m endations n e c e s s a r y using the headings given in the contents s u m m a ry
           of the "Guide to Safety at Sports G rou n d s" with som e additions. Where th e re is an
           o v erlap of the s p h e r e s of control, the p r i m a r y auth o rity responsible m ust consult the
           o th e r auth o rity (ies) co ncerned before finalising any recom m endation(s). The following
           abbreviations have been u s e d :-                -                                        ’

                                                             C.       =    County
                                                             P.      =     P o lice
                                                          F .B .      •-   F i r e Brigade
                                                          B .A .      =    Building Control Authority


                                        P rim ary                  To be
          Subject                                                                         M atters f o r Corrsultatioir
                                        A uthority                 Consulted


    I n g r e s s to the ground -
s   (i) s t ru c tu ra l                   B .A .                  F .B .& P .             P o s sib le a d v e rse effects
    (il) -means of escape                  F .B .                  B .A .& P .             on a r e a of resp o n sib ility of
                                                                                           P r i m a r y Authority


    E g r e s s fro m the ground
    (i) s tr u c tu r a l                  B .A .                  F .B .& P .             P o ssib le a d v e rse effects
    (ii) m ean s of escape                 F .B .                  B .A .& P .             on a r e a of responsibility
                                                                                           of P r i m a r y Authority


        .r a c e s -
    (i) s tru c tu ra l                    B .A .                  F .B .& P .             P o ssib le a d v e rse effects
    (ii) m eans of escape                  F .B .                  B .A .& P .             on a re a of responsibility
                                                                                           of P r i m a r y Authority


    Stands -
    (I) s t r u c tu r a l                 B .A .                  F .B .& P .             P o ssib le a d v e rse effects
    (ii) m eans of escape                  F .B .                  B .A .& P .             on a r e a of responsibility
                                                                                           of P r i m a r y Authority


    S ta ir c a s e s and ram p s -
    (i) s t r u c tu r a l                 B .A .                  F .B .& P .            P o s sib le a d v e rse effccts
    (il) m eans of escape                  F .B .                  B .A .& P .            on a r e a of responsibility
                                                                                          of P r i m a r y Authority
                                                                                                                 TV                -             *
                                                     P rim ary             T o be
- S r —,-.^-... ; Subject                                                                          M a tte r s f o r .Consultation
ro'S'-v *.1. s---                                    A uthority            Consulted                                            U


.’„i/ f i r e P r e c a u tio n s                       F .B .    . ;   " IB .A .& P .,            A u x iliary and em ergency
                                                                                                   lighting. E m e rg e n c y -
    <5> ‘                                                                  P.                      p ro c e d u re and staff trainin /


    - - /A c c e s s fo r e m e rg e n c y
                                                                            F .B .                 F i r e B rig a d e .ap p lian c e s.
     /     vehicles                                     P. .
                                                                                                                                               i- -
^ y ' Spacing of c r u s h b a r r i e r s            ' B .A .              P.                     E ffect on cro w d control.
                                                                            F .B .                 Effect on m e a n s of escape.


> /          Strength of c r u s h b a r r i e r s
              and p e r i m e t e r w alls               B .A .

                                                                                 -
            .-rT erraee to touch-lin.e
    l           d istan ce                               P.


"• & E s tim a tio n of safe
 v     ground capacity                                   C.                 P . , F .B .& B .A .   Final F i g u r e s .
     --- f --------------------------------

    ,p »✓-Communications                                 P.                 F .B .                 E ffect on f ir e warning
    V •'                                                                                           s y s te m .
                                                                            1

|             F i r s t Aid and Medical                  c.                 A r e a Health
                                                                            A uthority to
                                                                            be consulted


$             P o lice at ground                         p.



                                                                                                                                           *
              Legal and A d m in is tra tio n            c.

        /     C ertificate draw ings                     c.
          H- 6- iW s ia
f-        O O ^ ’P     MkV)                        ^1}             —

                           ih&dffco (Xo<£ i / j j L a O k jx ,< c j^ t                             4>ji/i i£ o^coo*^pv\S
                iv \C jN ^ O ^         CLuxU L ^ ia^£ C H 9 jboLJtjk                       A       u -*iCifefcc* 'T ^ L     ^ i '/ ( <~>fe-v/\
          ?   l^y>                      A-f) C^/t~ (>410 f^CX                   lf~^3— -
                                                                                       '                       ®          f"       4-SJUi'-^

          JCoo       K P o ^ S i^ o t^ /U ^ & -J                           (a/U.     6su i 3 ho/u--e. p - x i h h ^                        -

      ^0             ^^'*Ti>/V^)^Uyo                      U \J W       v    p    S    ^        W    l x i x o L^   fjfeCo//lAv\ -

      W e         iu x c ifc *               .     f     P cvJi^       K J O ^ a       cwv^f             C f O            in o t^ o t- t

          (A /\ f?u2^—|                           ®»



-2.   K       tc u o h ^ O O C lo   fJ L ^ sd h

      (Wcv           ^ Show ^ jWifvuA/J |iw < i                              Cj<^Xi2/o gXi^U'tJ 6-v/\ KV"!
                                        C   fcKv-V(ry^:^                                       ^



      j*     ArO 0         A L l-C O C 'tC                                        h)                 f~%,\o^\J, <t tz jfc ts c ^
                  /\                        * j    ■*~' /                                                 \                                    tW            ^        i
  I’       O - U . P - MtvA^                  I&o

                         L U ^                                 W f A M S fc W ^ ^ t z . f/<CUv^Ow,^ ioj)jWitSsi’O/rCUe r ^ W ■r/j _ L ^

                        ^ kv-v ci            6Utcu~_.*. muXzkjis) C ^ c w c ^ u/tft- Lw^Ufcxfl^.
H




       - feouaf*/<>(?<&) U / b U ^ H                           ^ £»1                                  $> PaaVJ^OfcwmCj                    6 7 c Sj X
(SO




      -                                     IwO                                h M a s k iv ^ ( V                  P & ss\ blogj f 4
            RooAilcoc^t^                           ^tetZ^vA^lr                                             £ V n AjsJ          pn^jwU/j       .
           Cij                 f^VCo^         IC/V"v\,0fcc^fe7JIaaXC{J^                                                                   iv \ ^ivvvi“C ^ o f

                  <WittXao UU^oVl4cuv- N & ^ o U                                                     d      h      CC'^J                    h Ic
                 6 \^ ^ C i x I iiu d       ( \s ^ tA ^ p [ t^         ,
           C(\)        f ) 0 Cj oA z N O ^ o^pj) <^ -a c (                                                / U w nicM./(           k ^ c ja J ^ c ^

                                 AA^j^ii^S                          (M r f o e yvfi-e-/               fa?       tM x ^ h ^ io ^ .c J *     < 9 x \U _J C\

                                               o(o&4 KJtL/3 AA\fr^Jn                                  -                fc j)[^K b^CoJlLf'
                  ^ x d x c e A x ^            U   v   S -'>   /o     Id ^ L                                                    /'H a a        c J o & J -

                               t/ [ £ jtf tj                                      (^ a /tx ^              t^ z s    v jc l M    U J o ^ f^ o b      C < ^ f}C U ^ f

                  i'3wj ct-f                           W^-^vULj                 |0i( J k J t \ j .
STATEMENT:

I have been in Sheffield/South Yorkshire Fire Brigade for the past 25 years.
My current post is ADO Technical. In 1979 I represented the Division into the
Officer Working Party with reference to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
175 General Safety Certificate - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. I believe
that the last meeting I attended was June, 1981.

Prior to the issue of the above certificate I served on the Officer Working
Party along with Senior Officers from the County Fire Service Headquarters.
My role was to represent the Division whose area Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club were in.

Recommendations were made regarding all parts of the ground which affected the
maximum number that_could be accommodated in various areas.        The          off
7200 .ffiAxAjttajn '"..'was allocated to the Sttst Terrace/ At this date no radial
barriers were in existence.

This figure was arrived at after studying the construction of the ground,
width and position of exits, circulation area to exits and the evacuation
procedure that was to be adopted.

My thinking at the time was that persons could enter the West Terrace from the
tunnel under the stand and in the event of an emergency, move sideways to an
exit which would lead him/her to a place of safety. Crush barriers were so
placed to prevent unreasonable crushing or large forward surges by the crowd.

The West Stand and West Terrace were concrete, therefore the risk of fire was
considered minimal. The means of escape was considered more than adequate
considering this low fire risk.         I did not consider that gates in the
perimeter fen^.©>wetd;,necessary as:a means of escape and they. were ngt      *■
into account by.' m e . :

Fire exit signs were considered ttanecesSmry ;in:the West ..'Terrace:
the openness of it. The exits from this part of the ground being                  self
evident.

Because the means of escape from the West Terrace were considered to be
adequate and the fire risk minimal it was decided.,//that large numbers of
spectators wottM. not need to be evacuated onto the pitch via the gates leading
^Oat-o-.-'.'thtf' -per.iStetefe"tii the pitch.

The gates were considered suitable for access for a relatively small number of
spectators at localised incidents such as fighting and possible first aid
treatment to spectators. The access to and from these gates was under the
control of the Police. We did not :consider them to be a means.of ©seajp-t,n4
therefore, .not .uader our responsibility .

“*ese perimeter
          '‘        gates
                      ‘   were not‘ marked
                                       “   to i\ndieate they were      .'''•.■feeoi.ise
        .'felt : .%his would lead.to eoafu-Si.on. The normal ingress routes were
it. was :
considered as satisfactory for means of escape purposes.

Staff Training

At the time that the safety certificate was issued I was involved in producing
a Training and Fire Drill Procedure particularly for Sheffield Wednesday F.C.

The Training instructions    were sent in two parts to Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club. The first part related to Fire Instructions and Drill.

This detailed areas of responsibilities, areas that should be concentrated on
minimum periods between instruction, together with a method of recording these
training periods.
 The second part instructed staff how to act in the event of a fire.             This
 included the action to be taken on discovering a fire and the action to be
 taken on hearing the warning signals. ®faesa iflatrttetioas were sent-©ft -.tllftVSNfch- :
.April. 19;8.0.

I had, prior to the issue of the safety certificate, contacted Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club with a view to training their staff. This is minuted
in a meeting at Hillsborough dated 12th November 1979.

Meetings were held with the members of the staff shortly afterwards. I can
recall at least two visits. During these visits I emphasised the action they
should carry out at a typical evacuation procedure, went through the
instruction procedure I had prepared for them and walked around the ground
highlighting possible fire situations, together with the correct method of
using fire extinguishers.

 The following year, after an inspection prior to a semi-final taking place, I
 was concerned that the staff required further training in an "Emergency
 Evacuation Procedure". A document w&s produced in consultation with the Chief
 /Superintendent'-.Sob- Herol of the South Yorkshire .Police., detailing the
              evacuation procedure. The document was then circulated to all
 members of Sheffield Wednesday's staff.        This is minuted in a
...B.illtberougli on. 7th .April 1981.

A further meeting was held on ;SttovJiMe.  :e’at which I was present where
mention was made of future proposals concerning the West Terrace. I would
rely on the minutes of this meeting to remind me of what transpired at this
meeting, I cannot recall any discussion regarding incidents at the 1981 semi­
final . Assurances were given that the Officer Working Party would be
consulted. This concluded my involvement at the Sheffield Wednesday ground.
                                  STATEMENT OF



I first began work as a                   fire     officer     with    Halifax      County       Borough     Fire

Brigade     in    1963.          I       started     working     for    the     fire      authority in South

Yorkshire in          1979.          I   was     a    Station    Officer      in    the    Fire     Prevention

Department       of       the    then       'C       Division    of the South Yorkshire County Fire

Service from November 1979 until early 1982.



I attended the meetings of the Officer Working Party for                                  that    division     on

the 11th September, 1981, the                                    :1981 fand the 4fcJi February, 1982.



At   the    first and third of those meetings, I recall the new radial barriers

                                                 when I attended the meetings               tlftt




■attjgsAees.          I    cannot         honestly remember it being suggested that they were

being introduced to reduce the risk of crushing.



We discussed the gates to be installed at the rear of the                                  radial     barriers.

£t   is. .my     distinct            recollection, that          at one meeting.           I cannot remember

which) a lefresplstive of South YsJEkStti#©. Polices (I                            cannot        remember    who)

                 tie §*fce,s.would be najtned; at :
                                                  %tl times by police o f f i c e r That

was important because one of the                       means    of     escape      from    the     terrace    was

through those gates.



I    note that the minutes for the 11th September, 1981 make reference to "the

use of the existing gates in the pitch perimeter security fence at the front

of    the   terrace"            being      discussed.        However,     I cannot in all honesty now
                                               - 1 -
remember if I had any views about the adequacy or otherwise of the gates         in

the   pitch   perimeter   fence.    However, the means of escape were considered

satisfactory at the time and in accordance with the      Green   Guide.    A ;:iap#S-1

evacuation would be at the rear and sides -'.-of the terracing and not-eivto

{playing area.* ffae terrace and stand were mainly, of concrete    and    presented §

very •'.-little in-the-way of fire bastard* “I never foresaw the pitch perimeter

fence gates having to be used for mass evacuation.



AS/DG

26.05.89




                                   - 2 -
                               STATEMENT OF JOHN RAY

I was with the South Yorkshire Brigade from 1981 to November 1983 at                              which

date     I retired.      Prior to that I was with Oxfordshire Fire Service and had

been in the fire service since 1957.



The .'first meeting of .-the Officer Working             tarty        that     I . attended, was . oh

11.09.81. " I believed my terms of reference at the time was to monitor and

report    back   to      the    Chief    Officer       any    matters        associated    with      fire

protection,      fire    prevention and means of escape in case of fire and other

associated fire         related   matters.         I    feel    that     these     minutes     clearly

established      for me my terms of reference.                 As this was my first meeting, I

contributed little and merely sat and listened.



In the early days of my joining the committee there was informal -talk.aboutJ

;the-crushing at the: 1981 semi final.               There was nothing as I recall of such

a nature in these discussions that led me to believe that I should.nee4                               t.®

       ter.: improvements       to      the   layout     of    the     area    where    the i-ttBieteat




I am aware that the minutes of the meeting of 08.06.81 gives assurance that

the    Working Party will be consulted when the crushing incident in the 1981

semi final had been considered.               During, my. period on the           Officers. .W&tkinf ,

.Party, this statement was never acted upon.



I am aware that the Officer Working Party agreed to the installation of the

radial barriers subject to them b®iag under the control of the police.$ The

impression I got from this was that the. police would man these gates.-* This

is minuted in the meeting of 11.09.81.



1 attended the        meeting     on     07.10.81.      At     that    meeting,        there   was    no

discussion regarding the west stand.
I    did not attend the Officer Working Party meeting on 04.02.82 (Hr Johnson

my deputy attended on my behalf) and rely on the minutes of this meeting to

advise    me      of    what transpired.       Similarly I did not attend the meeting on

10.05..82 (Mr Binttington^attended on my behalf.                He was one of my deputies)



I attended the meeting on 24.08.82.                  There was nothing in this meeting that

was pertinent to the west stand and escape there from.



On     16.09.82        I sent a memorandum to the Chief Executive of South Yorkshire

County Council following an attendance at a football match at                     Hillsborough

when     we had occasion to question the adequacy of amongst other things, the

fire routine and emergency evacuation procedure and confirmed in my opinion

they were in contravention of the conditions laid down in Schedule 2 of the

General Safety Certificate.              These are fully set out in my        memorandum.

recall     that        as a result of this complaint, the situation was rectified by

direct involvement between fire officers and club                   officials ..to   generally

improve     the safety standards.             Certain on site training was carried out by

a number of fire officers.              The situation was rectified to my         satisfaction

and I during my period of office had no further occasion to criticise their

methods.



During the whole of the time I served on the Officer Working Party, I never

considered the gates in the perimeter fence as forming part of the means of

escape procedure.            They were adequate in my opinion for           the   purpose   they

served,     namely        communication       gate    for   first   aid and rapid response to

localised incidents on the terrace.



            the reasons given for the radial fences                 being   installed   was   to

Obtain     better        g so w A   control   and aionitOE crowd behaviour.       Positioned as

they were, I did not see them as in any way impeding movement of persons in

 an outward direction in an emergency situation.
I   did not consider that the terrace and its mode of construction was a high

fire risk.     The    stand    was   concrete   and   there   was   little     combustible

material     with    or   without    radial barriers.    I consider that the means of

escape from the terrace was in an outward direction adequate              with     correct

policing/stewarding.          Movement   on to the pitch was not considered a means

of escape.    Egress was via the gates by which the spectators had entered.



Provided that the gates at the head of the radial             fencing   were     correctly

supervised in accordance with the recommendations as set out in the minutes

of the Officer Working Party, I did not foresee these gates would create                 a

problem.       __________________



AS/DG

26.05.89
                                DIVISIONAL OFFICER MALCOLM JOHNSON

                                         NORTH DIVISION HQ

I joined the Fire Service in December 1963 in Leeds City.                   In June of        1974

I    joined       South    Yorkshire     Brigade.      Prior to that I had been in Glasgow.

From January 1979 - August 1981, I was seconded to Fire                   Service    Technical

College,         Morton-in-Marsh, Gloucs.        I returned to South Yorkshire in August

1981. In February 1982 I was promoted to Divisional                   Officer    part    of    my

reference was to monitor the divisional work involving the Safety of Sports

Grounds.



On the 4th February, 1982, I attended a site meeting of the Officer Working

Party      at Hillsborough Stadium together with Stn.O                    and                  of

"C   Division F.P. Section.



The meeting had been arranged to discuss differences                 of   opinions      between

police      on     the    one    hand   and   Messrs    Eastwood and partners representing

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.



One of the differences of opinion involved the West Terrace.                    Recently      new

radial      barriers had been installed and the police were concerned that some

of the existing crush barriers extended through the                 new   radial    barriers.

This, they thought, would enable fans to climb from one pen to another.



It   was     eventually agreed, despite the fact fans may climb over the radial

barrier, that it was preferable to maintain the crush barriers which passed

through      the    radial       barriers and to review the position at the end of the

season.     My understanding of the decision being that it was safer from                     the

point      of view of preventing crowd surges if the crush barriers remained as

they were.
That was the only matter under discussion in the area of the                         west        terrace

at this particular meeting.



I    had not been involved with the original calculations and implementations

of the radial barriers and did not at this meeting consider them as                               I   was

there    to       look    at        a number of specific items.      The crush barriers on the

west terrace being one of these items. The other matters related                            to     other

parts of the ground and did not involve the west terrace or west stand.



The capacities of various parts of the ground would have been calculated at

an earlier date.               Miese       capacities. would: have    been    revised       when.. aity>

’BSariafcloa'                   -



At    the     time       of    this     inspection,    although    I was not there to consider

specifically means of escape, I did not consider that there was any                               danger

to     fans      on   this      terracing       providing   that   numbers    were controlled. I

considered that the means of escape from the central pen                       was     the       tunnel,

the     gate provided           with radial barriers and the gate in the fence onto the

pitch.        The whole situation looked right at the time.



At .this point 1 was not aware there had been crushing in                      1981.         I    became

aware       of    this        when    in    order   to acquaint myself with my new job I read

through my current files.                   I concluded from reading    the    appropriate

that          Jettt to-the pens not being ;ever crowded.the dangers of crushing''W»sj

gsea'feiy reduced by the installation of the radial barriers.



Oaatfe*- feOHi fire,was virtually none existent,* as the                 terrace       was       in   the

open     and      the     stand       to the rear was of concrete construction.              It was my

understanding that the gates provided on to the pitch would                          be   under       the

control          of   police         officers   and   that the gates in the new radial fence.
a    standard              condition         that    is placed upon control of any gates which the

police or club require to be kept closed.                          This is so they       can   be   opened

quickly          in an emergency,                 ly und#rst*n4i|itJ of              "un#®** the control

)p£* is,:that there should be a permaaent jaresenee.’
                                                    f In the case of the                               gate

onto       the         pitch this is the police's responsibility and in the case of any

other gate             it would most likely be a marshal who                  shouldbe   identifiable.

If     I   was         at       a    match     and there was no such manning, I would make it my

business to ensure that the gate was immediately manned and this                               would     be

followed          by        a       letter   to     the   club.   In      1984 I moved to East Division

Headquarters and ceased to have any responsibility for Hillsborough.



There were             no exit signs on any of the exits but in view of                  the   permanent

manning          of    gates           and    that other exit ways from the area were via routes

which fans would have arrived by, i t :was =n©t considered and not/ie

necessary.             I    was in fact endorsing the recommendations of my predecessors

who had arrived at a similar conclusion



AS/DG

25.05.89
                               L, I attended a meeting at Division            Street     Fire

 Station with other representative bodies, the purpose of the meeting was to

 consider plans submitted by Messrs Eastwood           &    Partners    to .the

erect ton    of   radial . barriers on the west terrace for the purpose of :crowd

,:do®tr0l



 It was my understanding that to the rear of each barrier, gates were to                    be

 installed   to    allow   lateral egress to other pens should a need arise, Mad

.that ;these gates would always be manned by      police        or     stewards   on'■' ■aiat&h'




 In addition to these gates, the means of escape from the terrace was deemed

to be satisfactory, the large double gates on the curtilage wall leading to

Leppings Lane, and the perimeter road running around the rear of the stands

 leading to Penistone Road.       The existing gates in the perimeter fence              were

considered    reasonable    for    limited   numbers       to evacuate onto the premier

track.



From the point of view of the Fire Service, the risk of fire was considered

as a low risk because of the structure being hard standing, in the open and

maintained by police and stewards



AS/DG
                               SUPPLEMENTAL STATEMENT OF MR



     I was employed by the             South      Yorkshire         County     Fire       Service      until

     Jebrmarf,       .1986.1    When     I     retired         I   had attained the rank of Divisional

     Officer.



                                     »er, 1§81#: Officer Working Party.                    The meeting was the
v/
     only meeting that I recall attending.                                            t



     I was aware that there had been problems at the April, 1981 semi-final.                                        As

     far as I can remember, I was not aware and was                           not     made    aware      that       the

     problem     had    been     one     of     crowd         crushing.       I understood that the radial

     barriers were        required       simply          to    break    the    crowd       down     into      smaller

     manageable groups.



         understanding          of     the condition tbat:"the new gates at the rear ol; tlie

     terrace als6 being under police control" p a s that they would be                                  oonstftnfely“

     manned during each match.                We would not have accepted anything less because

     it was important that an officer be there to give guidance to                                     the    problem

     with     respect to lateral movement in the event of an emergency.                                 Although I

     cannot remember the exact words used at the meeting of the 11th                                     September,

     1981,     the     decision      was         r,*-,
                                              along       felt
                                                          the  A   1 4,
                                                                   lines indicated aJsove and,‘
                                                                                              the police;




     I saw these gates in the perimeter fence                          primarily      for     access         into   the

     crowd.      I     did     consider however that they would serve as an exit poiafe: in

     the .event of. &.-minor- emergency e.g. an ill person having to be                                 passed, out.

     of .€be /CjJowct.       However, I considered the primary exits from the terrace as

     being through the tunnel or laterally                         through     the    gates       in    the     radial

      fences and round the sides of the stand.
At   the meeting of the 11th September, 1981, I did not apply my mind to the

problem of crowd crushing nor was my mind directed to that problem.



AS/DG

26.05.89
                                                              STN.O.



                                   MEETING 18.04.85 AND VISIT 26.04.85



My name is                                           and I am employed as a Station Officer                       in

the Fire Prevention Section of the South Yorkshire Fire Service, serving in

the Sheffield Division.                      I have been in    the      fire   service    for      20    years

always in the Sheffield Division.



I   was     instructed             to    attend a meeting of the Officer Working Party to be

held at the Police Social Club, Niagra, onfiSfch April, 1985,,as                                Divisional

representative.                I    accompanied Divisional Officer Grimshaw, the nominated

Headquarters Officer, to the meeting and this was to be my only involvement

with      safety    matters             at    this   ground,     I     was in fact substituting for a

colleague who was unavailable..                      My personal recollection of the details of

this      meeting        are       now rather vague, but after re-examining the records, I

feel able to state the following:-



The purpose of the meeting was to consider proposals                            put      forward        by       the

club,      and supported, I understood, by the police, to provide more flexible

arrangements for crowd control and segregation at the Leppings Lane end                                          of

the ground.




The     first      was     to       erect new radial fences on the terrace and thus'oreatft. ,

pens5to      accommodate                spectators    and   provide       flexible    arrangements,              for

segregating home and visiting supporters.                         This included the provision of a

manned gate at the end of the access tunnel to the central terrace area, by

which      supporters          could be diverted to either the left or right hand pens,

according to the dictates of the day.                       My understanding was that            the         <
would     be     manned   by      either        the    police or a club steward.              Each pen, in

addition to the normal means of ingress,                     was    to   have         gates     supervised

again      by    police     or stewards which would allow lateral movement along the

terrace.        Additionally, extra gates were proposed in                      the    pitch     perimeter

fence, primarily for poli



The second element of the proposals was to rearrange turnstiles, exit gates

and fences at the rear of the stand, so that                       crowd        segregation      could      be

effected prior to entry to the ground proper.



After      discussion       of        the   scheme,     Divisional Officer Grimshaw and myself

 informed the meeting that the proposals                     appeared      to    be    satisfactory         in

principle,        subject        to     a more detailed examination of the means of escape

 implications |»d..':ofe;,!%iie understanding that.' all -gttfcesf (which would                     normally

be     secured      for   crowd         control purposes) ‘would ..b© tna&ned by either police

o f f i , t t d / O E resgonsible club ©fficials*                  Ift?was stated that          a    written

reply to the Licensing Authority would be given and the meeting was closed.



       wbseguenfc ''consideration of;the proposals,, potential

vjseas'-were Gales'lated and it was €»eistedl. that the "normal., means of

        ''uaxpas    wpuld -satisfy              the retirement, for Means of escape and hence

                            This decision was taken in light of the                     fact        that    the

 terrace        was an open concrete area and that the ingress/egress route passed

 through non-combustible structures.                    The gates in the          radial      fences       were

 considered to be necessary to provide adequate alternative means of escape,

 by allowing lateral movement along                    the   terrace     to      alternate      points       of

 egress.



 I’
  he    :pxtefa petiiaefear           gates     were   not   calcmia-feed::as forming part o§:

"reeo^aised^'/tteaiia';' of           escape,     tout .-were.';:.acknowledged- as                           -.aaat-'j

•additional facility*- particularly .feu- alleviating localised difficulties'*'"?
It    was not thought necessary to sign any of the exit routes because a) the

principle ingress/egress route would be that already familiar to users                         and

b)     fence gates would be manned and under the control of police or stewards

on the spot, who would be able to assess local conditions and who could                         be

made    aware,     via the established emergency procedure of conditions outside

their immediate supervision.



The proposed entrance gates to the ground             ,   sited   at       the   rear   of     the

Leppings Lane stand, were assessed for required widths, based on the likely

numbers of people for which they would have to cater.



© a .2Sttt April , 19S5# -I visited the ground with Station Officer                            who

was     normally the Divisional representative with respect to these premises,

and Inspector Calvert of South Yorkshire Police.              Although I have no             clear

recollection       of   the substance of this meeting, I feel sure that it was to

consider any on site implications of the proposals put forward on                       plan    at

the     meeting    of    18th   April, 1985.     I also feel that this visit confirmed

that the proposals were satisfactory in principle as no record was made                         of

any     additional      requirement   to    those   considered    at the meeting of 18th

April.



             -r®ply, .including
                        eluding a „,rked copx
                                . marked copy of drawing noaiber -6705/2, was sent

:to..the- iicensiflg JtafBfaority on the 30£h .ftps'll, 1985.     -After this point I had

no     further     involvement    with     the   matter   although     I    understand,        from

subsequent        examination of records, that the proposals were not implemented

in the original format.



AS/DG

26.05.89
            Preliminary Statement of
                    Temporary Divisional OfficerI   I
    Regarding Involvement at Hillsborough Football Ground 1984 - 1986

In 1984 I was one of two officers of "C" Division Fire Prevention
Department who were given 'Safety at Sports Grounds' as part of a licensing
reference. This involved work at Hillsborough and Bramall Lane.

Work at Division involving sports grounds was done in conjunction with a
Headquarters FP Officer in order to standardise and co-ordinate activity
throughout the county.

The majority of comments regarding the grounds were relayed to the relevant
club through the County's Safety at Sports Grounds, Officer Working Party
(OWP).   Six monthly inspections, cons iderat ion of new       developments,
alterations and other matters concerning the grounds were carried out or
submitted to the committee for its cons iderat ion. The committee comprised
of representatives from the Fire Service (Division and Headquarters), SY
Police, and Sheffield City Council (Building Control), all being co­
ordinated and minuted by David Vaughan of the County Council.

I was involved in several inspections at Hillsborough and Bramall Lane
prior to May 1985 when I was temporary promoted to Headquarters Fire
Prevention.   As a consequence of that move I relinquished my divisional
references and then became involved in a headquarters capacity until early
1986 as assistant to DO Grimshaw who had as part of his headquarters
reference, 'Safety at Sports Grounds'.


Leppings Lane Involvement 1985

Taking into consideration that the events mentioned below were four years
ago, the following recollections are made with explanation of any personal
observations as appropriate.

In early 1985 I can recall requests by the police to improve crowd control
by segregation of supporters at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. This
                    .—
is reflected in the OWP mi- . *

Up to m y departure from ' C   Division in April 1985, .1 can recall .-BelJItj'
’-                        -- of exit flows in connectioft with pi
ooftetfraing th# fiepptmgs Lane end of the ground.
This included a site meeting between myself, Stn o|         (C FP), and Insp
Celvert (Police), at the area of the ground to be involved. The meeting
would have been to consider any site difficulties that might be envisaged
by the proposals.

In July 1985 the club, via Eastwood and Partners, submitted plans for the
consideration of the OWP. These were received by us and a request to
attend a meeting on the 29th July   to discuss the proposals was made at
short notice due to an apparent oversight by Eastwoods in applying for
Building Regulations Approval without prior acceptance by the OWP. I feel
that I was the only Fire Service representative at the meeting because of
the short notice and no other person being available to represent the
Division.

Discussion would have taken place between me and other officers at
Headquarters and Division before I attended the meeting, any points to be
clarified or our requests for alterations to the proposals on the plans
noted and those taken to the meeting. Once those points were accepted at
the OWP meeting and checked on the subsequently published minutes, they
would not have been retained as the minutes would then be accepted as our
file record.
I cannot recall details of the meeting accurately, but by virtue of this
feel that no controversy, or rejection of any parties proposals, or
question as to any obligation placed upon them by the scheme on the plans
submitted, was raised. If it had been I feel I would remember, and David
Vaughan, being a very accurate minute taker, would have recorded it in the
minutes.

The minutes of        the   meeting relate points raised on nine of the fourteen
plans submitted.

Plans that were of specific interest to the Fire Service were;

6705/6   Exit width between proposed central radial fence and each
side of the exit tunnel. Fence was central - acceptable.
         The position of the central fence would mean that one of
         the new areas created would not have        a   pitch perimeter
         gate into it - one was required.

          ;   Apparent    funnelling    effect  created  by       proposed new
           handrail adjacent to      access road to Leppings      Lane - point
           raised and noted in minutes.

6705/12         Split   of segregation of supporters in       relation   to   exits
              from each side of new barrier - acceptable.

6705/17       Gate provided in radial barrier - acceptable.

6705/18       Gate widths - acceptable.

6705/19       Swing and position of gates - acceptable.

The other matter covered by the minutes was the stewarding of new gates.
The principal of control and       definitions of the terms relating to
stewarding, policing, being under police control, would not have been
discussed.    However, all parties present were aware of the inter­
relationship of the factors comprising the evacuation procedure, and the
club   and the police were especially aware of the implications of extra
gates meaning extra staff having to be present when the ground was in use.

There should be no doubt that if someones duty or task is to control a gate
then that duty or task is to control it by perhaps opening it if it is
closed, closing it if it is open, or whatever other control is necessary
according to the direction he is given or by the situation at the time. If
the duty or task was to control a gate by only being in attendance at that
gate when it was shut in order to open it in an emergency, then that is
what would be required in the certificate or required by the OWP.         A
similarity can be drawn with the term stewarding of gates.

The use of the term 'stewarding' as opposed to any other term for meaning
someone being present at a gate to control it in order to carry out duties
during supporters access to or egress from the parts of the ground for
whatever reason including emergency evacuation, was because the safety
certificate places that responsibility on stewards.

There are however some gates where the police feel that it would be more
appropriate for the police to do the 'stewarding' task.
This is because of their location the stewarding of certain gates may have
more of a law and order involvement than others. Eg gates in fences or
barriers which split opposing supporters.     The provision of either a
steward or a policeman would be generally acceptable to us, and the
decision as to which would be provided was open to negotiation by the club
and the police.
The proposals, despite being modified, did not change the means of escape
situation from the West Stand and Terrace. Exit widths were not reduced,
and the situation regarding factors such as the perimeter fence, terrace,
entrance/exit tunnel, signs on exits, and alternative exit from the areas,
were not in any way worsened by the proposals. In fact the provision of
the new central radial barrier made it necessary to install an extra pitch
perimeter fence gate, as previously onegateserved the undivided central
area which was to be split in half.

Consideration to the need for forward evacuation of the whole area onto the
pitch was not necessary due to theproposals. We would         consider this
action if for example:

      A risk existed, or was to be created by any proposals, at          the
back of the terrace thus creating a possibility of the           exit routes
becoming unusable, eg timber stand.
      (This element would have been considered again at the time          of
the review of grounds following the Bradford City Fire).

      Long distances or complicated routes were to be followed on         an
evacuation.

      At the request    of the   police,   for   segregation   of   opposing
      supporters.

The provisions of the better crowd segregation facilities given by the
proposals would have been seen as an advantage, as it would assist in
achieving a more orderly and effective evacuation of the ground when that
was necessary.

The matters in the minutes were relayed to Eastwood and Partners by David
Vaughan and certain comments given in reply. Clarification was given where
necessary at the next OWP meeting.

My involvement with sports grounds ceased in early 1986 when I was promoted
to ADO at Headquarters.
Thoughts on potential criticism listed on brief

"The pens on the terraces at the Leppings Lane end of the ground
constituted a potential danger if crowded. The means of escape on
to the pitch were inadequate".

[Section 1 of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Football),
HMSO 1976, sets the criteria for approaching work to be done in
grounds to achieve "..a reasonable degree of safety" for
spectators.]

All terraces in any sports stadium; rooms in a building; any area
designed to accommodate a certain number of people constitutes a
danger if crowded to the extent that the designed capacity is
exceeded.

The safety of people regarding crushing and egress in football
grounds, night clubs, department stores, and any other place where
members of the public have access in large numbers, and
consequently would require evacuation in an emergency, is
dependent generally on two factors;

     The physical elements of structure designed and provided for
     escape from the place, and

     the management or other persons controlling access
     and initiating and co-ordinating the evacuation.

Without either of the two elements overcrowding and crushing would
occur and an evacuation would not be effective.

I feel that it is reasonable to consider that if capacities are
known and provision is specifically made to ensure that the
capacity is closely controlled and the people directed, that the
capacity would not be exceeded. If a statement was made that no
assurance could be given to restrict the number of people who may
enter an area which has a stated maximum capacity, then the
physical elements of structure would be different to those where
control is assured.

It would be unreasonable to require the provision of exits for
2000 people from an area that has a stated capacity of 1000. It
would be even more unreasonable to require that provision if
specific arrangements were in force to carefully supervise and
control people to ensure the capacity was not exceeded.

It would be unreasonable to expect a situation to be predicted
where several tasks specifically designed to either control or
allow/initiate escape in an emergency would not be carried out,
and consequently require the provision of extra exits to allow for
such a combination occurring.


Exit signs were not specifically required by the 1976 Guide,
except to encourage crowds in any particular section to flow in
one direction when leaving the ground. Section 6.6.

This was not the case from the central areas of the West Terrace;
the way in, was the direction the crowd was wanted to exit and
would naturally be the way the spectators would leave the area.


The Guide indicates that ramps should be of a constant gradient
and preferably not exceed a gradient of 1:10 where subject to
heavy crowd flow.

It again would be unreasonable to have envisaged a situation where
large crowds, (a packed mass of people akin to the crowds exiting,
instead of the controlled ingress of people regulated by turnstile
access), would enter onto the terrace from the tunnel. The
argument is really the opposite of an evacuation of the terraces.
If the slope had been in the other direction then consideration
would have been given to the suitability of the ramp as an element
of the exit route.
                    SUPPLEMENTAL STATEMENT OF MR ___________

I have to point out that I               have     very     little   recollection      of    what     was

actually said at the actual meetings, or what my precise thoughts were on a

particular day.           However, having looked at the documents, I am able to                      say

what thoughts and views inevitably went through my mind.



As   regard        what     I have to say on pages 2 and 3 of my statement, I want to

make it clear that I understood that the gates in the radial                          fences     would

be   manned        at     all   times    during     the    game.    However, it was a matter of

•ind^fffiEeiice to, th® fire service whether                that    manniacf. was, by

-©fficer. or a steward.             That was a matter to be decided between the club and

the police.         I     believe     that   this    was    also    the   police   understanding,

although       I    cannot swear to it.           However, the expression, "it is fewfetttial,;

rthat,all the new gates, are fully supervised by stewards" {see 2 {j), eft ;

jftiantesvof the.meeting of the 29th July 1385} reinforces my



As     regards      the width of the new perimeter fence gate, that would not have

entered my head at the time.                 I was conscious only of the need              for   a   new

gate     in the fence.          The reason I was not concerned about the width of that

particular gate was because I saw the escape routes from                       that        terrace    as

being     to     the      rear, as was existing at that time.             The introduction of an

additional perimeter fence gate was simply a bonus.                       ;I saw the
*1 never catislclered' the possibility of a lArge scale crushing incident
                                j.      -__________________ ™   2   -   X-   ~~
        ■ discussing the need for an ex



AS/DG

26.05.89




                                - 2 -
OMajSaJ                               ^u^cytohvSK^. tv(r(£jiO- t-.r■A \Q j^ U ^ j& s y ^ ~ ? j
tt^'C'-Xr; fcLa   p^C c<,£ p^J<bcPv^vwL>\ o fo c ^ j k/c^/3 ^(o^r>JL<Ajl^ i <&<UL foisj
                           ASSISTANT DIVISIONAL OFFICER BRIAN COPLEY 344



I have been in the South Yorkshire Fire                    Brigade    or        its    predecessors            in

title for 24 years.

Attended       "summer" inspection meeting 7th August, 1985,fin the roll of Fire

Service Headquarters representative.                   This was my        first       involvement           with

Hillsborough               stadium.     I   possibly may have been asked to go as I was the

only     available officer.                 I   attendedthis     meeting     with       S.O.

____________ He is now with one of the Welsh Fire Brigades.

At     this time I was TemporaryAssistantDivisional Officer, attached to the

Fire Prevention Department atF S HQ.



Having read the minutes of the meeting, I am                       able    to     confirm          that      the

following items regarding the west terrace were discussed and agreed:-



(a)    that the existing gate in the pitch perimeter fence allowing access to

        the sterile zone should either be extended or have                            steps       to    provide

        easier         access     from      the new 2m wide gap (the sterile zone) formed by

        the new radial fence I understood                  from the       comments       of       the     .sfisior ?

       .police         #£.fieer       present,that    it   would   toe the: policy                to ■liav#.tw«.

        pDlicettett posted within the gap in order for them to monitor the crowd

        on    the          adjacent     terrace.     The   gap   could be used by the police to

        direct the crowd onto the pitch in the event of a                         crowd        disturbance.

        I     did not consider that an exit sign was needed, because the need for

        mass evacuation could not be foreseen. This was because                               I    could      not

        see     any         fire hazard in this area and I was primarily concerned about

        escape in the event of fire.



 (b)    that a new: gate in the pitch perimeter fence should, be                          provided

               new south central terrace pen                f do not know whether one was ever
                ■ -’   .
                       '



        fitted.
    I cannot recall any comments made regarding the adequacy of the          gate,

    but    I felt that because the crowd would leave the terrace by th®::;sanie

    way as t he y ,
                  entered, the use for this gate would allow the       police   to

    gain aecefts to the terrace and for them to remove any trouble oau^ecs.

     It was stated that policewomen could be used to man the gate.         The use

     of exit signs was thought not to be necessary.



During the discussion, no comments were made regarding any games other than

those involving Sheffield Wednesday.    I   was   not   aware   of   any   previous

incidents at Hillsborough



B Copley



AS/DG
During 1985 I held the   reference within "C" Division of Planning Officer.
The main duty of the     reference was to liaise with theDepartment of Land
and Planning of the Sheffield City Council with regard to Fire Service
comments appertaining to applications for planning permission and/or
Building Regulations approval.

Early each week the City Council would forward to me a copy of the "Plans
List" in order thatI could prepare     our comments in time for the plans
meeting (colloquially called the "look-see") which would be held every
Friday morning at the Town Hall.

Prior to making comment on any submitted plan it was my usual practice to
peruse our records in order to ascertain whether or not the Department had
previous knowledge of the premises concerned or more specific details of
the scheme involved and whether or not any colleague was currently
involved with the premises.

•In ; tRe        Building Regulation Application No. S5/2543B appertaining
to alterations to the rear of the West Stand at Hillsborough Stadium which
was listed for Building Regulations approval on 19th July, 1985, I would
have discussed the proposals with the appropriate Officer (the Fire
Service were in possession of duplicate plans) prior to making comment.
My note for file dated 19th July, 1985 refers to my indications that our
comments to Building Control would be delayed pending further discussions
and consideration.

The Officer concerned would be responsible for liaising with the   Building
Control Authorities and/or architect as necessary.




I/DO 132 Ryder RT




                                   &dbrA'
ACO Seaman                                                                                   1.06.89



DO Pearson - East Division



                       D.P. Inspection for Semi Final - Hillsborough

                           Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 1988



On Saturday, 9th          April,      1988,     along    with    Station   Officer

attended     Hillsborough Football Ground arriving at 1345 hours and contacted

Mr          (Ground Safety Officer) at the control centre.



The purpose of the visit was to                 check    all    final   exits    in   case    of   an

emergency,       that      stewards     and     police   were in position to open the exits

should the need arise.



Mr          accompanied us on a tour of the ground when exits and firefighting

equipment        all    appeared      satisfactory.        The    PA    system   was also audible

throughout the ground, random checks were carried out                      by    Station     Officer

           on various stewards to ascertain the emergency code word.



The     tour terminated in the club control room beneath the south stand where

information from all the ground turnstiles on the numbers                        passing     through

are recorded on computer and video cameras monitor the crowd.



Apart     from    minor     defects      i.e.     a   small number of stewards were without

identification (HV jackets) all other arrangements appeared satisfactory.



AS/DG

02.06.89
ACO Seaman                                                                                   1.06.89



DO Pearson - East Division



                    D.P. Inspection for Semi Final - Hillsborough

                           Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 1988



On Saturday, 9th          April,     1988,     along    with     Station   Officer

attended     Hillsborough Football Ground arriving at 1345 hours and contacted

Mr          (Ground Safety Officer) at the control centre.



The purpose of the visit was to                check    all     final   exits    in   case    of   an

emergency,       that     stewards     and     police    were in position to open the exits

should the need arise.



Mr          accompanied us on a tour of the ground when exits and firefighting

equipment     all       appeared     satisfactory.        The    PA     system   was also audible

throughout the ground, random checks were carried out                      by    Station     Officer

Grayson on various stewards to ascertain the emergency code word.



The     tour terminated in the club control room beneath the south stand where

information from all the ground turnstiles on the numbers                        passing     through

are recorded on computer and video cameras monitor the crowd.



Apart     from    minor     defects     i.e.     a     small number of stewards were without

identification (HV jackets) all other arrangements appeared satisfactory.



AS/DG
ACO Seaman                                                                                  1.06.89



DO Pearson - East Division



                    D.P. Inspection for Semi Final - Hillsborough

                           Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 1988



On Saturday, 9th          April,     1988,     along    with     Station   Officer

attended     Hillsborough Football Ground arriving at 1345 hours and contacted

Mr ______ (Ground Safety Officer) at the control centre.



The purpose of the visit was to                check     all   final   exits    in   case    of   an

emergency,       that     stewards     and     police    were in position to open the exits

should the need arise.



Mr          accompanied us on a tour of the ground when exits and firefighting

equipment     all       appeared     satisfactory.         The    PA   system   was also audible

throughout the ground, random checks were carried out                      by   Station     Officer

Grayson on various stewards to ascertain the emergency code word.



The     tour terminated in the club control room beneath the south stand where

information from all the ground turnstiles on the numbers                       passing     through

are recorded on computer and video cameras monitor the crowd.



Apart     from    minor     defects     i.e.     a     small number of stewards were without

identification (HV jackets) all other arrangements appeared satisfactory.



AS/DG

02.06.89
ACO Seaman                                                                                  1.06.89



DO Pearson - East Division



                    D.P. Inspection for Semi Final - Hillsborough

                           Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 1988



On Saturday, 9th         April,      1988,     along    with   Station     Officer

attended     Hillsborough Football Ground arriving at 1345 hours and contacted

Mr          (Ground Safety Officer) at the control centre.



The purpose of the visit was to                check    all    final    exits   in   case    of   an

emergency,       that     stewards     and     police   were in position to open the exits

should the need arise.



Mr          accompanied us on a tour of the ground when exits and firefighting

equipment     all       appeared     satisfactory.       The    PA     system   was also audible

throughout the ground, random checks were carried out                     by    Station     Officer

Grayson on various stewards to ascertain the emergency code word.



The     tour terminated in the club control room beneath the south stand where

information from all the ground turnstiles on the numbers                       passing     through

are recorded on computer and video cameras monitor the crowd.



Apart     from   minor      defects     i.e.     a   small number of stewards were without

identification (HV jackets) all other arrangements appeared satisfactory.



AS/DG

02.06.89
ACO Seaman                                                                                   1.06.89



DO Pearson - East Division



                       D.P. Inspection for Semi Final - Hillsborough

                            Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 1988



On Saturday, 9th           April,     1988,     along    with   Station    Officer

attended     Hillsborough Football Ground arriving at 1345 hours and contacted

M r ( G r o u n d         Safety Officer) at the control centre.



The purpose of the visit was to                 check    all    final   exits    in   case    of   an

emergency,        that     stewards     and     police   were in position to open the exits

should the need arise.



Mr          accompanied us on a tour of the ground when exits and firefighting

equipment        all     appeared     satisfactory.       The    PA     system   was also audible

throughout the ground, random checks were carried out                      by    Station     Officer

Grayson on various stewards to ascertain the emergency code word.



The     tour terminated in the club control room beneath the south stand where

information from all the ground turnstiles on the numbers                        passing     through

are recorded on computer and video cameras monitor the crowd.



Apart     from    minor     defects      i.e.    a   small number of stewards were without

identification (HV jackets) all other arrangements appeared satisfactory.



AS/DG

02.06.89
ACO Seaman                                                                                    1.06.89



DO Pearson - East Division



                       D.P. Inspection for Semi Final - Hillsborough

                            Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 1988



On Saturday, 9th          April,      1988,     along    with     Station   Officer

attended     Hillsborough Football Ground arriving at 1345 hours and contacted

M r ( G r o u n d         Safety Officer) at the control centre.



The purpose of the visit was to                 check    all     final   exits    in   case    of   an

emergency,        that     stewards     and     police   were in position to open the exits

should the need arise.



Mr          accompanied us on a tour of the ground when exits and firefighting

equipment        all     appeared     satisfactory.        The    PA     system   was also audible

throughout the ground, random checks were carried out                       by    Station     Officer

Grayson on various stewards to ascertain the emergency code word.



The     tour terminated in the club control room beneath the south stand where

information from all the ground turnstiles on the numbers                         passing     through

are recorded on computer and video cameras monitor the crowd.



Apart     from    minor     defects      i.e.    a   small number of stewards were without

identification (HV jackets) all other arrangements appeared satisfactory.



AS/DG

02.06.89
ACO Seaman                                                                         01.06.89



Stn.O.



Mr D          (Ground Safety Officer)



     Re. DP Inspection Semi Final Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 09.04.88



At 1345 hours on the 9th April, 1988, myself and DO Pearson met Mr

at the control centre underneath the south stand.



Mr           gave us a guided tour round the whole of the ground, during which

time we were checking the positioning of stewards availability of exits and

fire     equipment,    the    correct    functioning     of the PA system and emergency

lighting.     All of which were satisfactory.



Prior to kick off, we were all together in the             control    room    viewing    the

computer      arrangements       for    counting   the   incoming    fans,   through     the

turnstiles.     It was not made apparent at the time whether or              not   all   the

turnstiles were in use.



Several     stewards   were    questioned    regarding the emergency procedure, all

were familiar.



The inspection revealed minor defects which were forwarded to West Division

on a note for file dated 09.04.88



AS/DG

02.06.89
ACO Seaman                                                                         01.06.89



Stn.O.



Mr            (Ground Safety Officer)



     Re. DP Inspection Semi Final Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 09.04.88



At 1345 hours on the 9th April, 1988, myself and DO Pearson met Mr

at the control centre underneath the south stand.



Mr           gave us a guided tour round the whole of the ground, during which

time we were checking the positioning of stewards availability of exits and

fire     equipment,    the    correct    functioning     of the PA system and emergency

lighting.     All of which were satisfactory.



Prior to kick off, we were all together in the             control   room     viewing    the

computer      arrangements       for    counting   the    incoming   fans,    through    the

turnstiles.     It was not made apparent at the time whether or              not   all   the

turnstiles were in use.



Several     stewards   were    questioned     regarding the emergency procedure, all

were familiar.



The inspection revealed minor defects which were forwarded to West Division

on a note for file dated 09.04.88



AS/DG
ACO Seaman                                                                         01.06.89



Stn.O.



Mr            (Ground Safety Officer)



     Re. DP Inspection Semi Final Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 09.04.88



At 1345 hours on the 9th April, 1988, myself and DO Pearson met Mi(

at the control centre underneath the south stand.



Mr           gave us a guided tour round the whole of the ground, during which

time we were checking the positioning of stewards availability of exits and

fire     equipment,    the    correct    functioning     of the PA system and emergency

lighting.     All of which were satisfactory.



Prior to kick off, we were all together in the             control    room   viewing     the

computer      arrangements       for    counting   the    incoming   fans,   through     the

turnstiles.     It was not made apparent at the time whether or              not   all   the

turnstiles were in use.



Several     stewards   were     questioned    regarding the emergency procedure, all

were familiar.



The inspection revealed minor defects which were forwarded to West Division

on a note for file dated 09.04.88



AS/DG
ACO Seaman                                                                         01.06.89



Stn.O.



Mr            (Ground Safety Officer)



      Re. DP Inspection Semi Final Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 09.04.88



At 1345 hours on the 9th April, 1988, myself and DO Pearson met Mr

at the control centre underneath the south stand.



M*'          pave us a guided tour round the whole of the ground, during which

time we were checking the positioning of stewards availability of exits and

fire     equipment,    the    correct    functioning     of the PA system and emergency

lighting.     All of which were satisfactory.



Prior to kick off, we were all together in the             control   room    viewing     the

computer      arrangements       for    counting   the    incoming   fans,   through     the

turnstiles.     It was not made apparent at the time whether or              not   all   the

turnstiles were in use.



Several     stewards   were     questioned    regarding the emergency procedure, all

were familiar.



The inspection revealed minor defects which were forwarded to West Division

on a note for file dated 09.04.88



AS/DG
ACO Seaman                                                                         01.06.89



Stn.O.



M r ( G r o u n d       Safety Officer)



   Re. DP Inspection Semi Final Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 09.04.88



At 1345 hours on the 9th April, 1988, myself and DO Pearson met Mr D                     Locke

at the control centre underneath the south stand.



             gave us a guided tour round the whole of the ground, during which

time we were checking the positioning of stewards availability of exits and

fire     equipment,    the    correct    functioning     of the PA system and emergency

lighting.     All of which were satisfactory.



Prior to kick off, we were all together in the             control    room    viewing     the

computer      arrangements       for    counting   the   incoming    fans,   through      the

turnstiles.     It was not made apparent at the time whether or              not   all    the

turnstiles were in use.



Several     stewards   were    questioned    regarding the emergency procedure, all

were familiar.



The inspection revealed minor defects which were forwarded to West Division

on a note for file dated 09.04.88



AS/DG
ACO Seaman                                                                         01.06.89



Stn.O.



Mr            (Ground Safety Officer)



     Re. DP Inspection Semi Final Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest 09.04.88



At 1345 hours on the 9th April, 1988, myself and DO Pearson met Mr D                     Locke

at the control centre underneath the south stand.



Mr           gave us a guided tour round the whole of the ground, during which

time we were checking the positioning of stewards availability of exits and

fire     equipment,    the    correct    functioning     of the PA system and emergency

lighting.     All of which were satisfactory.



Prior to kick off, we were all together in the             control   room     viewing     the

computer      arrangements       for    counting   the    incoming   fans,   through      the

turnstiles.     It was not made apparent at the time whether or              not   all    the

turnstiles were in use.



Several     stewards   were    questioned     regarding the emergency procedure, all

were familiar.



The inspection revealed minor defects which were forwarded to West Division

on a note for file dated 09.04.88



AS/DG
It is clear from details given by Mr Collins on the opening day of the

Inquiry      that   turnstile        allocation        for feeding spectators into the

ground from Leppings Lane was drastically different from that shown on

Drg. NO.6705/8A which was approved by                  theOfficer Working Party at its

meeting on 29th July, 1985.               There is      no record      whatsoever of                any

knowledge      on   the     part     of     South    Yorkshire      Fire   Service        of        the

arrangements in use.



In addition the gate in the wall separating the area at                        the    rear           of

the   west     stand   was not shown on Drawing NO.6705/8A.                   What was shown

was a    personnel door which Drawing                NO.6705/14A      indicated      to        be     a

timber     door 838mm wide x          44mm thick and which item 2A of the Officer

Working Party meeting minutes dated 7th                 August,       1985,    describes             as

"the police personnel access gate".                  The Fire Service had no knowledge

of the use of the gate (which is a metal two leaf gate) for passage of

spectators from one side of the wall to the other.



Drawing No. 6705/8A showed that:-



(i)   Turnstiles 1 - 8 would feed the north stand

(ii) turnstiles 9 - 1 3 would feed the north west terrace (standing)

(iii)turnstiles 14 - 16 would feed the north side of the west stand

        (seating)

(iv) turnstiles        17   -      19 would feed the south side of the west stand

        (seats)

(v)   turnstiles 20 - 23            (A-G)    would     feed   the    south    west    terrace

      including the centre pens.
All these        turnstiles      feeding into the north stand side of an imperforate

wall running from turnstile No.17 to the rear of the west stand.



4.   Of the arrangements shown on Drawing NO.6705/8A had been in use                     there

        would    have automatically been a fairly even division of spectators to

        the north and south sides of the wall dividing the reservoir area                  and

        hence    the terraces as well as the west stand.           Of the 10,100 standing

        spectators, 5,300 would have required access to the north side of                  the

        wall    as   follows:-         2,900 to the upper north west corner, 800 to the

        lower north west corner and 1,600 in the north west pen,                 4,800   would

        have    required       access to the south side of the wall including the two

        central pens.        The north stand is fed by      20   turnstiles.      Twelve    at

        Penistone Road and eight at Leppings Lane.



5.   The       effect   of     closing 12 turnstiles to the north stand at Penistone

        Road meant      that     60%   of   9,700   spectators   about   5,800     additional

        spectators      were sent to the Leppings Lane turnstiles in excess of the

        normal capacity gate.          A total of 24,256 compared with      18,456.       This

        is a 31% increase.




AS/DG

reps/inqturnsls
                    USE OF TURNSTILES - LEPPINGS LANE END



From     DO   Grimshaw's      notes of the opening statement by the Counsel to

the Inquiry it is obvious that the use of turnstiles                       to     allow        entry

was     drastically       different     from    that    which     was     considered by the

Officer Working Party at the meeting of 29th July, 1985.                          See Plan No.




It was the understanding of the Fire Service that:-

(i)           Turnstiles      1 - 8 would feed the north stand

(ii)          Turnstiles      9 -13 would feed the north west terrace

(iii)         Turnstiles14 - 16 would feed the north side of the west

              stand seats.

(iv)          Turnstiles 17 - 19 would feed the south                   side    of   the       west

              stand seats

(v)           Turnstiles 20 - 23 would feed the south west terrace

              including the centre pens.

(vi)          The   new    wall     separating the reservoir area at the rear of

              the west stand running from turnstile 17 to a point                       between

              the   two     gents     toilets     in   the   west       stand was to have a

              personnel      access     door    which    would      not    be     for   use       by

              spectators.

(vii)         Turnstiles      1 - 1 6      gave    access    to     home        supporters and

              turnstiles 17 - 23 gave access to away supporters.

(viii)        All gates in fences would be stewarded                 or    policed        at     all

              times.
The     Fire      Service    had       no    knowledge   of   or   involvement      in   the

arrangements for the semi final match which was a matter                    between      the

South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield Wednesday.



It appears that turnstiles were used as follows on the day:-

(i)            Turnstiles    1     -    10   to   feed   the north stand.        The use of

            turnstiles 9 and 10 being achieved by opening a gate in                      the

               separating    fence between the north stand and the north west

            terrace access routes.

(ii)        Turnstiles 11 - 16 were used to feed the west stand (it

            appears the whole of it).

(iii)       Turnstiles 17 - 23 to feed 10,100 people into                  the     standing

            terraces.       See plan attached.



The flow rate via a turnstile is given at 750 maximum persons per hour

by the Green Guide.         Based on the these figures,            the   time    taken   to

gain    entry to various parts of the ground via the July 1985 proposals

was as follows and the number of persons per minute to be stewarded is

calculated.
When     the       1985    alterations were made       the pens and the turnstiles and the

wall was constructed across the reservoir area at                  the    rear     of     the   west

stand,       it    was     the understanding of the Fire Service Officer who attended

the Working Party meeting that:-


1.     (i)     Turnstiles 1 - 8 would feed half to the north stand e.g.
               9882
               —-— = 4941 spectators via 8 turnstiles (How many from Penistone
                          Road end fed the east side of the north stand?) = 10

                                                            4941
                  8 x 750 = 6000 in 1 hour therefore          — = 50 mins to fill -
                                                            6000
               maximum number to steward is 100 per min.



       (ii) Turnstiles 9 - 1 3 would feed the north west                 terrace        2,900   plus

                  1.600    in   the north side of the west terrace. A total of 2,900 +

                  1.600 + 800 = 5,300 via 5 turnstiles, therefore, 5 x 750 =                    3,750

               =     1    hr    25   mins   to fill.   Maximum number to steward is 63 per

               minute.



       (iii)Turnstiles 14 - 16 would feed the seats in the north side of the

               west stand (was all of this stand fed via the access stair to the
                                                                        4465
               north stand on the side for the FA cup semi?) a total of —-— =

               2233 therefore 3 x 750 - 2,250 = lhr to fill.              Maximum number to

                  steward = 12.5 x 3 = 38 per minute

       (iv) Turnstiles 17 - 19 to feed the south side of the west stand

               therefore 2,233 spectators via 3 x 750 = 2,250 = 1 hr to fill.

               Maximum number to steward = 12.5 x 3 = 3 8 per minute.

       (v)     Turnstiles 20 - 23 to feed the newly created central pens 2,200 +

                  2.600 on the south west terrace, therefore, 4,800 to be filled

               via 4 turnstiles 4 x 750 = 3,000 =                  1 hr 36 mins to fill.
                                                            3000
               Maximum number to steward per minute 12.5 x 4 = 50 persons.
The    door   in       the    new   wall   was   for    personnel        access    only      (not

spectators).



All gates in fences would either be stewarded or covered by                          a    police

officer.

Note

Turnstiles are likely to pass more on a 750 pph, 12.5 pm at all-ticket

matches where giving of change is not involved.                    If this raised to           15

pm = 900 p hr.



It     is clear from the opening statement by Counsel to the Inquiry that

alternative turnstile arrangements were implemented on the day of                            the

semi     final.        This   was completely without the knowledge of the South

Yorkshire Fire Service.



The turnstile provision for 10,100               standing     supporters          amounted    to

only 7.     At a rate of 750 persons per hour per turnstile it would have

taken 2 hours to get all spectators into the ground.



The small gate in the           wall    dividing      the   rear    of    the     west     stand

(understood       by    the    Fire    Service   to    be    a personnel door) was, it

appears, left open and was the only way by which spectators could gain

access     to the north west terrace which had a capacity of 1,600 (north

west pen) plus 800 lower part of north terrace plus 2,900                         upper    part

of the north terrace.           A total of 5,300 people.



It    would be absolutely essential to provide clear direction signs and

active stewarding/policing to ensure overcrowding did not occur and to

ensure     even    distribution        of supporters.       This does not seem to have

happened.
8.      Had the Fire Service been aware of these arrangements, I feel sure        we

     would        have expressed our   concern even though it was not directly our

        affair.    Whilst this is speaking with hindsight, it seems      clear   that

        the   decision to close turnstiles to the north stand at Penistone Road

        led to more supporters and less turnstiles      at   Leppings   Lane.    This

        would contribute to a build up of fans outside the ground and was made

        worse by the seeming lack of stewarding of spectators inside.



9.      These factors seem to have been the main cause of the problems leading

        to the disaster.     The South Yorkshire Fire Service had no knowledge of

        the arrangements.     The same semi-final match took place in 1988 and it

     will be instructive to find out what things were done differently then

        than in 1989.




AS/DG

reps/inqturnsls
1.   The gates in the pitch perimeterfence were not included as part of the

        calculation      of    emergency evacuation time.       Tjhis is because the exit

        routes to the rear down the tunnel, around the north and              south     sides

        of    the   west terrace     and laterally via the gates at the rear of the

        radial fences were considered adequate.



2.   Because of the low fire exposure risk presented by the west stand,                    it

        was    considered      very unlikely that ny exit route would become blocked

        by fire and there was no indication of any structural               problems    which

        might lead to a collapse.



3.      Because     of   the    lack of fire hazard, an evacuation time of 8 minutes

        could be used and this meant that 5 x 60 x 8            =   2,400   persons     could

        evacuate in 8 minutes. Since the capacity of the pens was about 1,000

        the pens could theoretically empty in about                 x 8 = 3.34 mins =

        3 mins 20 seconds


4.   A properly packed terrace is regarded           as     a   relatively     safe    place.

        Dangers are most likely to arise at the time of leaving.




AS/DG

reps/inqturnsls
                 STATEMENT OF T J ROWLAND - T.DO 265 - WEST DIVISION




At approximately 1000 hours on 9th August, 1988, I attended a                   meeting      at

Hammerton     Road Police Station.        The meeting was called by South Yorkshire

Police to discuss the          operational   attendance    at    Hillsborough        football

ground during the forthcoming season.



I    was the only person from the fire service to attend.             Two officers from

the ambulance service attended and various police               officers.       I    remember

Chief Insp. Beal attended from South Yorkshire Police.



A     lot of talk took place into the ambulance service's role with reference

to a holding area for ambulances etc.            I was asked who     would      attend,      in

the    event of an emergency from the fire service.             I told the meeting that

it was not normal that a fire appliance would attend unless                  requested       in

an emergency which would normally be received at Fire Service Control from

the police and that it was essential that we received an accurate                    message

as    to   what    the incident was and the exact location of such incident.                  I

was asked which fire appliances and what routes            would     be     taken    to     the

ground.      I    told   the    meeting   that   it   was not possible to state which

appliances would attend as the pre-determined attendance                  may   be    out    at

another     incident     at the time of call and therefore appliances from other

stations would form the first attendance and that that was the reason                       why

ample information on the first call from the police was necessary.



Following     the    meeting,     I   did not receive any minutes of the meeting or

further communication with the police on this matter.
