                                                                 -ft. ~


«




      Statement by P. Wells 11 v. Supt. Woodseats Comb. Division Sheffield S.J.A.

    On Saturday 15th April 1989 I was on duty at Hillsborough Stadium Sheffield
    for the Semi Pinal between Liverpool & Notts.Forest. Two St. John Ambulances
    and 25 personnel with 8 Cadets aged between 14 to 16 were in attendance.
    SYMA5 were also in attendance with at least- two ambulances on standby.
    r~ ^ I n line with policy discussed previously with the Police, I dispersed
    our Ambulances. One was outside the First Aid room under the North Stand.
    The other was parked in the car park at the rear of the South Stand. St. John
    personnel were in attendance from 1.00 p.m. By 2.15 teams were in attendance
    in all four corners of the ground and Radio communication was set up between
    all the teams and the First Aid room. A trolley stretcher was in the South
    Stand/Kop corner and another one in the corner between the North 4 Vest Stands.
    Other stretchers ,of the wire mesh type,were available in the First Aid room.
             At 2.45 I toured the ground to check all was in order with our
    personnel. Shortly after the Kick off, I noticed fans climbing over the
     perimeter fence in front of the West Stand. I saw St. John personnel move
     in from the adjacent corners and as no message came over the radio I went
     to see if they needed assistance. On arrival it was obvious that fans were
     being crushed against the fence and that we were goin^ to have casualties.
     All available St.John members inside the ground were summoned to assist.
             It became very obvious that the weight of fans from the back was not
     decreasing and the people against the barrier and fence were being crushed
     tighter and some were unable to breathe. There was no possible way we could
     get to these people or assist them until the fans at the back were moved.
     The faces of the fans at the front were becoming congested and their difficulty
     in breathing was obvious. I took                     who was on his first duty with
     St. John, w i t h me to fetch the oxygen cylinder from the Ambulance behind the
     South Stand. When we arrived back at the scene I fed the tube through the
     mesh of the fence and attemted to administer oxygen to as many of the trapped
     fans as I could reach. One young girl had her arms pinned to her side, and
     because of the pressure had vomited, her face was pressed tight against the
     fence and I tried to clear the vomit from her mouth and hold her tongue
     forward to clear her airway. I shouted to her and she looked at me, then
      she gave a horrible gurgle, rolled her eyes up into her head and died.
              This was happening all along the fence, people were dying because
      no one could get to them. As the fans were pulled out of the gates by the
      Police, our members, along with the Police, Doctors and volunteer fans were
      attempting to resuscitate people. C.P.R. was being carried out wherever I
      looked. I then took the oxygen cylinder and started working amongst the
      ones who were alive but needed help in restoring breathing back to normal.
      Vnilst I was doing this I came across our members still valiantly trying
      to save limes by M.T.M. even though the casualties were vomiting and bleeding
      they were not deterred. Some of the Cadets were assisting in holding open
      airways and comforting casualties. Liverpool fans were using advertising boards
      to transport casualties and bodies away from the scene. Some of the casualties
      were so badly injured by crushing that their chest wall had collapsed making
      heart compressions impossible.
A Major disaster plan had been put into effect by the Police and more
Ambulances and the Fire Service arrived. I asked the Police if they wanted
us to assist SYMAS in the removal of casualties to hospital and both our
Ambulances were put at their disposal. A/M F.Godley and myself,along with
our crews, started taking casualties to the Northern GenSal H^piJfl!
After several trips we were told we were no longer needed, so we parked the
           311(1 made OU^ Way **** to the W r 8 t Aid room where casualties were
up“ o                      Pt’        lnf° ™ ed " e that the “ > ^ 1 Ho. of dead
H v p r J , 7 ld 1ike to.place on record the fact that the conduct of the
t£ I+^      Ja? S ,wh° assisted was fantastic as were the efforts of the Fblice
Doctors and indeed our own personnel. A tragedy of this magnitude has never*
occured in Sheffield before when we have been on duty, I hope it will never
               Jut I ’® sure the people who were on duty at Hillsborough know
in their hearts that they could cope*

                                      P.Wslls Div.Supt.
                                      V/oodseats Comb. Division.
