                                                                              0



We set off from Thorpe Hesley just after 1 pm, travelling through
Bcclesfield along Wheel Lane to the traffic lights ,at Halifax Road,
Grenoside.     The road was *ery busy and many young people were
congregated around wrery pub from Bcclesfield onwards.
We waited for the 3 cadets in Grenoside Main Street.     They arrived
just before 1.30 pm and we drove from there down towards Wadsley
Bridge along Pox Hill Road.     We parked on one of the housing estate
roads further away from the ground than usual, Baxter Drive, as our
usual spot on Baxter Road was already occupied.
We arrived at the ground just before 2 pm.                and
                  were in the first aid room and had set out the equipment
and re—arranged the room as a large crowd was anticipated at the match.

We were detailed to escort our cadets to the Leppings Lane end of th®
north stand.                    and his cadet son were already in position.
             was in radio communication with St John Control.

There was a pleasant, friendly atmosphere in the ground.        The sun was
shining and it was pleasantly warm.     A man dressed in Liverpool red
trousers, jumper and top hat and 'puppets' on his hands approached a
policeman and put his arm round him.    The policeman calmly responded to
the good humour and gestured him back*     The man responded immediately
and danced to the end of the stand, encouraging those on the c o m e r
'terrace to cheer.    By this time the man was stood on the wall bo the
policeman tugged gently at his trouser leg bottom asking him to move up
the stand.     This he did.

               and      made plans in case of incident, how they would
approach the crowd as a team, ie, themselves and the 2 oldest cadets
would set off together, leaving myself and the 2 younger ones in the

corner.
At around 2.45 Pm we organised our seating arrangements, noting the lack
of spectators behind us in the wings.     One youth was standing on the
flat top of a barrier which went up at an angle of 45°•      There was plenty
of room around him, no-one within reach.      If he was to fall he could only
injure himself.      A young man had earlier been escorted to the first aid
room and on returning was told to go into the wing seotion by the steward.
We placed the plastic sheet on the wall and covered it with a blanket
for our 3 cadets to sit on, sitting on the stretcher ourselves N 3 adults
and one cadet).      There were still no spectators behind us.    We are very
conscious if spectators are behind as they complain that they cannot
see the match.   Prom our seated position we were conscious of spectators
climbing over the internal fencing and others being pulled up from the
terraces into the stand.      On previous occasions the police have stopped
them.   This did not appear to happen.     The teams arrived on the pitch.
Fans were climbing the front fence.      This at that time appeared to be
caused by enthusiasm for the teams.      The fans were not instructed to
get down as forcibly as in the past.

A photographer beckoned for assistance,                  and      went over,
followed by the 2   15   year olds.
I went to the terraces as instructed by the photographer.          On arriving
I saw blue faces forced against and through the wire mesh railings.              A
large man was asking me to do something as a small ohild was in front
of him crushed against the fencing.       I tried to reassure him that every
effort was being made to clear the terraces by the police.          I could not
get in to the terrace but spectators were trying to climb over the fence
Moving along the fence towards the door I helped remove a man's trapped
arm from round the gate post.      I led him onto the field and sat him down
Seated on the ground was a young boy who suffered from asthma.           I asked
his friend if he had an inhaler for his condition.         The reply was that
it was in the coach.    After reassuring and comforting him he appeared
to be in ho further danger.

An older man came dazed towards me, he was very pale and I escorted him
towards the centre of the pitch away from the congestion.          He told me he
was alright and that others were in greater need.

I went back towards the fence.      Spectators were telling the police that
they ought to pull the fence down, and reference was made to the miners'
strike.

Someone, probably a policeman, sent me over to a man who he thought had
had a heart attack.    He had some pain in his chest but as I talked to
him he did not want assistance, he had someone with him.

Shortly after this I found a man lying on the floor with a blue face,
unconscious, with no carotid pulse and not breathing.          A woman offered
  —asrsxirt";— I— cirecic©d the a irway ~ no obstruction — stud eonusoncs^i—
artificial ventilation with the woman givirig the compressions to my
counting.    We continued for some time.     I observed that there was no
movement and he seemed to become stiff, we stopped.         I looked around in
a vain attempt to find a doctor who cbuld check that he was dead.              I put
him in the recovery position.

A man was laid on the floor, again with a blue face, unconscious, no
pulse or breathing.    A bystander spoke.to me and I understood him to
say that he was his father, and could we do something for him.           The
spectator cleared his airway on my instructions and tilted his head
back.     He held the nose and filled the lungs with air.       On depressing
the rib-cage the mouth filled with foreign material.          The bystander
cleared it away again and ?ave another breath.         At each compression
the mouth filled with foreign material.        He continued attempting to give
mouth to mouth and cardiac massage but concluded that he was dead.     By
this time a lot of stretchers were being carried past and bodies being
covered by police.   At some time I walked over to the corner where we
had sat, I was trying to check the safety of the cadets.    Someone told
me that they were all safe by the ambulance room.
I spent some time moving dazed people away from the fence into the middle
of the pitch to facilitate the rescue of those still trapped.

I walked with someone into the middle of the pitch and met ____________
nursing cadet.    She was in a distressed state and I escorted her to the
first aid room.    I then assisted around the first aid room.   There va«3
still a number of people awaiting transfer to hospital.    I checked
whether transport was available for the walking wounded.
