                                                                            0
                             STATEMENT OP

                             N/SGT. ECCLESALL COMB, DIV.


          PUBLIC DUTY AT HILLSBORO. S.W. FOOTBALL CLUB
          SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989.


13.30     Arrived at Ground and signed in.
          helped to arrange casualty dressing table - moved couches round to give
          more room and generally made room ready to receive any casualties.

14.15     Male casualty with Higk B.P. - rested and reassured.
approx.

14.30     Male casualty with upset stomach - rested.
approx.

   45     Male casualty misplaced contact lens, helped him with a mirror.
approx.

14.50     Walked into the ground to survey the crowd, went back into the P.A. room
approx.   when both teams came out on the pitch.

15.15     Young boy - Asthma attack due to being crushed, inhaler in brother's car.
approx.   Encouraged him to breathe better - Shock.

15.15     Male teenager - crushed ribs - left side.
approx.   At this stage we received word that there was trouble of enormous
          preportions and after this the time was not noted again due to pressure
          of work and the countless number of casualties. Names and addresses of
          some of the casualties were not able to be recorded.
          Casualty - Male fractured ankle - couch.
          Casualty - Male arm fractured in two places.         This patient extremely
          shocked, kept repeating "Am I going to lose my arm". County Ambulance-men
          were called in order to administer a pain killing drug but casualty refused.
          A final year medical student came in and asked where he could help.   I
          advised h im to go on to the pitch to try to resuscitate.

          County Ambulance—men brought a wire splint for the fractured arm. Patient
          remained in the P.A. room, as he was not now an urgent case because of change
          of circumstances.
          Stretcher bearers brought an unconscious patient in (male) and put him on the
          floor. Another fan came with him but was hysterical so I asked him to go out
          and find all the rest of his mates.

          The ankle injury lay holding hands with the unconscious casualty shouting to
          him to "hold on" and please talk.
          On examining this casualty I found he had deteriorated and with the help of
          another nurse lifted him onto the couch, put him into the recovery position
          and summoneda Doctor. The Doctor came and pronounced him stable.
          A male cadet was asked to keep a watch on his airway which he did until
          casualty was transferred to hospital.
                         -   2   -




Outside the P.A. room I helped to attend numerous casualties with multiple
injuries mostly due to crushing.
On making rounds outside, I found casualties who appeared to be alive, but
on examination had no heart-beat, so I commenced resuscitation until told
to stop by a Doctor. I tried to revive 3 young men, but apparently they
had been dead sometime but hadn't been certified.
A male casualty outside the P.A. room who had bad internal injuries was
getting very agitated about letting his wife know that he wasn*t dead.
At this point X approached a Policeman to ask if the few names X had
managed to get would be any help to relatives who would be enquiring, he
said he would let me know.
Someone brought a young man in named       who was extremely shocked and
very upset as he had lost his brother and was convinced he was dead. I
comforted him and said I would try to find someone to help him.
The Policeman I had spoken to earlier came to take me into the mortuary
to speak to an Inspector. I waited a short time, but after seeing the
Police Inspector's problems in the mortuary I decided to wait until a later
time.
Before leaving I helped to console a relative who had come into identify
a deceased, but later passed her into the hands of the Club's Chaplain.
Checked on all my casualties once more. Most severe had left by ambulance,
walking cases were going into Police vans.
The fractured ankle cascualty had gone into shock and was sobbing
uncontrollably, he had reassured all the casualties in the P.A. room, now
they were leaving he suddenly thought about himself.
Looked out again and did the "rounds" once more, sent a female cadet to try
to get peoples names etc.
A Policeman came into the P.A. room in deep shock, he cried and I did what I
could to help him, he thanked me and left.
Every casualty had someone looking after them no matter what their injuries
were.
Three Doctors arrived from the "Hallamshire Hospital", they had run d.1 the
way, and the female Doctor was exhausted. I thanked them all, but after
having a brief rest they set off back to the Hallamshire.
Male casualty came in with a slashed finger - dressed.
Pemale casualty brought in with a fractured elbow, I was applying a triangular
bandage around her arm and body to steady the injured arm when I was called
to an emergency outside. I ’m afraid I didn't see that patient again but
assumed she went on to hospital.
Mr. Ball - middle aged - had been found unconscious, brought into the'P.A.
room when he had recovered. He was accompanied by a young man, but was
distressed as he had lost his son and another young man. I tried to comfort
him and suggested different things and places that his son could be. All
particulars were taken and we left him in the Police's hands.
I*


                               - 3 -




           who had lost his brother earlier came in and, wept with joy as
     he had found him. We hugged each other and I told this tale to Mr. Ball
     hoping it would cheer him a little.
     A boy about 12 years of age was brou^it in with shock, but on examining
     him, I found he had been pressed into something which had a screw in it,
     part of whatever it was had remained in his abdomen making a deep
     impression. He was transferred to hospital.
     On looking round I was surprised to find all the casualties had been
     removed, just St. John and Police left.
                 Ambulance man at Ecclesall Comb. Div. arrived to see if he
     could help.        |was unable to be at Hillsboro, owing to being
     elsewhere for St. John.
     A Doctor unknown to us came to thank us all in turn.
     "Well Done" he said.

     Left Hillsboro by ambulance at 18.00.

     Arrived home at 19.00.




                                                              M   -   •
