SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY          N O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as it
                                          contains     exempt         information
FINANCE A N D GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE- within para. . . . S ? : • • • • • • • • of
                                          Sch.l2A to the Local Government
8 DECEMBER 1989
                                          Act 1972 as amended.

H ILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY - CLAIMS FOR COMPENSATION

Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer

       Matter for Consideration
1.1    Conduct of the claims for compensation in consequence of concessions made
       to the Hillsborough Steering Committee on 30 November.
       Information
2.1    On 30 November an announcement was made that it had been decided by the
       A u t h o r i t y ’s insurers that whatever the rights and wrongs of the
       Hillsborough Stadium disaster it was inappropriate for persons who were
       injured to have to await the outcome of a further lengthy hearing in 1990
       before receiving compensation. Accordingly, without a decision on
       liability, some of the claims are to be paid with the amount of
       compensation to be agreed if possible, and failing agreement, to be
       assessed by the court.
2.2    So far over 770 claims have been received but it is only the following
       categories of claims which will in the first instance be p a i d :-
       1   Deceased and injured in pens 3 and 4.
       2   Nervous shock suffered by people in pens 3 and 4 and close relatives
            of those who died or were injured in those pens.
       3   Nervous shock suffered by rescuers. Claims from elsewhere in the
           ground, particularly in the tunnel leading to the Leppings End and the
            turnstile area will also be considered on receipt of details but at
           this juncture are not technically part of the concession.
2.3    These concessions still leave the issue of proportionate liability as
       between the various parties, Chief Constable, Sheffield Wednesday Football
       Club, their engineers and Sheffield City Council, unresolved. This will
       be dealt with by the issue of a fresh Writ by the Chief Constable against
       these parties claiming full contribution to the settlement of the claims.
       In the event of no agreement being reached between the parties as to their
       respective liabilities, members can expect a trial on this issue but it
       may well be this will be delayed until after the criminal and police
       disciplinary aspects of the disaster have been resolved.
2.4   As outlined above, this may still mean court actions by claimants. There
      will, no doubt, be some claims such as some of the nervous shock claims
      from people who were not even at the ground where no form of liability
      will ever be admitted. There will be other claims where the insurers are
      quite prepared to make a payment but cannot agree the amount; these are
      likely to be the more severe cases of injury. Ultimately such cases too
      will have to be resolved by the courts.
2.5   Members will have seen press reports putting the final cost of the
      Hillsborough claim at £50 m. There has been much speculation, fuelled in
      the main by solicitors acting for the claimants, on the final cost.
      Members of course will be interested in this because of the A u t ho ri ty ’s
      insurance limit of £8.5 m. It is the considered opinion of the
      A u t h o r i t y ’s solicitor that the estimate of £50 m is a wild exaggeration.
      Whether the Police Authority will ultimately have to bear any part of the
      cost will be determined by two factors; the final bill and the extent of
      the po li ce ’s liability. Whatever the outcome, the A ut h o r i t y ’s solicitor
      is reasonably confident at this juncture that the insurance cover will
      prove to be sufficient.
3     Recommendation
3.1   That the report be noted.




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer
