                                                                               S>-
                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE                              C-OVJ lA f-O .
                                        POLICE AUTHORITY
R .C . Johnston B . A ., I .P .F .A .                                                    P .O . B ox 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                             R egent Street
                                                                                             Barnsley
                                                                             South Yorkshire S70 2 P Q
                                                                    T e le p h o n e Barnsley (0226) 733222

Our Ref.         RCJ/                        Your R ef                     Date:   19 May 1989
This matter is being dealt with by       Mr R C Johnston                   Telephone ext:   341




               Dear Member

               HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY : FINANCING OF WEST MIDLANDS POLICE INQUIRY
           Following the meeting of the Finance and General Purposes Committee I wrote to
           the Secretary of State to seek his confirmation that the full cost of the West
           Midlands inquiry (and we are talking of several million £s) would be borne by
           central government. I attach a note of an officer level meeting held in
           consequence from which you will see that the Home Office is taking the view that
           the costs are chargeable, at least in the first instance, to the Police
           Authority.

           It was agreed at the meeting that a meeting at political level should be                       held as
           a matter of urgency to resolve this disagreement and Sir Jack has agreed                       that
           this is the appropriate way forward.

           I will write to you again when it has been decided when the meeting should take
           place and in what form. In the meantime please let me know if you have any
           comments.
           Yours sincerely




           R I uqjmston
           Clerk and Financial Officer




  r                                                        n
           ■
           To:     All Members of the Authority
           cc:     Mr P Wright CBE, Chief Constable
                   Mr D Vaughan
  L                                                        J
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY

FINANCING OF WEST MIDLANDS POLICE INQUIRY

Notes of a meeting at the Home Office on Thursday. 18 May 1989

Present:   Messrs J Addison, N Nagler, E Soden, F Archer, S Waghorn and
           Ms P Ransford - Home Office
           Messrs R C Johnston and T Watson - South Yorkshire Police Authority

1     The purpose of the meeting was    to discuss the financing of the inquiry
       into the Hillsborough Disaster   being carried out by the West Midlands
       Police following a letter from   the Police Authority to the Home Secretary
       seeking his assurance that the   cost would be met by central government.
2     The Home Office starting point was set out by Mr Addison as follows.
2.1   The inquiry was started at the initiative of the Chief Constable of South
       Yorkshire who had invited the Chief Constable of West Midlands to carry
       out an investigation into the happenings at Hillsborough Stadium on
       Saturday, 15 April 1989. While the Home Secretary had made it clear that
       the work to be carried out would be "at the service of Lord Justice
       Taylor"its principle focus was connected with policing in South Yorkshire
       and the actions of some of the members of the South Yorkshire Force would
       be central to the inquiry. Consequently the financing of the
       investigation should be met, at least in the first instance, by South
       Yorkshire Police Authority.
2.2   It was important that the discussion should concentrate on the principle
      of the issue rather than the financial detail.
3     The South Yorkshire position was as follows.
3.1   The last point of the Home Office statement was agreed.
3.2   While the first steps to set up the West Midlands investigation had been
      taken by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, this initiative had quite
      properly been overtaken within 48 hours by the announcement of an inquiry
      to be headed by Lord Justice Taylor. The choice of West Midlands as the
      appropriate Force had been made by the Home Office and it was to Lord
      Justice Taylor that the Chief Constable of the West Midlands was reporting
      exclusively. The scope of Lord Ta yl or ’s inquiry went far beyond policing
      of South Yorkshire in to questions at a national level of "the needs of
      crowd control and safety at sports grounds".
3.3   The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire was himself devoting substantial
      resources in to carrying out an investigation in to the events of 15 April
      for the purpose of briefing his own Counsel for the public enquiry.
3.3   In view of the national nature of the inquiry and the fact that West
      Midlands Chief Constable was reporting to Lord Justice Taylor, the full
      cost of his work should be met by central government.
4     After this initial statement of positions a number of further points were
      made including:
4.1   Agreed that the West Midlands inquiry probably did not fall under Section
       14 of the Police Act 1964.
4.2   Nonetheless Mr Addison proposed that mutual aid was a reasonable basis for
       sharing the cost between South Yorkshire and central government (for
       example the m i n e r s ’ strike had seen a limit placed on local expenditure of
       the equivalent of a 34P rate - approximately Elm).
4.3   Considerable discussion as to the notional scale of the West Midlands
       investigation if no national inquiry had been established.
4.4   Relevance of West Midlands investigation to national aspects of Lord
       T ay l o r ’s inquiry.
4.5   Financial resources of South Yorkshire Police Authority and degree of
       insurance against claims.
4.6   Urgent need for decision as West Midlands were incurring substantial
       expenditure and seeking reimbursement.
5     South Yorkshire stated that it might accept a proportion of the total cost
       of police inquiries (including those of its own force) on the basis
       originally set out in the Home Office letter of 8 May 1989. This would
       take in to account the relative relevance of the work to policing in South
       Yorkshire as against the national question of safety at sports grounds.
       It was important that the government should accept that its contribution
       reflected the national importance of the inquiry rather than the financial
       inability of South Yorkshire Police Authority to meet the total cost.
6     The Home Office could not accept this last principle.
7     It was agreed that the difference in approach between the two sides
       demanded an urgent meeting at political level.




RCJ/
19 Mav 1989
