SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
29TH SEPTEMBER 1989

PRESENT:
Councillor Sir John Layden (in the Chair)
Councillors: G G allimore (Vice-Chairman), D A Axe, C J C Betts, J M Cromar,
             R Fisher, D W George, C Swindell, C M Walayat, J Wood
M ag istrate Members: Mrs B R Bullivant, K Goodall, H D Hepworth, Dr H H Smith,
                      D E Wilburn.
81.   MINUTES
       RESOLVED -
       1. That the Minutes of the m eetings of the Aut ho r it y held on 14th and
           18th Aug us t 1989 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
       2. That the detailed report on the R ecommendations of the Interim Report
           of the Inquiry by the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor into the
           Hillsborough Stadium D isaster referred to in Min ut e 49 of 14th Aug us t
           1989 be considered at a Special Meeting of the Police Authority, and
           that progress reports be submitted to subsequent scheduled meetings
           of the Authority.
82.   MINUT E S OF COMMITTEES,   ETC
A.    Working Party on Equal     O pp or t un it i es in the South Yorkshire Police - 7th
       September 1989
       In accordance with Finance and General Purposes C ommittee Minute 10.2 or
       29th July 1988, the Minutes of the meeting of the Working Party on Equal
       O pp ortunities in the South Y orkshire Police held on 7th September 1989
       were submitted.
       The Aut ho r it y discussed the intent of Minute 4 (Service Delivery Aspects
       of Policing) and considered that the R ecommendations did not fully
       reflect what the Working Party had had in mind.
       RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Working Party on Equal
       O pp ortunities in the South Y or kshire Police held on 7th September 1989
       (set out as Appendix "A" to these Minutes) be agreed and the
       recommendations set out therein confirmed, subject to the Recommendation
       in Minute 4 being withdrawn in favour of a report to the next meeting of
       the Police A ut hority on just the Service Delivery Aspects of Policing
       referred to in the Report mentioned.
B.     Accountability, Complaints and Dis ci p li ne C om mittee - 8th September 1989
        The Minutes of the meeting of the Accountability, Complaints and
        Discipline Committee held on 8th September 1989 were submitted.
        RESOLVED - T hat the Minutes of the meeting of the Accountability,
        Complaints and Discipline Committee held on 8th September 1989 (set out
        as App en d ix "B" to these Minutes) be agreed and confirmed.
Finance and General Purposes C ommittee - 15th September 1989
The Minutes of the meeting of the Finance and General Purposes Committee
held on 15th September 1989 were submitted.
The Clerk and Financial Officer confirmed that the urgent meeting with
West Midlands Police A uthority Members (referred to in Minute 13c(ij) had
taken place last week and that a greement had been reached on outstandinhg
matters.
RESOLVED - That the Minute of the meeting of the Finance and General
Purposes Committee held on 15th September 1989 (set out as Appendix "C"
to these Minutes) be agreed and confirmed.
NOTES OF DIVISIONAL REVIEW PANELS
The Notes of the meetings of the following Divisional Review Panels were
considered:-
(i) "E" (Sheffield South) - 3 1st August,  1989
(i i )"B " (Barnsley)     - 4th September, 1989
The A uthority discussed various matters raised in the Notes.
RESOLVED -

1. That the Notes of the Divisional Review Panels now submitted be
    received.
2. That it be noted that a report on a possible extension of the Lay
    Visitors Scheme is being prepared for submission to a future meeting
    of the Police Authority.
3. That it be noted that, upon receipt of detailed information from the
    Sheffield City Council's D ep artment of Design and Building Services,
    r epresentations are to be made to both the Home Office and the
    Suppliers of the cell door electronic locks.
4. That, should the information be readily available, the Chief
    C onstable be requested to report on the proportion of black people
    charged and sentenced in South Yorkshire..-
5. That, whilst noting the reference to allegations of threatening
    racist letters, the A uthority note the Chief Constable's assurance,
    that he has no evidence of the individual case mentioned being part
    of a series of such letters and that the case is being fully
    investigated.
6. That all recommendations on possible Force Objectives for 1990 be
   considered as part of the normal consultation process leading to the
   Authority's consideration of such Objectives.
CRIME SUMMARY AND STATISTICS
The Chief Constable submitted the Crime Summary and Statistics for the
period 1st January to 31st Aug us t 1989.
Compared with Aug us t 1988, there had been an increase of 8.05% in
recorded crime (4.37% over the whole period), with a detection rate of
46.23% (43.74% over the whole period).
Whilst acknow le dg i ng that the rate of increase was slowing and that six
extra detective constables had been drafted into the "B" (Barnsley)
Division, the Aut ho r it y expressed concern that the crime figures for the
Division still compared u n f a v o ur ab l y with other Divisions of the Force on
both a committed and detected crime basis. The Chief Constable was asked
w ha t further proposals he had in mind to stem the horrendous rise in the
Division and to improve and increase the detection rate.
The Chief Constable pointed out that, since the drafting of the six extra
d etective constables into the "B" (Barnsley) Division, he had not
received any furth e r requests from the Divisional Commander for
additional resources. However, as suggested, he would look at the case
loads in the Division and c onsider r e- deployment of resources should this
be the appropriate response.
In response to a query from the Authority, the Chief Constable expressed
the f irm view that morale in the "F" (Sheffield North) Division remained
good and was not considered to be a factor in the B urglary (Dwellings)
crime figure in the Division.
The A ut hority also discussed the Sexual Offences figures (particularly in
the “A" (Doncaster) Division), and the Domestic Violence figures.
RESOLVED -
1.   That the contents of the report be noted.
2.   That the Chief Constable be requested to submit a report to the
     A uthority on the extent of the Domestic Violence figures so far as
     they can be defined in South Yorkshire and on measures considered to
     be approp ri at e to deal with the problem.
CRIME PRE VE N TI ON REPORT
The Chief Constable submitted a report on crime prevention activities
during the period 1st June to 31st August 1989.
RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
COMMUNITY ACT IO N TRUST "CRIMESTOPPERS" SCHEME
The Chief Constable submitted a report on the p ar ticipation of the South
Y orkshire Police in the Yorkshire regional "Crimestoppers" Scheme
initiated by the C ommunity Action Trust.
The report also recalled the bac kg r ou nd and method of operation of the
Scheme, and outlined the results of the Scheme since its commencement in
this area on 8th March 1989.
In m a n po w er terms, a detective constable from the Force was t emporarily
attached to the Wakefield based "Crimestoppers" unit. The Chief
Constable confirmed that the s ec on d me nt was the only cost to the
Authority. Whilst the officer was phy si c al ly deployed in Wakefield, the
results to date indicated that this was to the advantage of the Force. It
was intended to review the results of the initiative in the near future
with a view to continued police participation.
RESOLVED - That the A uthority note the current involvement of the South
Yorkshire Police in and give support to the "Crimestoppers" Scheme.
EQUAL OPPORT UN IT I ES TRAINING
In accordance with the recommendation made by the Working Party on Equal
O pp ortunities in the South Yorkshire Police at its meeting held on the
7th September, the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
submitted a joint report on providing equal opportunities practical
training for 70 civilian s upervisory personnel, t o g et h er with a half-day
seminar for all Police A u t ho r it y Members.
RESOLVED -
1.   That the Authority note the proposed training arrangements for
     civilian supervisory personnel, subject to a ppropriate financial
     provision being included within the 1990/91 Revenue Estimates when
     approved;
2.   That all Police A uthority Members be invited to attend the half-day
     Equal O pp ortunities Seminar to be held on W e d ne s da y 17th January 1990
     at the Barnsley Conference Centre, and be requested to let the Clerk
     and Financial Officer know of their preference on a morning/afternoon
     basis.
FORCE E ST ABLISHMENTS 1990/91
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted recalling Minute 168 of 7th April 1989, and submitting a
letter of reply from the Home Office dated 3 1st July, 1989 to the
r epresentations made to the Secretary of State.
 The A ut hority expressed surprise and concern that the Government was
 apparently still expecting an open-ended commitment from the Police
 Authority whi ls t giving no assurance as to the future level of financial
 support to Police Authorities.
 RESOLVED - That the Clerk and Financial Officer be requested to continue
 his efforts to obtain some form of Government assurance and commitment as
 to the future level of financial support to Police Authorities.
 FOULING OF FOOTPATHS AND PLAYING FIELDS BY DOGS
 Following the representations made in accordance with Minute 11.2 of 12th
 May 1989, the Authority considered a letter dated 14th September 1989
 from the A ss oc iation of Met ro p ol it a n Authorities.
The letter thanked the A uthority for its views, and outlined the steps
being considered to counter the growing problem of dog control and
responsible dog ownership.
RESOLVED -
1.   That, as the original r epresentations followed concern and annoyance
     expressed by the "C" (Rotherham) Divisional Rev ie w Panel, a copy of
     the AMA letter be passed to that Panel.
2.   That the Police A uthority also make representations direct to the
     Government.                                            „ .
3.   That the fouling of footpaths and playing fields by horses and ponies
     be also included in the representations.
P UBLICATION OF INFORMATION ABOUT UNUSED AND UNDERUSED LAND
In accordance with Min ut e 87 of 11th November, 1988 the Clerk and
Financial Officer submitted a further report on the Publication of
Information about Unused and Underused Land owned by Public Bodies now
that the Code of Recommended Practice had been p ublished by the
D ep ar t me nt of the Environment f ol lowing consultations with the Local
A u t ho r it y Associations.
Whilst the Code of Recommended Practice was not mandatory, the Secretary
of State had the power to make regulations requiring Authorities to
comply w it h any provisions of the Code. The covering Circular also
indicated that the proposals set out in the Code were expected to have
minimal net cost and m anpower implications for Authorities.
RESOLVED - That the A uthority adopt the r ecommendations contained in the
Code of R ecommended Practice annexed to DoE Circular 18/89, and that the
Clerk and Financial Officer, t ogether with the Chief Constable take the
necessary steps to compile the appropriate Register and publish
information in accordance with the provisions of the Code.
SPECIAL RESPONSIBILITY ALLOWANCE
The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on the payment of
Special R e s p o n si bi l it y Allowances to Elected Members of the Authority in
1989/90 c on se q ue nt upon the issue by the Secretary of State for the
E nvironment of Statutory Instrument 683/1989.
The Statutory Instrument also increased the prescribed amount of the
daily rate of Att en d an ce A llowance payable to Elected Members of the
Authority.
There was s uf ficient provision within the a ppropriate head of the
A uthority's 1989/90 Revenue Estimates to meet the increased expenditure.
RESOLVED -
1.   That Special R es po nsibility Allowances be paid to Elected Members of
     the A u t ho r it y as set out in paragraph 2.2 of the Report now submitted
     and that, in future years, they be paid on the same percentage basis
     of the figure set by the S ec retary of State for the Environment.
2.     That A t t e n d an ce Allowance continue to be paid to Elected Members of
      the A u t ho r it y at the m a x im u m of the amount fixed by the S ecretary of
      State from time to time.
LIST OF O UT ST ANDING AND/OR R EQ UESTED REPORTS
In accordance with Finance and General Purposes Committee Minute 1.2 of
9th June 1989, a joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the
Chief Constable was submitted an outstanding and/or requested reports.
RESOLVED -
1.    That the contents of the report be noted.
2.    That future reports contain an indication of the anticipated
      submission date(s) to the Authority.
A CCOUNTS 1988/89
The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on the Authority's
Annual Accounts for the year ended 31st March 1989.
Appendices attached to the Report gave a summary of Revenue and Capital
Expenditure for the year (compared with the Revised Estimates), Reserves,
and an explan at io n of the main variations between the Revenue Estimates
and Actual Expenditure.
RESOLVED - That the Report be accepted, and a Summary of the Authority's
1988/89 Accounts be included in the Annual Report.
FINANCIAL PROSPECTS
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted recalling the p ostponement of the Forward Planning Seminar
originally arranged for 14th July and reporting (in the form of a
Presentation) as to the position now reached, the likely future position
and a possible planning process.
The joint report also gave an outline of the main issues and guidelines
to be considered in connection with the preparation of the Joint
Authority 1990/91 Budgets.
Following the Presentations give by the Clerk and Financial Officer and
the Chief Constable, the A u t ho r it y discussed in general terms at this
stage the options and implications raised. Whilst accepting that it was
right and proper for the officers to draw the attention of the A uthority
to the present position, the A uthority pointed out the ever-increasing
Government control of Local A ut hority (including Joint Authority)
finances. Coupled with the f orthcoming introduction of the Community
Charge, there could not be any absolute ring of protection for any
Service in Local Government.
RESOLVED -
 1.   That the officers be thanked for the comprehensive Presentations now
      given.
2.        That the reports now submitted on the options and implications raised
          be r eferred to the Finance and General Purposes Committee for
          detailed initial c on sideration and report back to the Authority.
ITEMS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE ABSENCE OF THE PUBLIC
RESOLVED - That, under Section 100(A)(4) of the Local Government Act
1972, the public be excluded from the meeting for the following items of
business on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure of ® xe,JPj
information as defined in paragraphs 1, 8 or 9 of Schedule 12A of the Act
as appropriate.
APPEALS PANEL - 11TH AND 12TH SEPTEMBER 1989
The Minutes of the meeting of the Appeals Panel held on 11th and 12th
September 1989 to hear an appeal against dismissal were submitted.

RESOLVED -
1.        That the Minutes of the meeting of the Appeals Panel held on 11th and
          12th September 1989 now s ubmitted be received and approved.
2.        That the Police Authority record that, as a m a t t e r of principle, it
          does not condone the taping or bugging of tel ep h on e conversations
          outside of the Home Secretary's Guidelines.
PREMISES
 E cclesfield D & SDHQ - Contributions in Lieu of Rates
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was s ubmitted on the need to appoint a consultant to negotiate the
Contributions in Lieu of Rates for the new Eccles fi el d D & SDHQ, as both .
the D istrict Valuer and the Sheffield City Council's Estates and
Valuation Off ic e r had an interest in the property.
 RESOLVED - That approval be given to the appointment of Messrs. Lawrence
 Tattersall, Chartered Surveyors, Sheffield, to negotiate the
 Contributions in Lieu ot Rates for the new Ecclesfield D & SDHQ on behalf
 of the Authority.
 W est Bar D & SDHQ - Minor Internal Alterations
 A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
 was s ubmitted on the need to carry out minor internal alterations within
 the existing West Bar D & SDHQ upon the completion of the new 3-Storey
 Extension.
 RESOLVED -
     1.    That approval be given to a capital estimate of 118,500 (inclusive of
           Design and Administration Charges and a sum for Furniture and
           Equipment) for Minor Internal Alterations at the existing West Bar u
           & SDHQ.
-   8   -




            2.   That the Clerk and Financial Officer, in consultation with the
                 Chairman, be authorised to approve a List of Tenderers prepared by
                 the Sheffield City Council's Director of Design and Building
                 Services, the invitation of tenders and the acceptance of the lowest
                 satisf ac to r y tender received.
C.          Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
    (i)     A cc ommodation Provided for the West Midlands Police
            A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
            was submitted on accommodation provided for West Midlands Police
            personnel based in Sheffield immediately following the setting up of the
            Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.
            RESOLVED - That, following confir ma ti o n that the e xp en diture will rank
            for Special Grant in accordance with the arrangements agreed with the
            Home Office, the Clerk and Financial Officer be authorised to complete
            the Licence Agr ee m en t prepared by the Property Services Manager of the
            Sheffield City Council for the occupation of the property named by West
            Midlands Police personnel for a period of twelve weeks from 24th April to
            14th July 1989 on the terms and conditions now reported.
    (ii)    A cc ommodation Requested for the West Midlands Police
            A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
            was submitted on the request for accommodation to be provided for West
            Midlands Police personnel to be based in Sheffield to undertake further
            enquiries in connection with the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.
            RESOLVED - That, on the u nd erstanding that the expenditure will also rank
            for Special Grant in accordance with the arrangements agreed with the
            Home Office, the Clerk and Financial Officer be authorised to complete
            the Licence A gr eement prepared by the Property Services Manager of the
            Sheffield City Council for the occupation of the property named by West
            Midlands Police personnel for a period of up to six months on the terms
            and conditions now reported.
    98.     VOLUNTARY EARLY RETIRMENT A PP LI CATION
             A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
             was submitted on an application by a Civilian Driver in the Sheffield
             North Division to retire under the Voluntary Early Retirement Scheme
             approved by Police Authority M i n u t e . 154 of 8th April 1988.
             RESOLVED - That the application by the Civilian Driver in the Sheffield
             North Division now named to retire under the agreed Voluntary Early
             Retirement Scheme be approved with effect from 31st October 1989 and that
             he be awarded the total lump sum allowance and annual pension as
             detailed.
    99.     THE POLICE (DISCIPLINE)(SENIOR OFFICERS) REGULATIONS 1985
             The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report (which had been
             circulated to Police Authority Members only) on a complaint made by
             Mr T H against an A ssistant Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire
             Pol ice.
         The s tatutory r esponsibilities of the Police Aut ho r it y under the
         Regulations and the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 were detailed
         in the Report.
         RESOLVED -
         1.   That the c om plaint be investigated.
         2.   That the complaint be referred to the Police Complaints A uthority to
              supervise the investigation.
         3.   That tbe Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police be appointed to
              investigate the complaint, subject to the approval of the Police
              Complaints Authority.
!00.     COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE POLICE
         The Force Complaints Book was available for Members' inspection.



CHAIRMAN




D0C829
