                                                                                              •™2.; ? o }                        I ^ .... [ i
                                                                          WAT ~H
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY                                  I       i V U i   s w   i i T '   j.s-- L^i 'k&/*"' &l * '* ^ I » O iw   IX


                                                                  .
                                                                  j       «'r*.r-.,t,;-/-";---‘
                                                                          '..f                --r'1 ~ycsr^.t
                                                                                            i V      . .* ♦ k 4 w ;n-Ar'V‘o^nn
                                                                                                                             1I

23 July 1999                                                      | v/;th?n p-ra                            5 ..i? .............. of
                                                                                                                       * f**1
Report of the Clerk and Treasurer                                     ,                        t
  &                            ; r\L-l i v i i . <sc‘ « ; ir«’itUdU

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

i ____ Purpose of the Report

                  To report on the implementation of the resolutions passed by
        i)
                  the Authority relating to the provision of financial assistance to
                  Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.

                  To provide updated costing information.
        ii)

        iii)      To report on the committal proceedings in the Leeds
                  Magistrates Court.




                  Recommendations

                   Members are recommended to:

                   i)     approve the actions taken by Garretts as
                          detailed in the report;

                   ii)    to approve the terms contained in the draft
                           letters of agreement as the basis on which the
                           Authority will make financial assistance
                           available; and

                   iii)   to note progress on the committal proceedings
                          in the Leeds Magistrates Courts




  3          Financial Assistance

  3 1          On the 18 June 1999 the Clerk and Treasurer reported that Garretts
              had been progressing the various costs issues. A costs d^ ™ nJ]®s
              been engaged and has begun the process of reviewing costs incurred
              up to the 5 February 1999 in the criminal proceedings in the Leeds
              Magistrates Court. With the proviso that the Authority reserves the
              riqht to recover any excess following completion of the costs
              draftsman’s work, the Clerk and Treasurer has agreed to pay on


                                                                                                                                     1
      account 50% of the sums claimed for work between July 1998 and
      February 5 1999 in these proceedings.

3.2   On the work since the 6 February leading up to the current committal
      hearing, Garretts set out the basis on which the Authority was
      recommended to agree any support in their report to the 21 May
      meeting, and as was reported on 18 June both officers had accepted
      that basis in principle. Further detail has been confirmed since 18
      June, so that there is now in position a framework constructed around;

      a)    a maximum cost estimate

      b)    a blended hourly rate of £125 for Solicitors

      c)    an hourly rate for leading and junior counsel (£250 and £125
             respectively)

      d)    limits on the number of fee-earners who will be paid for by the
            Authority at meetings, conferences and hearings.

      Garretts have prepared detailed formal letters of agreement which will
      ultimately be signed by David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray. These
      were sent to their Solicitors on 1 July and their written comments are
      awaited. Any amendments proposed to the letters in the light of any
      comments received will be reported to the Authority. Copies of the
      letters are appended to this report. The detailed terms require the
      officers to take steps to recover costs and disbursements from other
      sources and provide protection for the Authority in the event of the
      case being conducted unreasonably. The right is also reserved for the
      Authority to have its contribution reviewed by a legal costs draftsman.

4     Costs Update

      Updated costs information will be circulated at the meeting.

5     Committal Hearing - Leeds Magistrates Court

      The private prosecution proceedings bought against Mr Duckenfield
      and Mr Murray came back before the Leeds Magistrates Court earlier
      this month on the 5 July. Before the commencement of the committal
      proceedings the Stipendiary Magistrate heard evidence and
      submissions over a period of 5 days in respect of an application by the
      defendants that the prosecution proceedings should be stayed on the
      grounds that in all the circumstances they are unfair as to amount of
      an abuse of process. On the 15 July the Stipendiary Magistrate
      dismissed the defendants application. He concluded that the defence
      had not persuaded him to the required standard of proof that a fair trial
      is not possible in this case.
W J Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer

Officer responsible:              Mr W J Wilkinson, Clerk and Treasurer and
                                  Miss M V Oades, Assistant Clerk and Solicitor
                                  Tel: 01226 772856

Background papers used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection at the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, Barnsley.

Other sources and references: None

Typists/M VO ades/R eports/23,7FinancAssistance.doc




                                                                                  3
         [SYPA headed note-paper]




         Dear Mr Murray

         Committal Proceedings, Leeds Magistrates Court {"Leeds Proceedings") - Provision of
         funding of your legal costs by South Yorkshire Police Authotity ("The Authority")

         I write fur diet to the Authority's meeting on Friday 21 May 1999.           N

         As you are aware, the Authority decided to make a contribution to certain legal costs incurred
         by you as a consequence of the proceedings brought by Ms Adlington on behalf of the
         Hillsborough Family Support Group. I attach a copy of the letter sent by our solicitors to yours
         on 28 May 1999 detailing the Authority's decisions.

         This letter sets out the terms on a formal basis upon which the Authority will make their
         contribution to your legal costs incurred in relation to the Leeds' Proceedings from and
         including 6 February 1999 until and including the last day of the committal hearing.

         Accordingly, the Authority agrees to meet your legal costs up to a fixed amount of £158,625
         provided th a t:

         1. no more than two fee-eamers (and only if reasonable snd proper for more than one to do
            so) may attend meetings (save for internal review and briefing meetings), consultations
            and conferences with counsel or court hearings ("fee-eamer " to include trainees);
         2. fee-eamers will be charged out at a blended rate of £125.00 per hour;
         3. a partner should attend all court hearings, conferences and consultations with counsel and
            is to supervise all correspondence relating to the Leeds Proceedings;
         4. Leading counsel to be charged out at an hourly rate of £250.00 plus VAT per hour and
            Junior counsel to be charged out at a rate of £125.00 plus VAT per hour for time properly
            and reasonably spent undertaking work outside the scope of the brief fee;
         5. counsel are not to charge for daily meetings/consultations immediately before, during or
            after the committal hearing in addition to their brief fees;
         6. Leading counsel's brief fee and refresher fee not to exceed £12,500 and £1,250 respectively;
         7. Junior counsel's brief fee and refresher fee not to exceed £6,250 and £625 respectively;
         8. Junior counsel to be used for all court hearings other than the committal hearing unless it is
            reasonable for Leading counsel to attend; and
         9. Leading and Junior counsel may both attend the committal hearing.

         Further, please note that:

         1. Your legal team should comprise of a partner, two trainees and a paralegal, Leading
            Counsel Mr Michael Harrison QC and Junior counsel, Mr Simon Myerson (unless further
            legal support is reasonably required);
         2. die legal costs must be monitored and reported to the Authority regularly;                              a
         3. the Authority's contribution to your legal costs (including any costs met on an interim                 W
            basis) may be withdrawn and/or clawed back if you have misled the Authority about your

         lc-00mdec

£00 -d
                                                                  3 M ) S A1 I 0 1     I c : 9 1 (flfU166 . I f l P - I Q
     case, failed to provide adequate evidence of the costs incurred of otherwise conducted
     your case unreasonably;
4.   die Authority reserves the right to have its contribution to your costs reviewed by a legal
     costs draftsman appointed by the Authority and to pay such costs only to the extent that
     the Authority is satisfied that they are reasonable and have been reasonably incurred;
5.   You must use reasonable endeavours to recover costs and disbursements you have
     incurred from such other sources as may be available to you at the end of the proceedings
     including central funds and the prosecution;
6.   the Authority will not be liable for any costs that you incur over and above the limits
     imposed by this letter; and
7.   nothing in this letter affects the liability you have to your solicitors in respect of their fees.

Please sign the enclosed copy of this letter in order to confirm your agreement to its terms.

I look forward to receiving ycrur response.
                                                                                    \
Yours sincerely



Bill Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer
South Yorkshire Police Authority
[SYPA headed note-paper]




Dear Mr Duckenfield

Committal Proceedings, Leeds Magistrates Court ("Leeds Proceedings*') - Provision cf
funding cf your legal costs by South Yorkshire Police Authority ("The Authority")

I write further to the Authority's meeting on Friday 21 May 1999.

As you are aware, the Authority decided to make a contribution to certain legal costs incurred
by you as a. consequence of the proceedings brought by Ms Adiington on behalf of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group. I attach a copy of the letter sent by our solicitors to yours
c p . 28 May 1999 detailing the Authority's decisions.


This letter sets out the terms on a formal basis upon which the Authority will make their
contribution to your legal costs incurred in relation to the Leeds' Proceedings from and
including 6 February 1999 until and including the last day of the committal hearing,

Accordingly, the Authority agrees to meet your legal costs up to a fixed amount of £176,250
provided th at:

1. no more than two fee-earners (and only if reasonable and proper for more than one to do
    so) may attend meetings (save for Internal review and briefing meetings), consultations
    and conferences with counsel or court hearings ("fee-earner " to include trainees};
2. fee-eamers will be charged out at a blended rate of £125.00 per h o u r;11
3. a partner should attend all court hearings, conferences and consultations with counsel and
    is to supervise all correspondence relating to the Leeds Proceedings;
4. Leading counsel to be charged out at an hourly rate of £250.00 plus VAT per hour and
  ' junior counsel to be charged out at a rate of £125.00 plus VAT per hour for time properly
    and reasonably spent undertaking work outside the scope of the brief fee;
5. counsel are not to.charge for daily meetings/consultations immediately before, during or
    after the committal hearing in addition to their brief fees;
6. Leading counsel's brief fee and refresher fee not to exceed £[ ] and £[ J respectively;
7. Junior counsel's brief fee and refresher fee not to exceed £ [ ] and £ [ ] respectively;
8. Junior counsel to be used for all court hearings other than the committal hearing unless it is
    reasonable for Leading counsel to attend; and
9. Leading and Junior counsel may bo Hi attend the committal hearing.

Further, please note that:

1. Your legal team should comprise of a partner, an assistant solicitor, a legal executive and a
   consultant. Leading Counsel Mr William Clegg QC and Junior counsel, Mr Paul Isaacs
   (unless further legal support is reasonably required);
2. the legal costs must be monitored and reported to the Authority regularly;
        3. the Authority's contribution to your legal costs (including any costs met on an interim
           basis) may be withdrawn and/or clawed back if you have misled the Authority' about your
           case, Jailed to provide adequate evidence of the costs incurred or otherwise conducted
           your case unreasonably;
        4. the Authority reserves the right to have its contribution to your costs reviewed by a legal
           costs draftsman appointed by the Authority and to pay such costs only to the extent that
           the Authority is satisfied that they are reasonable and have been reasonably incurred;
        5. You must use reasonable endeavours to recover costs and disbursements you have
           incurred from such other sources as may be available to you at the end of the proceedings
           including central funds and the prosecution;
        6. the Authority will not be liable for any costa that you incur over and above the limits
           imposed by this letter; and
        7. nothing in this letter affects the liability you have to your solicitors in respect of their fees.

        Please sign the enclosed copy of tlils letter in order id confirm your agreement to its terms.

        I look forward to receiving your response.

        Yours sincerely



        Bill Wilkinson
        Clerk and Treasurer
        South Yorkshire Police Authority




                                                                               f

too d
                                                                    aavnOS AJ.I01          £ Z : 91 { A H A ) 6 6 , T W -
