South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772877
W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA. Clerk and Treasurer
                                                                    S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
Our ref:    PMS/SJL                                                                  P O LIC E
                                                                               A U T H O R IT Y
Your ref:


Date:   25 May 1999



This matter is being dealt with by:   Stuart Lunn     Direct Line: 01226 772850
Email SLunn@syorks-ja.gov.uk


To: Members of the Police Authority
cc: Appropriate Officers


Dear Member

HILLSBOROUGH

As agreed last Friday I am enclosing a copy of the press release issued on the funding
decision.


Yours faithfully




Stuart Lunn
Policy and Member Services
NEWS RELEASE
                                                                              .4k.
21st May 1999
                                                                              Tr
                                                                   S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                                                    P O L IC E
                                                                              A U T H O R IT Y
                       HILLSBOROUGH FUNDING DECISION

South Yorkshire Police Authority today agreed to give support to the two former
officers facing private criminal prosecutions brought by bereaved families following
the Hillsborough disaster. This support relates to the criminal prosecutions and a
judicial review heard in March of the decisions of the Director of Public Prosecutions
in relation to them, whilst deferring a decision on supporting certain other ancillary
proceedings.

Support was made available last year when the prosecutions first began. The
position was reviewed following a legal challenge earlier this year, and in March the
High Court ruled that the Authority did have power to offer financial support to
former officers, having regard to the particular merits of each case.

Today’s meeting considered funding applications from the two officers including the
committal hearing which is due to commence on 5 July.

The Authority considered in depth the circumstances of the case, and referred to
the reports of the Taylor Inquiry, the later Scrutiny, and previous decisions of the
Director of Public Prosecutions that there was insufficient evidence on which to
bring criminal charges. They also heard personal submissions from the officers’
representatives and also invited the Hillsborough Family Support Group to comment
on behalf of the bereaved families.

While acknowledging the previous admissions that mistakes were made in the
policing of the event in April 1989, the Authority considered that the officers acted in
good faith. In view of all the circumstances the Authority has agreed to provide
support to the officers for the criminal proceedings up to committal stage.

It is recognised however that the Authority does not have unlimited funding
available, and that it has many competing demands on that funding if it is to satisfy
its duty of providing an efficient policing service to the people of South Yorkshire. In
these circumstances therefore, the Authority instructed officers and advisers to
agree appropriate arrangements with the former officers and their advisers to
ensure that their legal costs are kept within a reasonable and affordable budget.
The Authority has asked for regular progress reports.

The Chairman, Clarence Swindell, said: “Hillsborough continues to affect the lives
of many people, and I sincerely hope that the matter can be drawn to a conclusion
soon. I have extended my sympathies - and continue to do so - to the bereaved
families. However in the circumstances, the Authority felt that it should offer support
to its former officers.”
                                     -Ends-

Media Enquiries: for further information contact Mike Sanderson on (01226)
772805 or 742644
