             515A j zh-         i\A

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY


1 AUGUST 1997


JOINT REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE AND THE CLERK & TREASURER


LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH’S SCRUTINY OF
THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER OF APRIL 1989


1     Purpose of the Report

      i)      To advise the Authority members of recent developments.

      ii)     To ask for financial provision to respond to the Scrutiny.

      iii)    To ask the Authority to provide financial assistance for
              legal representation to serving and retired officers.


2     Recommendations

      Members are recommended to:

      2.1     Approve the provision of up to £500,000 from reserves for
              expenditure likely to be incurred in respect of the Scrutiny;

      2.2     Approve a commitment to provide financial assistance for legal
              representation to officers (serving and retired) in connection with
              Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny in accordance with the
              principles set out in Home Office Circular No 77/87 Financial
              Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings; and

      2.3     To authorise the Clerk and Treasurer to determine individual
              applications for financial assistance in consultation with the Chief
              Constable.


3     Background Information

3.1   On 30 June 1997 the Home Secretary announced to the House of Commons
      that he has asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct a Scrutiny of aspects
      of the Hillsborough disaster of April 1989. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is an
      Appeal Court Judge.
                                         2



3.2   The disaster occurred on 15 April 1989 when Liverpool and Nottingham
      Forest played a semi-final cup match at the Sheffield Wednesday ground at
      Hillsborough. A crush caused the deaths of 95 people that day and one
      person later died of his injuries.

3.3   The Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police, Mr Geoffrey Dear (now Sir
      Geoffrey Dear, Her Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary) was appointed to
      investigate. His team of officers took 3907 statements and he reported his
      findings to the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) and to the Police
      Complaints Authority (PCA). The DPP ruled that the evidence did not warrant
      any prosecutions. The PCA directed that the Chief Superintendent and a
      Superintendent should face disciplinary action. The Chief Superintendent
      retired on grounds of ill health. The PCA agreed that action against the
      Superintendent was not proper in the absence of the more senior officer.

3.4   Lord Justice Taylor (later Lord Chief Justice Taylor, now deceased)
       conducted a judicial enquiry which lasted 32 days and heard evidence from
       173 witnesses. His staff also had access to the material collected by the
      West Midlands officers. Lord Taylor’s report apportioned blame for the
       tragedy and made recommendations to improve public safety.

3.5   The Sheffield Coroner held an inquest into the 95 deaths at Hillsborough.
       Preliminary sittings established identification and time and place of death.
      When reconvened, the inquest lasted 80 days and heard evidence from 230
      witnesses. The jury returned verdicts of accidental death. The inquest into
      the death of the person who died in 1993 was conducted at Bradford and also
      returned a verdict of accidental death.

3.6   Following the verdict at the Sheffield inquest, the relations of some of the
      deceased applied to the High Court for a judicial review of the verdict. The
       High Court dismissed the application.

3.7   In recent months a television drama programme, reports in a national
       newspaper and television interviews with a Doctor, have claimed that there is
       fresh evidence. The Chief Constable is satisfied that no fresh evidence has
       come to light.

3.8   The Home Secretary has asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to consider
      whether there is fresh evidence. If there is fresh evidence, he has been
      asked to advise whether it has a bearing on;


      i)     The conclusions of Lord Justice Taylor’s report.

      ii)    The Coroners’ verdicts.

      iii)   The DPP’s decisions.
                                           3



       iv)    The Chief Constable’s position (in respect of disciplinary
              issues pertaining to currently serving police officers).

3.9    A number of police officers, who were involved in the events of that day, have
        since retired. Others are still serving.

3.10 At the time of writing little is known of how Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will
      conduct his Scrutiny except that hearings will be in private.

3.11 The South Yorkshire Police Authority, the Chief Constable and serving and
      retired officers all have an interest in ensuring that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
      is given the best possible opportunity to assess the strength and credibility of
      the evidence that may be presented to him.

3.12   In order to do that the Chief Constable is forming a small team of staff to work
       on this Scrutiny. Good legal advice and representation will also be needed.
       It is difficult to assess the likely legal costs because of the lack of clarity
       about how the Scrutiny will function.

3.13 A large archive of material is stored in the Discipline and Complaints offices
     at Heeley. The team of staff will be based at Heeley for ease of access to
     this archive. There may be a need to hire a portacabin (£1,000 for four
     months plus £130 per extra month) to accommodate the additional staff.

3.14   Home Office Circular 77/1987 provides advice on financial assistance to
       police officers in legal proceedings. Rather than reproduce its six pages, it
       may suffice to quote Paragraph 2:

              The central principle which should guide consideration o f individual
              cases is that, where a Police Authority considers that an officer has
              acted in good faith in pursuance o f his duties or that the interests o f a
              force as a whole are involved, the officer should have the support o f
              the Police Authority to ensure that he has the services o f a lawyer and
              that he should not be out of pocket.

3.15 This should be read in conjunction with Section 111 of the Local Government
     Act 1972 which provides that a local authority has the power to do anything
     which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the discharge
     of any of their functions. A Police Authority is a ‘local authority’ for these
     purposes.

3.16 The Scrutiny will begin work in September and the Home Secretary hopes
     that a report will be available by the end of the year.

3.17   It is not clear whether any officer, retired or serving, will require separate
       legal representation.    However, the Authority is invited to approve a
       commitment to provide financial assistance for legal representation in
       accordance with the central principle set out in Home Office Circular
                                           4


       No77/87. If the Authority approves such a commitment, the determination of
       individual applications could be delegated to the Clerk and Treasurer in
       consultation with the Chief Constable. This procedure would enable
       applications to be considered more quickly than would otherwise be the case.

3.18 The Chief Constable is minded to use a firm of solicitors based in London for
     easy access to the Scrutiny and at present does not envisage a conflict of
     interest between himself, the Authority or the retired officers. On that
     premise, separate legal representation for each party is not envisaged.

3.19   Update reports will be provided at regular intervals.


4      Financial Implications

       There is no specific budgetary provision to meet this expenditure from within
       the 1997/98 budget. Consequently, the Authority is asked to agree that up to
       £500,000 be made available from reserves to meet costs associated with this
       scrutiny.




R B WELLS                         W J WILKINSON
Chief Constable                   Clerk and Treasurer


Chief Officer Responsible:         Ian Daines, Assistant Chief Constable
                                   Direct Tel: 0114 2523405




                                NOT FOR PUBLICATION as It
                                contains exempt information
                                with*n Para      l.£         0f
                                Sdi, 12A to the Local Government
                                Act 1972 as amended
