SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                                       5B
FINANCE AND GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE

NIAGARA. SHEFFIELD - 27 APRIL 1990

PRESENT:   Councillor C M Walayat (in the Chair)
           Councillors: D A Axe (substituting for 6 Gallimore),
           J M Cromar, D W George, Sir John Layden,
           J Wood (substituting for R Fisher)
           Magistrate Member: Mr E A Hancock


1   APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRMAN FOR THE MEETING
     RESOLVED - That, in view of the unavoidable absence of the Vice-Chairman
     and the anticipated late arrival of Councillor Sir John Layden, Councillor
     C M Walayat be appointed Chairman for this meeting of the Committee.
2   MINUTES
     In reply to a query from the Committee, the Clerk and Financial Officer
     confirmed that it was the intention to submit a report to the next meeting
     of the Committee on the Regional Crime Prevention Conference held at
     Rotherham on 2 April 1990 (Minute 6 of 9 March 1990).
    RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of the Committee held on 9 March
    1990 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
3   DEPUTATION TO MEET HOME OFFICE MINISTER
    A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer was submitted on the
    meeting which a deputation from the Police Authority had had with Earl
    Ferrers on Tuesday, 17 April 1990 in accordance with Minute 5.2 of
    9 March 1990 and Police Authority Minute 191.2 of 30 March 1990.
    The Authority's financial problems caused by   the .late notification of the
    Home Office Capital Expenditure approval for   1990/91, together with the
    Home Secretary's reversal of his decision on   the calculation of protected
    sums for Housing Allowance, had been brought   to the attention of the
    Minister.
    The Minister had been sympathetic to the Authority's problems, but could
    not offer any further support at this stage. A number of other Authorities
    had already met him or were to meet him over the next few weeks. His room
    for manoeuvre was limited by the need to work within the constraints of the
    national public expenditure planning totals, but pressure to stress the
    Authority's financial problems was being maintained.
    RESOLVED - That the contents of the report, as well as the fact that an
    updating report on the Authority's financial problems is to be submitted to
    the Police Authority on 11 May 1990, be noted.
4   PROJECT PROGRESS REPORT
    The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on the progress being
    made on the Authority's Capital Programme on a scheme by scheme basis, and
    answered Members' queries on particular projects.
    RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
5   CONFERENCES. ETC
    The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted copies of correspondence inviting
    the Authority to be represented at forthcoming Conferences/Seminars.
    RESOLVED -                                                     0
    1     That the Authority be represented at the Seminar on "Current Issues in
         the Police Service - Finance, Efficiency and Effectiveness" to be held
         on Wednesday, 16 May 1990 at the AMA Offices, London by one Police
         Authority Member from each of the Constituent District Councils,
         together with a Magistrate Member and appropriate officers (the
         attendance of such Members to be regarded as "Approved Duty").
    2     That the Authority be represented at the Seminar on "The Implications
         of the Taylor Report for Local Authority/Football Club Relationships"
         to be held on Friday, 11 May 1990 at Barrington House, London by one
         Police Authority Member from each of the Constituent District
         Councils, together with a Magistrate Member and appropriate officers
         (the attendance of such Members to be regarded as "Approved Duty").
    3     That the Authority be represented at the Police Conference 1990 to be
         held from Tuesday, 5 June to Friday, 8 June 1990 atTorquay by one
         Police Authority Member from each of the Constituent District
         Councils, together with a Magistrate Member and appropriate officers      (fe
         (the attendance of such Members to be regarded as "Approved Duty").
6   URBAN ACTION ACTIVITIES   INVOLVING YOUNG PEOPLE
    A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
    was submitted detailing six projects initiated by two of the Territorial
    Divisions, together with Headquarters, which fulfilled one or more of the
    required objectives and was open to (or of benefit to) both male and female
    participants.
    RESOLVED - That the six projects now detailed be approved at an estimated
    total cost of £4,700 and met from the Urban Action Fund for specified Urban
    Action Activities.
7       LIST OF OUTSTANDING AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
        In accordance with Minute 1.2 of 9 June 1989, a joint report of the
        Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable was submitted on
        outstanding and/or requested reports.
        In reply to queries from the Committee, the Clerk and Financial
        Officer confirmed that it was intended to submit reports to the next
        meeting of the Committee on Item 4 (Doncaster Leisure Complex -
        Proposed Police Section Station) and item 6 (Urban Action Activity -
        Theft of Personal Property).
        RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
ITEMS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE ABSENCE OF THE PUBLIC
RESOLVED - That, under Section 100(A)(4) of the Local Government Act 1972,
the public be excluded from the meeting for the following items of business
on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure of exempt
information as defined in paragraphs 9 or 11 of Part 1 of Schedule 12A of
the Act as appropriate.
INVITATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF TENDERS
Joint reports of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
were submitted on the invitation and acceptance of tenders.
A       Additional VHF Channel
        RESOLVED -
        1    That it be noted that, in consequence of the reduced Home Office
             Capital Expenditure for 1990/91, it will not currently be
             possible to proceed with this Scheme.
        2    That, in view of the fact that the policing requirement still
              exists, should any further monies become available the Scheme be
              re-submitted for formal consideration.
         3   That the contractor now named be advised that, in the
              circumstances now reported, the Authority is unable to accept the
              tender submitted.
    B   Police Garaae/Workshops. Decov Bank North. Doncaster - Contributionin
        Lieu of Rates
        RESOLVED -
         That, in the circumstances now reported, approval be given to the
         appointment of the Chartered Surveyors now named to negotiate the
         contribution in lieu of rates for the Police Garage/Workshops at Decoy
         Bank North, Doncaster.
     C     Replacement Emergency Food Store. Ecclesfield
           RESOLVED -
           1   That approval be given to a Capital Estimate of £12,000
                (including fees and equipment) for the carrying out of
               adaptations and some external repair work in order to provide a
               replacement Emergency Food Store at the Police Training School,
               Ecclesfield.
           2   That tenders for the work be invited from the four contractors
               now listed (including the Sheffield City Council Works
               Department).
           3   That the Clerk and Financial Officer, in consultation with the
               Chairman, be authorised to accept the lowest satisfactory tender
               received for the work.
10   CIVILIAN STAFF - APPLICATIONS BY TRADE UNIONS
     A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
     was submitted recalling Minute 4 of 2 February 1990 and reporting further
     requests from the Trades Unions concerned for the Authority to consider the
     claims originally submitted to the 2 February meeting and deferred by the
     Committee.
     The reports originally submitted on 2 February were re-circulated, together
     with additional information which had become available since that date.
     The Committee discussed the claims, together with both the original and
     additional information, in detail.
     RESOLVED -
     1     That the claim submitted by the GMB Trade Union for the rate of
           calculating bonus for the Authority's Engineering Craftsmen to be
           based on the full rate of pay rather than the current bonus calculator
           rate of £80 be referred for urgent consideration to the Authority's
           Joint Consultative Committee and report back to the next meeting of
           this Committee should this be feasible (the Clerk and Financial
           Officer to obtain information from the other Joint Police Authorities
           on their policy and practice on this matter).
     2     That a decision on the claim made by NALG0 to amend the effective date
           of the already approved regrading of Telephone/Teleprinter Operators
           in the Barnsley Division to 1 May 1983 be deferred until the next
           meeting of the Committee to enable the Clerk and Financial Officer to
           check and report on whether a laid-down criteria and agreement as to
           back-dating of claims in circumstances such as these is in existence
           and applicable.


CHAIRMAN                                                               WP000486
