SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

11 December 1998

Report of the Clerk and Treasurer


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS


1.    Purpose of the Report

To update members on matters relating to the private prosecutions issued on
behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group and to report the receipt of
an application for further financial assistance.


      2.     Recommendations

      Members are recommended to defer consideration of the
      application for further financial assistance referred to in the
      report.



3.    Background Information

3.1   The private prosecution proceedings issued on behalf of the
       Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) against Messrs David
       Duckenfield and Bernard Murray presently stand adjourned until the
       21 December 1998. However, these prosecutions will not proceed in
      the event of the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) deciding to
       intervene and quash them. His decision is to be announced on the
       18 December 1998.

3.2   It is understood that in the event of the DPP taking over the
      prosecutions and quashing them the HFSG will make application to the
      Divisional Court for Judicial Review of this decision. If the DPP does
      not intervene to take over the proceedings and quash them, the advice
      of Leading Counsel acting for Mr Murray is that he should make
      application for Judicial Review of this decision.

3.3   The Solicitors acting for Messrs Duckenfield and Murray have been
      informed that the decision made on behalf of the Authority to fund the
      defence of the prosecution proceedings does not extend to financing
      an application for Judicial Review or for that matter an appeal against
      the findings of the Court. Accordingly, assistance in such proceedings
      would have to be the subject of further applications. Following this
      communication a letter has been received from the Solicitors acting for
      Mr Murray (copy attached hereto) applying for further financial
      assistance to him to meet his legal costs and disbursements in relation
      to Judicial Review proceedings whether as Applicant or Respondent.

3.4   Counsel’s advice has been taken on this further application and he has
      advised that it should be considered at the stage of application to the
      Divisional Court. In the circumstances rt is recommended that
      consideration of the application be deferred pending developments and
      further information.

4.    Financial Implications

4.1   There are no financial implications at this stage.



W J W ilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer

O fficer responsible: Miss M V Oades, Assistant Clerk

Background papers used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection at the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, Barnsley.

O ther sources and references: None




                           NOT FOR. PUBLICATION as it
                           contains exempt information
                           within para                  of
                           Boh. 12A to ths Local Government
                           Act 1972 as amended




                                                                             2
                                                                       W A L K E R
                                                                       M O R R I S
                                                                                   Solicitors


                Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2 8 32 5 00 .
            Facsimile 0 1 1 3 2 4 5 9 4 1 2 . D o c u m e n t E x change 12051 Leeds 24 . E m ail info @ w alk erm brris.co .uk
                                                               W eb; http ://\v\v\v,\v alkerm o rris.co.uk



FAO Miss M V Oades                                                                                      Our ref                   RBM/BQW/MURRAY
Assistant Clerk and Solicitor
South Yorkshire Police Authority
P 0 Box 37                                                                                              Your ref                  MVO/POL
Regent Street
Barnsley
S Yorks                                                                                                 20 November 1998
S70 2PQ

Dear Sirs

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN                                                                                                                                LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS - OUR CLIENT : M R BERNARD MURRAY

We refer to your letter by fax of 19 November. First I would restate that it is wholly
proper in my view that former Superintendent Murray should have the support of the
Police Authority insofar as his legal costs are concerned when the allegations made
against him arise from his duties as a then serving Police Officer with your force. I
believe that there are numerous precedents for this view. It would be unconscionable
for my Client to have to use what savings he may have and to even sell his house to
defend himself.




I bear in mind the substantial sums paid to some of the people who form the
Hillsborough Families supporters Group and the fact that apparently £0.5 million was
raised at a pop concert in Liverpool last year. I leave you to decide the appropriate
way in which you will provide the information as to the financial support that has
been given.

May we now turn to the issue o f an application to the Divisional Court for Judicial
Review. We have already spoken to Leading Counsel. He is strongly of the view
that if the Director of Public Prosecutions decides to allow the Prosecution to continue
and not to intervene to take over the proceedings and then quash them, then this is a
matter that should go to the Divisional Court. It has also been made clear by HFSG
that if the DPP intervenes to take over the proceedings and quash them, they will
immediately make application to the Divisional Court for Judicial Review.

Either way, there is going to be the need for Client to be represented either as
Applicant or Respondent in Judicial Review proceedings.


H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\RBM\REV1EW\MURRAY3.LET\20 November 1998




             o f l l 'f p a r tn e r s '   is open to inspection J t the above itddress. R e ^u b iic d b \ 1 he L .u r Society in th e co n d u c t o f im e .c m e n : business.
                                                              FAO Miss M V Oades
                                                                20 November 1998
                                                                          Page 2



Please would you accept this letter as an application for further financial assistance
to Mr Bernard Murray to meet his legal costs and disbursements in relation to Judicial
Review proceedings whether as Applicant or Respondent.

V n n r c fsnthfiflK/______________________________ ,




R B Manning
PARTNER




H:W TCRIM -M AT\RBM \REVIE\V\M URRAY3.LET\20 November 1998
