South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772877
EMail: SLunn@ syorks-ja.gov.uk
Internet: w ww.southyorks.org.uk
W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CP FA. Clerk a nd Treasurer


Our ref:     PMS/SJUPOOO/MJB
                                                                                     #
                                                                          S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                                                           POLICE
                                                                                     A U T H O R IT Y


Your ref:



Date:      23 February 2000


This matter is being dealt with by:   Stuart Lunn       Direct Line:   01226 772850

TO:-         Members of the Police Authority
             Cc Appropriate Officers

Dear Member

RE:-        HILLSBOROUGH

Members will already be aware that with a full trial of the former Officers now scheduled
for June, further applications could be anticipated from them for financial assistance from
the Authority in meeting their defence costs. These applications have now been received.

Following consultation with the Chairman a meeting to consider them will be held at
9.30 am on Friday 10 March 2000. I will let you know the venue shortly.

In connection with the Authority’s consideration of the applications two documents will
need to be available to members. These are the report into the disaster by Lord Justice
Taylor and the Scrutiny report by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. These substantial documents
were circulated to members for the last major Hillsborough meeting in May 1999, the one
held at the Fire Service Training Centre. Copies of the documents will need to be
available to members at the 10 March meeting. If you no longer have these documents
could you please let me know when I see you at the meeting this Friday, or by
telephone beforehand. Members who have joined the Authority since last May will not of
course have them.

Some members may already be aware that a meeting of the Authority was under
consideration for 10 March on Best Value. That will therefore need an alternative date.

Yours sincerely^"’”*

                    C
Stuart Lunn
Policy and Member Services


                                                                                  P042079
