                                                         APPENDIX "B"




SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
FINANCE AND GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE
27TH OCTOBER 1989

PRESENT:
Councillor Sir John Layden (in the Chair)'
Councillors: G Gallimore (Vice-Chairman), C J C Betts, J M Cromar, D W George,
R W Gillies, C Swindell, C M Walayat, J Wood (substituting for R Fisher).
Magistrate Member: Mr E A Hancock.

1.   URGENT    ITEM
      The Chairman reported that he had agreed that a letter received by the
      Clerk and Financial Officer on 25th October from the Association of
      Metropolitan Authorities relating to a one-day Seminar on Vandalism and
      Graffiti to be held in London on 20th November should be considered as an
      urgent item.
      RESOLVED - That Councillors J M Cromar and C Swindell, together with a
      Magistrate Member and an officer, be nominated to attend the Vandalism and
      Graffiti Seminar to be held in London on 20th November 1989 (the
      attendance of such Members to be regarded as "Approved Duty").
2.   MINUTES
      RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of the Committee held on 15th
      September 1989 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
3.   REVENUE ESTIMATES 1989/90
A.   Revenue Budget Overspend    1989/90
     In accordance with Minute 3A of 15th September 1989, a joint report of the
     Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable was submitted on the
     effects on the continued operational efficiency of the Force of imposing
     budget restrictions during the remainder of the financial year in order to
     contain a projected overspend of the Pay and Price Contingency within the
     cash-limited budget provided.
     The report detailed the current position of the respective budget heads
     and forecast the position to the end of the current financial year. This
     showed that of the additional costs of £4,399,100 reported to the
     Authority to date, £4,206,300 gross had been identified as inflation.
     The projected overspend of the Pay and Price Contingency remained at
     approximately £750,000 gross, and the Committee considered details of
     potential savings, together with the operational effect of such savings.
     The Committee once again discussed the effects of the ever-increasing
     Government control of Local Government (including Joint Authority)
     finances, the practical effect of which was to reduce the resources made
available when inflation was taken into account. The financial effects of
the forthcoming introduction by the Government of the Poll Tax (Community
Charge) had also to be borne in mind.
RESOLVED - That, subject to it being made plain that such action is
necessitated by Government financial controls, particularly bearing in
mind the effects of the real cuts in proposed expenditure already
Incorporated within the approved Revenue Estimates for the current
financial year, the Committee with reluctance:-
(i)     implement the further savings totalling £402,500 (gross)
        identified in Category (a) of the report how submitted;
(ii)    implement the additional savings totalling £540,000 (gross)
        identified in Category (b) of the report now submitted (subject to
        a report to the next meeting of the Committee identifying posts
        where a commitment has already been made on behalf of the
        Authority);
(iii)   agree to finance any remaining overspend from reserves and;
(iv)    instruct the officers, in order to reduce the potential call on
        Reserves, to exercise economy, efficiency and effectiveness on all
        heads of expenditure during the remainder of the current financial
        year.
Pay and Price Increases and other Minor Variations 1989/90
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted on the financial effects of recently notified pay and price
increases and the availability of Contingency provision or other finance.
RESOLVED - That approval be given to:-
(i)     a Supplementary Revenue Estimate, out of the Pay and Price
        Contingency, of £29,000 gross (£14,200 net of Police Grant), and;
(ii)    the use of additional income, totalling £3,500 by means of
        Diversions to meet part of the presently unfinanced additional
        costs.
CAPITAL MONITORING
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted on all schemes in respect of which payments were expected to
be made during the current financial year.
A detailed schedule showed forecasts of total spending and of current year
spending in comparison with the provision made in the approved Capital
Programme.
The report detailed the reasons for the current year spending being
expected to be some £468,100 (9.14%) less than the approved provision of
£5,117,600.
RESOLVED - That the contents of the Capital Monitoring report now
submitted be noted.
PROJECT PROGRESS REPORT
The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on the progress being
made on the Authority's Capital Programme on a scheme by scheme basis.
RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
CIVILIAN STAFF - SCENES OF CRIMES OFFICERS - STANDBY ALLOWANCE
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted on the need to amend the method of determination of the
Standby Allowance payable to Scenes of Crimes Officers in consequence of
the effects of the Manual Worker Review, and the adoption of a revised
formula which would resume automatic increases in the Allowance in line
with Pay Awards.
The net costs, after Police Grant, would be £200 in the current financial
year (including payment of arrears) and £100 in a full year.
RESOLVED - That approval be given to the Agreement relating to the payment
of Standby Allowance to Scenes of Crimes Officers by substituting "two-
thirds of APT&C Spinal Column Point 18 (Scale 4 minimum) hourly rate" for
"Manual Worker grade E hourly rate" effective from 1st February 1988.
CHARGES FOR POLICE ON LOAN TO PRIVATE EMPLOYERS
A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
was submitted recalling the Authority's policy of 3rd April 1987 to
continue the policy of the former Police Committee of adopting the
standard hourly rates of charge as set by the West Yorkshire Metropolitan
Police and applied throughout the ACPO (No 2) (North East) Region, such
rates being calculated in accordance with the recommended formula set out
in Home Office Circular 54/1972.
                                             t

The rates of charge had last been increased by the Authority with effect
from 1st December 1988, following the September 1988 Police Pay Award. The
new rates of charge (taking into account the September 1989 Police Pay
Award) had now been calculated by the West Yorkshire Metropolitan Police,
and were to be implemented by them with effect from 1st October 1989.
Charges for the use of vehicles and horses had, it was recalled, also been
fixed in a similar manner, and details were set out of a new scale of
charges which had been implemented by the West Yorkshire Metropolitan
Police.
-4-

      The Chief Constable undertook to reply direct to the Member concerned as
      to the policy of charging Developers for the services of the Police in the
      circumstances described.
      RESOLVED - That implementation of the revised hourly rates and the new
      scale of charges for vehicles and horses be approved as now submitted with
      effect from 1st November 1989 to all users of special police services
      (except Football Clubs in respect of association football matches, as
      covered by the formal agreements with the Clubs).
8.    UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
      A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
      was submitted on the increased rate of uniform allowance payable
      consequent upon a determination of the Police Negotiating Board, the last
      review having taken effect from April 1987.
      The Clerk and Financial Officer circulated an additional Report to each
      Member present containing fuller details on the matter.
      RESOLVED - That the annual rate of uniform allowance payable under Police
      Regulations be increased with effect from 1st April 1989 from £216 to £231
      for ranks up to Chief Superintendent and from £270 to £288 for Chief
      Officers.
9.    UNLEADED FUEL
      In accordance with Minute 8 of 15th September 1989, a joint report of the
      Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer was submitted setting
      out the detailed information requested by the Committee as to the costings
      and engineering work which would be involved in changing the existing
      Police Vehicle Fleet over to using unleaded petrol exclusively at the
      present time.
      Of the authorised Fleet Establishment of 544 units, 135 would require to
      be individually and comprehensively re-engineered at a cost ranging from
      £300 to £1,000 per unit. These vehicles formed largely the older part of
      the Fleet and, together with the cost of adapting the Force's fuelling
      centres, would cost in the region of £54,000 to convert. Additionally, it
      had to be borne in mind that the present taxation subsidy of lOp per
      gallon at retail pumps was not fully reflected in trade prices, and that a
      likely fuel consumption deterioration of between 1 and 2 miles per gallon
      resulted from the use of unleaded petrol.
       RESOLVED - That, in view of the detailed information now submitted, the
       Committee approve the policy of the continued acquisition of suitably
       engineered vehicles (including those equipped with catalytic converters
       where appropriate) through the normal vehicle replacement programme,
       leading to the introduction of unleaded fuel to the South Yorkshire Police
       Vehicle Fleet at some point during the 1990/91 financial year.
-5-

10.   LIST OF OUTSTANDING AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
      In accordance with Minute 1.2 of 9th June 1989, a joint report of the
      Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable was submitted on
      outstanding and/or requested reports.
      RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
11.   ITEMS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE ABSENCE OF THE PUBLIC
      RESOLVED - That, under Section 100(A)(4) of the Local Government Act 1972,
      the public be excluded from the meeting for the following items of
      business on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure of exempt
      information as defined in paragraphs 1 or 9 of Schedule 12A of the Act as
      appropriate.
12.   APPLICATION TO RECKON PREVIOUS PENSIONABLE SERVICE
      A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
      was submitted on a re-application made by a serving police officer to
      allow previous pensionable service with another Police Force to be
      reckoned as pensionable service.
      RESOLVED - That, in the circumstances now reported, the Committee approve
      the application now made by the police officer named for previous
      pensionable service with the Strathclyde Police Force to be reckoned for
      pensionable purposes, and agree to accept repayment of returned pension
      contributions from the officer at the monthly rate specified in the report
      now submitted.
13.   HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - CLAIMS FOR COMPENSATION
      At this point, Councillor Sir John Layden declared an interest, took no
      part in the discussion or voting, and Councillor G Gallimore took the
      Chair.
      The Clerk and Financial Officer reported on the current position regarding
      claims for compensation, including the reported outcome of the Pre-Trial
      Review relating to civil claims for compensation held yesterday.
      The Committee discussed the matter in detail, particularly as regards the
      previously understood position in case law that criminal proceedings are
      normally concluded before civil claims relating to the same matter are
      heard.
      RESOLVED - That the Committee note the report now made, and request the
      Clerk and Financial Officer to continue to submit progress reports as
      appropriate.
INVITATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF TENDERS
At this point, Councillor Sir John Layden resumed the Chair.
Joint reports of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
were submitted on the invitation and acceptance of tenders.
Askern Police Station - Adaptations and Improvements
RESOLVED :-
1.     That approval be given to a Capital Estimate of £12,450 (including
        design and administration charges and furniture and equipment) in
        respect of the adaptations and improvements at the Askern Police
        Station now detailed.
2.     That, in the circumstances now reported, tenders for the work be
        invited from the five contractors named in the list available at
        the meeting.
Barnsley D & SDHQ - Permanent Secure Access to the Detention Area
RESOLVED :-
1.     That approval be given to a Capital Estimate of £6,713.00
        (including design and administration charges) in respect of
        providing a permanent secure access to the detention area at the
        Barnsley Divisional and Sub-Divisional Police Headquarters.
2.     That the single tender in the sum of £5,962.36 submitted by the
        Director of Works of the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council for
        the work be accepted.
Fingerprint Section - Purchase of Photocopier
RESOLVED :-
1.      That approval be given to a Capital Estimate of £1,740.00 in
         respect of the purchase of a Photocopier to meet the specialist
         requirements of the Force Fingerprint Section.
2.      That, following the demonstration of photocopiers to the required
         specification, approval be given to the placing of an order for
         the purchase of the Konica U-Bix 170Z model photocopier from Saint
         Systems, Sheffield.
Police HQ, Snig Hill, Sheffield - Interview Rooms
RESOLVED - That, after taking into account the information and amendments
now reported by the Clerk and Financial Officer:-
1.      approval be given to a Capital Estimate of £8,123 (including
         design and administration charges and associated furniture and
         equipment) in respect of the carrying out of alterations to
           provide a further two Interview Rooms at Police Headquarters, Snig
           Hill, Sheffield, for the tape recording of interviews with persons
           suspected of criminal offences, as required by Section 60 of the
           Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984;
2.         The single tender in the sum of £5,373 submitted by the Director
           of Works of the Sheffield City Council be accepted for the work.
West Bar D & SDHQ, Sheffield - Interview Rooms
RESOLVED - That, after taking into account the information and amendments
now reported by the Clerk and Financial Officer:-
1.         approval be given to a Capital Estimate of £11,335 (including
           design and administration costs and associated furniture and
           equipment) in respect of the carrying out of alterations to
           provide a further two Interview Rooms at the West Bar Divisional
           and Sub-Divisional Police Headquarters, Sheffield, for the tape
           recording of interviews with persons suspected of criminal
           offences, as required by Section 60 of the Police and Criminal
           Evidence Act 1984;
2.         the single tender in the sum of £9,085 submitted by the Director
           of Works of the Sheffield City Council be accepted for the work.
PREMISES
Doncaster Leisure Complex - Proposed Police Section Station
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted on the consultations which had taken place with officers of
the Department of Finance and Economic Development of the Doncaster
Metropolitan Borough Council and on the negotiations which had taken place
with the Developers as to the possibility and financial implications of
providing a Police Section Station at the Doncaster Leisure Complex.
The revised requirements of Home Office regulations regarding leasing
costs now having to be set against a Police Authority's approved Capital
Building Programme were also recalled.
RESOLVED - That consideration of the report be deferred to enable further
consultations to take place, following which the matter be re-submitted to
the Committee.
Police HQ, Snig Hill, Sheffield - Don Valley Intercepting Sewer
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted advising the Authority of action taken in appointing
vibration and noise consultants in view of the possible risk of damage
resulting from blasting operations to be carried out by contractors in
connection with the Don Valley Intercepting Sewer Project.
         The particular concern related to the effect of vibration caused by
         blasting operations upon the computer equipment located at Police
         Headquarters.
         Discussions were still taking place with all of the interested parties.
         RESOLVED - That the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable be
         authorised to take such action as they consider necessary, in consultation
         with the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, to protect the Authority's interests
         in relation to the works being undertaken by the Sheffield City Council in
         connection with the Don Valley Intercepting Sewer Scheme.
16.      WORKING PARTY ON FINANCIAL PROSPECTS
         A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
         was submitted on the referral by the Police Authority on 29 September,
         1989 of options and implications regarding financial prospects for
         consideration by the Committee in the form of a Working Party.
         RESOLVED - That the Committee meet as a Working Party to consider the
         options and implications regarding financial prospects following the next
         meeting (to be held on 8th December 1989).



CHAIRMAN




D0C931
