SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY


14 SEPTEMBER 1990


REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                                    14
HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY - DECISION BY THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
REGARDING CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS


1   Matter for Consideration

    The progress of the enquiry conducted by the Chief Constable of
    the West Midlands Police and latterly the Chief Constable of the
    Cumbria Police into the events at Hillsborough Football Ground on
    15 April 1989.

2   Background Information

    In August        1989, following publication of the Interim Report
    produced after the Public Inquiry conducted by Lord Justice Taylor
    into the circumstances surrounding the Hillsborough Disaster, the
    D i r e c t o r of P u b l i c Prosecutions requested a full criminal
    investigation.        This investigation has been conducted by officers
    of the West Midlands Police.

3   Comment

    On Thursday 30 August 1990, having received the final report in
    that   criminal   i n v e s t i g a t i o n a n d a f t e r the most careful
    consideration of all the evidence and documentation, the Director
    of Public Prosecutions announced his findings.

    The Director has decided that there is no evidence to justify any
    criminal proceedings being instituted against South Yorkshire
    Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Messrs Eastwood and
    Partners or Sheffield City Council in connection with the disaster
    at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.       Further, the Director has
    concluded    that  t h e r e is insufficient evidence to justify
    proceedings against any officer of the South Yorkshire Police or
    any other person for any offence.

4   Recommendation

    Members of the Authority are requested to note the decision of the
    Director of Public Prosecutions.




R B WELLS
CHIEF CONSTABLE
  48-6.JS
                                                  HOME OFFICE
                                          Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                 Direct line: 01 -273
                                                Switchboard: 01-273 3000



Our reference: q PE/86 52/3/34
Your reference:

  To The Chief Officer of Police (England and Wales)
     The Chief Clerk to the Crown court
     The Clerk to the Justices
       (with a copy for the Chairman of the Bench for the
       information of the Justices)
     The Clerk, to the Police Authority
     The Circuit Administrator
     The Clerk to the Magistrates' Courts Committee
     The Courts Administrator
                                                               30 August 1990



  Dear Sir/Madam



  HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 69/1990
  FOOTBALL EXCLUSION ORDERS AND
  ATTENDANCE CENTRE ORDERS



  This Circular reminds those concerned of the provisions of Part IV
   of the Public Order Act 1986 which came into force on 1 August
   1987 under which the courts have power to make exclusion orders,
   prohibiting those convicted of football hooliganism offences from
   attending prescribed football matches in England and Wales.            It
   also reminds recipients of the courts' powers to make attendance
   centre orders for people between 10 and 20 provided in the
   Criminal Justice Act 1982.


   FOOTBALL EXCLUSION ORDERS

   2.      It had been intended that the exclusion order provisions
   should cease to have effect after the introduction of the national
   football membership scheme proposed by the Football Spectators Act
   1989.    Following the publication of Lord Justice Taylor s final
report on the Hillsborough stadium disaster, the Government has
decided not to proceed with the scheme. Consequently the exclusion
order provisions remain in force, as a complementary measure to
the restriction order provisions introduced in the Football
Spectators Act 1989: exclusion orders prohibit attendance at
prescribed matches in England and Wales: restriction orders are
intended to prevent attendance at key matches outside England and
Wales.


3.   Home Office Circular No.39/1987 explains fully the provisions
of the exclusion order scheme. A court may make an order where a
person is convicted of the type of offence set out in section 31
of the 1986 Act and when the court is satisfied that an order
would help to prevent violence or disorder at or in connection
with prescribed football matches.    Home Office Circular 31/1990
explains the provisions of the restriction order scheme under
Part II of the Football Spectators Act 1989.


Duration of Exclusion Orders


4.   An exclusion order must last for a minimum of three months.
There is no maximum time limit set; this is at the discretion of
the courts.    In determining the duration of the order, courts will
have regard to the nature of the offence that gave rise to the
order, the age of the offender and what is known of his general
background, character and past record;    when making orders of a
short duration the courts will also wish to bear in mind the
football "close season" which lasts generally from late May to
late July and the likelihood that short-term orders made to-
incorporate all or part of that period might have little practical
effect.


Enforcement


5.   Home Office Circular 39/1987 advised police forces on the
procedures to obtain photographs of those on whom exclusion orders
are imposed.   To increase the effectiveness with which exclusion
orders can be enforced, and the likelihood of detecting those who
enter a football ground in breach of an order, forces should
forward details of all exclusion orders made (and terminated),
including a photograph of the offender, to the National Football
Intelligence Unit.    These details will be compiled to form a
national index for issue to and use by football intelligence and
liaison officers in local police forces.       Whilst it will not be
possible for the police to check every person entering a football
ground, experienced closed circuit television operators who are
aware of likely trouble spots in grounds will be able check
photographs of those subject to orders when scanning the crowd
during the game.     Checks against those photographs should also be
made when viewing videos of any disorder after the event.


ATTENDANCE CENTRE ORDERS

6.   An exclusion order cannot be free-standing.       It must be
coupled with the sentence, probation order or order for absolute
or conditional discharge imposed for the offence.       An attendance
centre order may sometimes be the appropriate sentence to
accompany an exclusion order.     Attendance centre orders are
available for young people aged 10 to 20 (inclusive) who have been
convicted of imprisonable offences.     They require the young people
to attend the centre for 2-3 hours, normally on alternate
Saturdays, up to a maximum of 24 hours for those under 17 and 36
hours for those aged 17 to 20.     Programmes include physical
training and instruction in activities making constructive use of
leisure time.   Junior centres, for those under 17, are available
in most parts of the country.     Senior centres, for those aged 17
to 20, are available in the main centres of population.


7.   Any enquiries about this circular should be addressed to
Sue Jago (071-273 2850).


                            Yours faithfully



                                L GODDARD
                              F8 Division
