                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                 POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston, BA., I.P.F.A.                                                            Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222
Clerk and Financial Officer                               Please reply to:                    Fax Barnsley (0226) 730442

                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                               P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ


OurFtof      SW/                              Your Ref.                             Date:    30 November 1990

This matter is being dealt with by   Mr S Walker                                    Telephone ext   620




     To:     All Members of the Police Authority




     Dear Member
     APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE BY POLICE OFFICERS
     Members will see an item on the Agenda for the meeting next Friday regarding
     the applications from officers for financial assistance to cover the
     Hillsborough inquests. Clearly, following the history of this controversial
     issue, some explanation is in order; particularly as I will not be in a
     position, until early next week, to let members have the report.
     It will be recalled that at the special meeting on 16 November when the
     applications were refused, there was talk of an application by the officers
     for judicial review. This was subsequently confirmed through the press.
     The application for leave to apply for judicial review was granted by the
     High Court on Thursday, 22 November and therefore it became necessary after
     that date to instruct Counsel to act for the Police Authority.
     Early this week the Authority’s legal adviser, Stephen Walker, met Counsel
     in conference and it became clear that the application for judicial review
     was likely to be successful and the Authority will be required to consider
     the applications afresh. Rather than take this chance and risk an award of
     substantial costs, several thousand pounds in all probability, it was
     decided in consultation with Councillor Gallimore, acting Chairman at the
     last meeting, and as many Section 41 representatives as could be mustered,
     together with a representative of the Magistrates, to consider the matter
     again at next Friday’s meeting.
2

Stephen Walker will explain the position in more detail next Friday but in
the meantime, I felt it was appropriate to forewarn members since it is
likely, yet again, to generate considerable media attention.




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer
