SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 19 OCTOBER 1990
                                                                          20
MEETING WITH SOUTH YORKSHIRE FOOTBALL CLUBS - 11 OCTOBER 1990

JOINT REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE AND CLERK AND FINANCIAL
OFFICER

1    Matter for Consideration
     Negotiations on charges for 1990/91 Season.
2    Detailed Information
     Representatives of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and
     Financial Officer met with representatives of the five Clubs
     on 11 October. The rationale behind the Authority’s 14
     September resolutions was outlined and a distinction was
     drawn between the long-term target of full recovery of its
     costs, and the short-term target of implementing a 50%
     increase in the overall charges for the current season.
3    Following the meeting a note of the discussions was
     circulated to the Clubs (a copy of this is enclosed with this
     report).
4    The Clubs were concerned at the scale of the proposed
     increases and felt that they had little opportunity to
     influence the levels of deployment they were being asked to
     pay for. It was stressed to the Clubs that the Authority’s
     proposals were designed to allow a full exchange of views
     between the Police and the Clubs, and the current season’s
     increase would enable the Authority to take the first steps
     towards a sounder financial basis while these discussions
     were proceeding.
     The local Clubs are meeting other Clubs in this region on
     Monday, 15 October and the topic of policing charges is on
     the Agenda. It was agreed that following that meeting, the
     Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, on behalf of all the Clubs,
     would contact the Authority to reconvene the meeting in order
     to reach an agreement on the current season’s charges.
     It is hoped to be able to update members verbally at Friday’s
     meeting.


                                             NOT FOR P U B L I C A T I O N as it
R C Johnston                                 contains * exemgt r information
Clerk and Financial Officer                  within para
                                             Sch.l2A to the Local Government
R B Wells
Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police      Act 1972 as amended
FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS

1    BACKGROUND
     All the District Councils and Joint Authorities are facing
     severe budget constraints. The Police Authority has been
     forced to look for budget savings. These can either be
     expenditure reductions, or taking steps to ensure that the
     Authority receives reimbursement for all special services.
     Specifically on the question of football charges there is
     also pressure from outside sources:-
          Home Office - a recent draft Circular to all Police
          Authorities urged that a more "businesslike" approach be
          adopted and that charges should recover the full cost of
          officers.
          Audit Commission - the local auditor has reported to the
          Authority that its charges for policing football charges
          are substantially less than the costs and that steps be
          taken to increase them.
          ACPO - the Chief Constable’s organisation advocated a
          nationally prescribed rate for the policing of football
          matches which is designed to cover the full economic
          costs.
          Taylor Report - this report also recommended that
          Authorities should make realistic charges for policing.
2    ESTIMATED COSTS
     Estimated costs for the 1990/91 season for inside the ground
     officers* based on the proposed deployment patterns, is £1.3m
     for the five South Yorkshire Clubs.
     Charges levied to the Clubs in 1989/90 were £0.25m
     representing a recovery of about 20% of the costs.
3    RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE POLICE AUTHORITY
     At its meeting on 14 September the Police Authority
     considered a report from the Chief Constable and the Clerk
     and Financial Officer. After taking into account all the
     factors, the Authority set out as its principle target, a
     move to fully recover its costs.
     The Authority recognised the financial pressures facing many
     clubs and in the light of this it was accepted that the
     achievement of its long term target had to be flexible. In
     this context it proposed three measures:-
                                                                      4




         The Chief Constable and the Authority should discuss
         with each Club the deployment of police under the new
         arrangements.
         Discussions should take place on the training of
         stewards.
         Consideration should be given to a national approach to
         the policing and charging for football match duties.
    All the above are related to the Authority’s long term
    target. For the current season, as a first step towards full
    recovery, and while discussions on other issues were
    proceeding, the Authority resolved to increase the charges so
    as to increase its total income by 50% compared to the 1989/
    90 season.

4   WHAT IT MEANS IN PRACTICE
    The proposed 50% increase is inclusive of the Police Pay
    Award of 9.75% in September 1990.
    Even with a 50% increase this will still leave charges
    recovering only about 30% of estimated costs based on the
    proposed deployment.
    Attached is a schedule which was given to the Clubs at
    today’s meeting setting out the figures.
5   IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGREEMENT FOR THE CURRENT SEASON
    It is suggested that a fee be agreed with each Club to cover
    all league matches in the 1990/91 season. The fee would be
    based on a simple 50% increase on the actual charges to each
    Club in 1989/90. Payment of the fixed fee would be in
    instalments spread over the season.
    Cup matches and special games would have to bethe    subject of
    one-off agreements.
    Agreeing a fee for the season rather than introducing a new
    formula based contract has the advantage of enabling the
    Authority to take the first steps towards its long term
    target while leaving the detailed issues of manning levels
    and unit costs open for further discussion with the Clubs.
1990/91 SEASON

LEAGUE GAMES ONLY

                   Estimated     Charges      Charqes
                   Value of      1989/90      1990/91
                   Police                     including 50%
                   Services                   increase
                   (Note*)
                   £000          £000         £000


Sheffield Utd      390             74          111
Sheffield Wed      399             74          111
Barnsley           217             45           67
Rotherham Utd      175             33           49
Doncaster
Rovers              94             21           32
                 17275"           247"        *370

NOTE*           Based on new deployment proposals and special
                services rate.




WJW/MR
11 October 1990



                                           N O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as it
                                           contains exempt information
                                           within para.                        . of
                                           Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                                           Act 1972 as amended.
