                                           ( jij . b { ° \
                                    Charles Clarke MP


                                                                      H ome O ffice
                                                                     QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                                     LONDON SW1H 9AT

MINISTER OF STATE


  Clarence Swindell Esq
  Chairman
  South Yorkshire Police Authority
  PO Box 37 Regent Street
  BARNSLEY
  South Yorkshire S 70 2PQ                                               NOV 1999




                               U   . \ >




  I am writing to follow up my recent meeting with you, the Chief Constable, and
  others to discuss Hillsborough costs. I found the meeting very useful. It gave
  me a clear insight into the continuing implications of the tragic Hillsborough
  disaster for the force and the authority.

  I have had some quick enquiries made on the question of expediting any appeal
  on the taxation issue. I understand from the Inland Revenue that there is no
  right of appeal to the Tax Commissioners against the "pre-transaction" ruling
  which has been made in this case. An appeal can only be made after the
  defence costs are made to the officers and the payments are assessed for tax.
  Once that stage were reached I would be happy to try again to expedite any
  appeals process, without any guarantee of success, of course.

  On the specific issue of the Home Office providing financial assistance to the
  Authority in support of the tw o former officers' defence costs, I have carefully
  considered all the points you made. In this case the Authority has taken a
  decision to meet the officers' legal costs to date. I fully understand your
  reasons for reaching such a decision. Having done so, my view is that it has to
  be for the Authority to find the money. I do not believe that it is reasonable for
  the Authority on the one hand to agree to continue to pay the defence costs
  and then to look to the Home Office to contribute some funding. You may
  want to consider whether the Police Superintendents' Association could
  contribute.




 8 4 23 CC
I have looked separately at your request for support in respect of the personal
injury claims from victims. Given the circumstances I would be prepared to
consider further whether w e may be able to offer some limited form of financial
assistance. I have asked my officials to obtain further information from the
Authority's Treasurer on the breakdown of these costs to enable me to reach a
decision.

 I am sending a copy of this letter to the Chief Constable for his information.




84 23 CC
