SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 19 OCTOBER 1990

THE POLICE (DISCIPLINE) (SENIOR OFFICERS) REGULATIONS 1985

Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer

1     Matter for Consideration
      The timing of a decision on the investigation into complaints
      of
      1    Failure to take control of the Hillsborough Disaster.
      2    Collusion with Chief Superintendent Duckenfield to
           mislead the public and senior police officers.
      made against ACC Walter Jackson by Mr Trevor Hicks.
2     Background
2.1   The investigation carried out by Mr Leslie Sharpe, Chief
      constable of Cumbria, has now been completed and the
      Authority must decide what, if any action, should now be
      taken against ACC Mr Jackson as aresult of the findings.
2.2 Members have not yet seen the outcome        of the investigation
     and at the A u t ho ri ty ’s meeting on 14 September further
     consideration was deferred to enable the Clerk to liaise with
     the Police Complaints Authority in connection with its
     involvement with officers of lesser rank who have also had
     complaints registered against them arising out of the
     Hillsborough Disaster. This deferment was the result of the
     encouragement given to members at the meeting to deal with
     ACC Mr J ac ks on ’s complaint in tandem with those against the
     other officers for whom the Chief Constable has
     responsibility.
2.3   The issue with which the Police Complaints Authority is
      presently grappling is whether to defer a decision on these
      other complaints until after the inquests have been held and
      which commence on the 19 November. The timing of the
      decision on the complaints depends upon a number of factors
      which are discussed below but it is pertinent to point out at
      this juncture that the inquests may last for three months.
2.4    It is unlikely because of the depth of investigation which
       has already been carried out by the Director of Public
       Prosecutions, that fresh evidence will emerge from the
       inquests. However, the possibility cannot be ignored and
       this may be relevant to the decision that has to be taken by
       the Authority concerning Mr Jackson. Any new evidence will
      have to be considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions
      and might result in him changing his decision not to
      prosecute anyone in connection with the disaster.If this were
      to happen, the A uthority’s consideration of ACC Mr J a ck so n’s
      case would have to be delayed until any criminal proceedings
      were completed.
2.5   The likelihood of fresh evidence emerging at the inquests
      must be weighed in the balance as also must the effects any
      delay in reaching a decision on the disciplinary aspects will
      have upon the officers who are the subject of complaints.
      They have been told no criminal action is to be taken and not
      unnaturally perhaps, they will be expecting a speedy decision
      on the complaints - whether they are to be subject to
      disciplinary action or not. It is this balance that is to be
      considered by the Police Complaints Authority at a meeting
      which is being held on the 18 October. Members will be
      informed of the outcome of this meeting as it will be an
      influence on the A u thority’s further conduct of the issues
      relating to ACC Mr Jackson.
2.6   If the Authority decides to consider the outcome of Mr
      S ha rp e’s investigation before the inquests are concluded, it
      is considered this should be done at a special meeting of the
      Authority to be addressed by him.
3     Recommendation
      Members note the report with an oral update to be made at the
      meeting and then resolve:-
      1   When to consider the complaints against ACC Mr Jackson.
      2   If it is to be done before the inquests that a special
           meeting of the Authority be convened to be addressed by
           Mr Sharpe, Chief Constable of Cumbria.



R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer


                                           NOT FOR       P U B L I C A T I O N as it
                                           contains       exempt         information
                                           w i t h i n para.   .                 of
                                            S c h . l 2 A to the Local Governm ent
                                            Act 1972 as amended.
