    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY



    5 JANUARY 1990
                                                                            11
    REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE



    HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - IMPLEMENTATION OF
    THE TAYLOR INQUIRY REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS



    Matter for Consideration

    To report on the action taken in relation to the Police Authority resolutions
    numbered  four,  five a.to d.  and six (minute 118 of  the Police Authority
    meeting held on 17 November 1989 refers).



    Background Information

    The Chief Constable submitted a report at the Police Authority meeting held on
    17 November 1989 detailing the action taken by the South Yorkshire Police both
    prior to and subsequent to the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's     Interim
    Report,    including  consultations with local authorities,       the criminal
    investigation, matters of complaint and discipline, the Coroner's Inquest, the
    civil actions and,   the  effects of the disaster on the health and welfare  of
    the Force.

    Following this report     the Authority    resolved that a further report   be
    prepared, inter alia, on a number of aspects of the resolution as follows:-


    Resolution 4

    That the Chief Constable be requested to consider and report on the suggestion
    that all relevant information on the policing of football matches   should be
    provided to both the relevant local authorities and the football clubs in the

•   interest  of increasing the effectiveness of liaison with other than just
    other emergency services.
                                                                               the



    The suggestion,   that  all relevant information on the policing of football
    matches  should be provided to both the local authorities and the football
    clubs in the interest of increasing the effectiveness of 'liaison with other
    than just the emergency services has been considered.  The Chief Constable has
    directed that a full police operational order for every football match shall
    be available to each local authority and each football club.


    Resolution 5a.

    The comments and criticisms of the Taylor Inquiry with regard to the   policing
    of the South Yorkshire Force on the day of the disaster.

    The Chief Constable has noted with regret and concern the nature and the tenor
    of the comments and criticisms about the actions of certain South Yorkshire
    Police officers on the day of the disaster contained in Lord Justice Taylor's
    report.
As stated in his report of 17 November 1989, the Chief Constable has asked the
Director of Public Prosecutions to advise upon the criminal consequences of
such actions.    The Director,   in turn,   has called for a full criminal
investigation which is on-going and is being conducted,   independently, by the
West Midlands Police,    who will also pursue any complaints     or discipline
matters that arise.  Until that report is available and the Director of Public
Prosecutions,  the Police Authority and the Chief Constable have made their
decisions regarding   future action on the criminal and complaints aspect,
comment on the actions of individual officers would at this time be improper.

All comment or criticisms contained in the Report were,     where appropriate,
transposed  as recommendations   and all affecting the      police have   been
implemented as previously reported to the Committee.




Resolution 5b.

The comments and criticisms of the Taylor Inquiry with regard to the evidence
given to the Inquiry by police officers of the South Yorkshire Force and  the
manner in which such evidence was given.

Of the 172 witnesses, who gave oral evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry,
59 of them (over 33%) were South Yorkshire Police officers.  The Force adopted
a policy of complete openness and helpfulness towards the Inquiry.    Following
the disaster,  the Chief Constable's concerns were those of the Inquiry itself
- to discover exactly what happened and to make sure that nothing      like it
could happen again in South Yorkshire or elsewhere.   To this end,  the Chief
Constable set up a liaison team which furnished the Inquiry with over       900
statements and whatever    additional information it required.     Whilst   the
Inquiry was sitting,   the Treasury Solicitors made constant requests to this
team, all of which were met.  Unsolicited, the South Yorkshire Police produced
numerous photographs and plans for use by the Inquiry.    Each of the police
witnesses that were called gave their testimony fully and voluntarily.

Despite the policy of openness adopted by the South Yorkshire Police,   some
individual   officers   may have felt under     severe attack from the    10
representative Counsel who had the opportunity with the benefit of hindsight
to question them about their actions and decisions.

As Lord Justice Taylor complimented certain officers for the way they gave
their  evidence but has not indicated which officers he has criticised,     the
Chief Constable is of the view that it would serve no purpose to speculate.


Resolution 5c.

What  steps he has taken to review and change the planning,    procedures and
operation of the Force     since the Hillsborough disaster  in light of the
comments and criticisms of the Taylor Inquiry, particularly those contained in
Chapter 18.

The planning procedures involved in the policing of football events have been
reviewed and supplemented as follows:-
   (i)   The South Yorkshire Police have entered into a written agreement with
         each of the    football  league clubs in the County.       The written
         agreement covers such matters as club/police liaison before any event;
         the preparation of contingency plans;  demarcation of responsibilities
         in  the filling and monitoring of the terraces;  provision and use   of
         cutting equipment; plans for relieving overcrowding, etc.

  (ii)   The operational planning for each football match in South Yorkshire is
         intended to enable the police to cope with foreseeable patterns in the
         arriv al   » and departure    from,  the event   by spectators.    The
         following scenarios are each catered for by way of contingency plans

         a)   all ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches
         b)   early arrival of spectators
         c)   unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators
         d)   individual section of ground approaching capacity
         e)   whole ground approaching capacity
         f)    late arrival of spectators
         g)    emergency opening of external gates, (or forcing of external
                gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators
         h)   early departure of spectators from ground
         i)   emergency evacuation

         A reserve   of officers is maintained at each ground to enable their
         rapid deployment to any difficulty which may arise inside or outside
         the ground.

 (iii)   The South Yorkshire Police now liaise with the fire       and   ambulance
         services at the time of planning for a football event.

  (iv)   A model   South Yorkshire Police operational order for football events
         is nearing   completion.   Operational orders have been obtained  from
         most Forces in England and Wales - best practise has been adopted  and
         the  lessons  learned from the Hillsborough disaster (highlighted    at
         paragraphs 273 and 274 of the Taylor Report) have been incorporated.

   (v)   The South Yorkshire Police have prepared a video     tape film which
         highlights  the problems of crowd density,   crowd distress and crowd
         dynamics.  The film will be used as a training aid for both police and
         stewards who monitor football crowds.

  (vi)   Furthermore,   the    police   Implementation Team has     produced  a
         comprehensive  package detailing the measures which have already been
         taken or are recommended for the future at each football     ground in
         South Yorkshire    to ensure crowd safety.   These packages have been
         provided  to the local authorities who each have a responsibility for
         the safety certification at football grounds.     Extracts  from these
         packages were   appended to the Chief Constable's last report   to the
         Police Authority on 17 November 1989.

These  steps are together intended to enhance the planning and operational
procedures involved in the policing of football events in South Yorkshire.
Resolution 5d.

The steps he has taken to review the change of management training   appraisal
and quality of officers of the Force since the Hillsborough disaster in light
    the comments and criticisms of the Taylor Inquiry,     particularly those
contained in Chapter 18.

Chapter 18 of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report states that  "...over many
years the South Yorkshire Police have given excellent service to the public.
They have handled crowd problems sensitively and successfully at a large
number of football games including major matches,   during strikes in the coal
industry and the steel industry, and in other contexts...".

The management training,   appraisal and selection processes that exist within
the Force are all targetted to achieve a continuation of that       "excellent
service to the public" of South Yorkshire.    Such matters are under constant
review and any changes considered appropriate will be introduced.

The policing of football matches has traditionally been regarded by the police
service as a whole as a particular     public  order problem.    Training has
reflected this view - policing of football has been subsumed in general public
order training.    In the light of the Hillsborough disaster there are clearly
policing matters specific to football events that warrant a training    input,
eg,  Safety Certification matters,   football crowd dynamics,  communications,
intelligence gathering,  contingency planning,  CCTV utilisation,   membership
schemes,   etc.    The Association of Chief Police Officers has already
recommended that these matters be subject of a carousel course at the Police
Staff College,   Bramshill.   When this course is arranged the Chief Constable
will ensure that South Yorkshire officers attend.

Within Force,   the superintendents who have a responsibility for policing
arrangements at the five football league grounds in South Yorkshire have been
co-opted onto the Implementation Team which has been tasked with implementing
the recommendations contained in the Taylor Interim Report.




Resolution 6

That,   as previously requested by minute 81.2 of 29 September 1989,  progress
reports be submitted to each scheduled meeting of the Authority until further
notice.

There is little by the way of further progress to report in addition to   that
already reported to the Authority on 17 November 1989.

As outlined at paragraph 3.3 of that report the Police Implementation Team
provided  each local authority with a comprehensive report of what the police
have so far achieved.  The Authorities were each asked to convene a meeting to
discuss the report relative to their area and what still remains to be done
through the Local Authority Licensing Committees.

Item four dealt with the increased costs for policing football matches.  The
Chief Constable can now report that the Association of Chief Police Officers
Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events has undertaken to review
nationally and consider    further the position of police costs    arising     from
football.  They will report in due course.

The officer referred to at paragraph 9.3 has now been retired from the Force,
on the grounds of ill-health.

On 30 November 1989 it was announced that the Chief Constable and the South
Yorkshire Police Authority were offering an out-of-court settlement    to the
bereaved  and injured at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.   The purpose of this
was  to ensure that those entitled to compensation receive it without  further
delay.

The below press statement was released at 2.30 pm:-

 It has been decided by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and the South
Yorkshire Police Authority,   in conjunction with their   insurers,  Municipal
Mutual  Insurance,  that  those bereaved and injured in the tragic  events at
Hillsborough  stadium on 15 April should not have to await the outcome of a
further lengthy hearing in 1990 before receiving compensation.

In the circumstances,  the Chief Constable,  in conjunction with his insurers,
intends  to open negotiations with the aim of resolving all bona fide claims
against him for compensation arising out of the Hillsborough disaster.

The other   parties  presently named as Defendants in the civil proceedings
arising out of the Hillsborough tragedy,  namely, Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club,  Eastwood & Partners,  and Sheffield City Council, have been offered the
opportunity of   joining in the course of action now taken on behalf    of the
South Yorkshire Police, but have refused to do so.  It is the intention of the
Chief Constable and his insurers to pursue legal action against those parties
to recover moneys paid out to the claimants pursuant to today's offer."


Recommended

The Police Authority note the current position as     previously   requested    by
minute 81.2 of 29 September 1989.




P WRIGHT
CHIEF CONSTABLE
