SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
FINANCE AND GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE
9 AUGUST 1991: JOINT SECRETARIAT. BARNSLEY

PRESENT:   Councillor Sir John Layden (Chairman)
           Councillors: G Gallimore (Vice-Chairman), R Fisher, D W George,
           R W Gillies, C Swindell, C M Walayat, R Whitfield
           Magistrate member: Mrs B R Bullivant
1   MINUTES
     RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Committee held on the
     21 June 1991 be signed by the Chairman as acorrect record.
2   CONFERENCES
     A report by the Clerk and Financial Officer referred to invitations for the
     Authority to be represented at two conferences.
     RESOLVED -
     1      That three members of the Authority be authorised to represent the
            Authority at the National Conference on Police and Community
            Consultation in Manchester on Monday 18 November 1991 and that it be
            noted that two representatives of the Pol tap and Community Liaison
            Forums will also be nominated.
     2     That one member from each district, together with a Magistrate Member,
           be nominated to attend the International Police Exhibition and
           Conference to be held at the Barbican, London from 17 to 19 September
           1991 •             ,   to *(. &C.                   I p * '* ' < ^ 3 •

3    PROJECT PROGRESS REPORT                Stli,I. f e W ,
                                   r                k   u m   .
     A report by the Architectural Services Officer referred to the progress
     being made on the various projects included in the Authority's building
     programme.
4   CAPITAL MONITORING
     A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
     was submitted on the current forecasted capital spending in 1991/2 as
     compared with the approved capital programme. The cost of schemes listed
     had decreased by £58,500 and current year spending was expected to be £9,200
     within the provision of £2,479,000.
     RESOLVED - The current forecasted capital payments in 1991/2 be noted.
5   BULK PURCHASE OF UNIFORM ON A REGIONAL BASIS
     A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
     referred to an initiative involving the Home Office, Association of Chief
     Police Officers, and other staff associations in which regional working
     parties were established to consider the cost effectiveness and potential
     savings through bulk purchasing of uniform stocks on a regional basis.
- 2 -

    A measure of agreement had been reached on the possible standardisation of
    garments and six of the seven forces in the region were considering whether
    to take part in the arrangement of a regional contract commencing in 1992.
    South Yorkshire was unable to do so being tied to an existing contract until
    1993, but it was anticipated that the arrangements should be sufficiently
    flexible to allow the inclusion of South Yorkshire at the end of the
    existing contract.
        Using the experience of three forces who had mounted a joint purchasing
        arrangement for 1991/2 it seemed that, based on South Yorkshire's 1991/2
        costs, a possible saving of £23,700 could have been achieved with regional
        bulk purchasing. Whilst the Authority were attracted by this potential
        saving some members had reservations about the precise way in which the
        arrangements would work. In particular would the Yorkshire Purchasing
        Organisation have a role in this scheme? If not, who would undertake the
        administration and what would be the cost? Finally, after the tender stage
        who would decide on the award of the contract?
        RESOLVED - That the report be noted and that further reports be submitted as
        discussions proceed.
        URBAN ACTION ACTIVITIES - FUTURE PROJECTS
        A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
        referred to Urban Action activities. In accordance with the established
        policy that projects costing between £500 and £2,500 be submitted to the
        committee for approval, a project involving a National Young Anglers
        Competition was considered at an estimated cost of £900 to be financed from
        the Headquarters main fund.
        RESOLVED - That the proposal to support a National Young Anglers Competition
        at a cost of £900 to be financed from the Headquarters main fund be
        approved.
7       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY UNIVERSITY SCHEME
        A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
        referred to the Police Authority University Scheme which enabled up to six
        serving officers annually to attend at university full-time to read for a
        first degree. Twenty-two officers had obtained degrees in this way and all
        were still serving in the South Yorkshire Police.
        It was now proposed that the existing arrangements be extended to include
        second Degrees starting with Master in Business Administration Degrees. The
        course for this degree extended over two years but most of the work was in
        the candidates own time so that from an organisational point of view there
        was very little disruption to the normal work cycle, as distinct from a
        first degree course where effectively the force lost the candidate's
        services for three years. In addition to this, the degree offered other
        advantages to the organisation due to the practical way in which the course
        content was related to the candidates occupation. The overall cost of a
        course was £9,500.
        It was noted that the number of graduates in the Police Force was steadily
        rising and that at some stage it would be appropriate for the Authority to
        look at the role that such graduates were to play in the force.
- 3 -
        RESOLVED - That approval be given to the proposed amendment to the existing
        University Scheme to include second degrees, starting with Masters in
        Business Administration Degrees.

8       DEVOLVED BUDGETING
        A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
        referred to minute 11 of the meeting of the Committee on 21 June 1991 when a
        report had been requested to this meeting of the Committee dealing with the
        monitoring of a devolved budget system. A further report was also
        requested, to be submitted in due course, looking at the financial
        consequences in future years.
        A system of devolved budgeting had been under consideration since 24 August
        1990 when the Committee had received and noted a report identifying the need
        to consider devolved budgeting arrangements.
        Such a system remained mainly at the planning stagethough some devolvement
        had already occurred; any devolved budgeting arrangements would be designed
        to comply with the financial arrangements specified within the Authority's
        Standing Orders. The main thrust of devolved budgeting was to provide
        operational managers with information to enable them to obtain the optimum
        use of scarce financial resources, and assist the Chief Constable in the
        allocation and monitoring of the Authority's approved budget estimates. It
        did not diminish the role of the Police Authority.
        RESOLVED -
        1    That the report be noted.
        2    That a presentation on devolved budgeting be made to a future meeting
              of the Authority
9       PRINT ROOM SUPERVISOR
        A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
        referred to the staffing of the force printing department.
        It was noted that the demand for printing had increased considerably since
        1984 and a Research and Development Officer had completed an evaluation of
        requirements to improve the service. Some changes had already been made but
        the review had also identified the need to improve the supervisory
        structure. An additional post of Print Room Supervisor on scale 4 seemed to
        be appropriate.
        Comparisons with two other forces in the region, both having smaller
        establishments, indicated that both employed more staff and also employed a
        Print Room Manager.
        At the present time finance was not available to fund the appointment.
        RESOLVED - That the Authority approve without commitment the creation of a
        post of Print Room Supervisor on grade scale 4 and that the Chief
        Constable's intention to report further on how the post may be funded,
        together with confirmation of an appropriate salary grade, be noted.
FORCE SUGGESTION SCHEME
A report of the Chief Constable referred to the Force Suggestion Scheme
under which about fifty suggestions were received each year. Any police
officer or civilian employee could make a suggestion to improve efficiency,
effectiveness, or economical operation of the force. Suggestions were
evaluated by the Research and Development Department.
It was now considered that operation of the Scheme would be improved if
persons making the best three suggestions in each calendar year received a
cash award. The decision as to which suggestions were best would be based
on the improvement the suggestion had made to the operational or
administrative efficiency and effectiveness of the force, particularly the
degree it had enhanced the force's ability to serve the public. Financial
saving would be a factor in the consideration, but not the sole determinant.
RESOLVED - That £500 per financial year be allocated to provide cash awards
for the Force Suggestion Schemes.
PURCHASE OF SPEED DETECTION UNITS
RESOLVED - That approval be given to a capital estimate of £4,875 for the
purchase of ten Vascar speed detection units direct from the manufacturers,
Traffic Safety Systems Limited, Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire.
REVISED LOCAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE FOR APT&C STAFF
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
referred to the meeting of the Committee on 21 June 1991 when a proposal to
carry through some amendments to the conditions of service was deferred to a
future meeting.
The local conditions of service had been revised to take account of the
abolition of the County Council, specific amendments either now proposed or
previously approved and certain additional general amendments.
RESOLVED - That consideration be referred to the South Yorkshire Joint
Consultative Committee.
LIST OF OUTSTANDING AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted on outstanding and/or requested reports.
RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
EXCLUSION OF PUBLIC AND PRESS
RESOLVED - That under Section 100 (A)(4) of the Local Government Act 1972
the public be excluded from the meeting for the following items of business
on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure of exempt information
as defined in paragraphs 1,7,8 and 10 of part 1 of Schedule 12A of the Act.
VOLUNTARY EARLY RETIREMENT FOR MRS E L K
RESOLVED - That approval be given to the retirement of Mrs E L K on
31 August 1991 in accordance with the provisions of the Authority's
Voluntary Early Retirement Scheme and that she receive the appropriate
benefits under the Scheme.
POLICE RADIO INSTALLATION. KEPPELS RESERVOIR SITE. ROTHERHAM
RESOLVED -
1     That approval be given to a capital estimate of £41,500 for the
      construction of a new radio mast and equipment room at Keppels
      Reservoir site, Rotherham.
2     That competitive tenders be invited for the work
NETHER EDGE HOSPITAL. SHEFFIELD - PROPOSED POLICE POST
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
referred to a proposal to establish a police post within Nether Edge
Hospital, Sheffield. The facilities would be made available at no cost to
the Police Authority except for some minor modifications to increase
security.
RESOLVED -
1     That approval be given to the occupation of accommodation provided by
      Sheffield Health Authority within the site of Nether Edge Hospital,
      Sheffield
2     That as there appears to be advantages to both parties the possibility
      of extending the arrangement to other hospitals be investigated.
RADIO CONTROL EQUIPMENT
A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
referred to the proposal to replace existing radio installations which were
becoming difficult to maintain.
Due to the value of the contract the project had been advertised in the
official journal of the European Communitiesinviting interestedCompanies
to apply for inclusion in a restricted list of tenderers. The Committee now
considered the response received.
RESOLVED - That an invitation to tender for this contract be issued to the
firms now named in Appendix A to the report.
VEHICLE PURCHASES
RESOLVED - That approval be given to a capital estimate of £216,300 and to
the purchase direct from the manufacturers of the vehicles now referred to.
CRIME MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
A       Computer Hardware
        A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer, Chief Constable,
        and the Director of Finance and Economic Development, Doncaster MBC,
        referred to the resolution to minute 24 of the meeting of the
        Committee on 21 June 1991 when approval had been given to the
        development of a crime management computer system subject to a
        detailed investigation of the existing computer equipment operated by
        Doncaster MBC to assess its ability to support the new system,
        service.
        Meetings had been held between police officers, computer staff from
        Doncaster MBC, and the technical experts from the computer software
        company following which the conclusion reached was that the preferred
        option was for the force to purchase a new computer, by competitive
        tender.
        RESOLVED -
        1      That approval be given to the purchase of a new computer, by
              competitive tender, to meet the technical specification needed
              to implement the new crime management system.
        2      That the list of firms to be invited to tender be drawn up
              following consultation with the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of
              the Committee.
        3      That the foregoing be subject to the signing within seven days
              of the agreement between the South Yorkshire Police and
              Doncaster MBC extending the arrangements for the provision of
              computer services for a further period of five years from 1
              April 1992.
    B   Licensing Concessions
        A joint report of the Chief Constable, the Clerk and Financial
        Officer, and the Director of Finance and Economic Development,
        Doncaster MBC referred to the licensing arrangement which would be
        necessary between the force and the manufacturers of the software
        product. The Company were prepared to offer a substantial reduction
        in the license fees if the whole of the sum payable was paid in 1991/2
        rather than over two years as previously proposed.
        RESOLVED -
         1     That approval be given to afurther capital estimate of £95,800
              for phase 1 of the crime management system in 1991/2
        2      That approval in principle be given to the acceptance of the
               licensing proposal as offered by the suppliers of the software
         3     That detailed negotiations   be undertaken to reach a contractual
               agreement
21   MANUAL WORKERS - APPEALS AGAINST JOB GRADES - CONSTITUTION OF APPEALS PANEL
     A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
     referred to a request from the GMB that Trades Union Representatives should
     sit on the Authority's appeals panel when manual worker grading appeals are
     being heard. The Authority noted that similar requests were being made in
     respect of other Authorities.
     RESOLVED - That consideration of this matter be referred to the South
     Yorkshire Joint Consultative Committee.
22   THORNE POLICE STATION - DETENTION ACCOMMODATION - INTERVIEW ROOMS AND RADIO
     ROOM
     A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
     referred to the circumstances in which additional expenditure had been
     incurred on the provision of detention accommodation, interview rooms, and
     radio room at Thorne Police Station.
     RESOLVED - That approval be given to additional capital expenditure of
     £10,550
23   POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES - CHARGES FOR THE 1991/92 SEASON
     RESOLVED -
     1     That in respectof the charges for the policing of football matches
           during the 1991/92 season a charging policy be adopted based on match
           categorisation on the Chief Constable's deployment figures for each
           club
     2     That the prices to be charged for the 1991/2 season be based on the
           following principles:
           i)     a target cost recovery rate of 38.4% for the first and second
                  division clubs
            ii)   a target cost recovery rate of 30% for fourth division clubs
     3      That the price schedule to be issued to each club be on the basis set
            out in Appendix G to the report now considered
     4      That the formal notification to the football clubs draw their
            attention specifically to the matters referred to in Section 6 of the
            report.




 WP012590/SJL
