SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 30 AUGUST 1991

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS AT THE INQUESTS INTO THE
DEATHS AT THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER AND ASSOCIATED DISCIPLINARY
PROCEEDINGS                           ------------------

Joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
Constable

1     Matter for Consideration
1.1 The extent of financial assistance to police officers for
    representation at the Hillsborough inquests and the impact of
    this on the provision of financial assistance to Chief
    Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray who are
    now the subject of disciplinary proceedings.
2     Background
2.1   In December 1990 the Authority granted applications by 6
      police officers
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
      Superintendents Murray, Greenwood and Marshall
      PCs Smith and Illingworth
      for financial support in connection with their separate legal
      representation at the Hillsborough Inquests.
2.2 The agreement was subject to the 4 members of the
    Superintendents’ Association first using the £50,000
    available to them under policies of insurance which each of
    them had. Those policies are effected by every member of the
    Superintendents’ Association for the primary purpose of using
    policy monies to finance legal representation at disciplinary
    proceedings. As it was accepted that these officers may be
    the subject of disciplinary proceedings it was agreed that
    each of them could retain £10,000 exclusive of VAT, out of
    the policy monies for that eventuality.
2.3 Money expended by the Police Authority so far under the
    agreement is as follows:
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield                  £47,200
      Superintendent Murray                             £53,325
      What further money will have to be paid has yet to be
      finalised but the present situation is as follows.
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
His solicitors have asked for a further £22,000 by way of
legal costs incurred at the inquests. This is in dispute and
the court will decide what further costs are payable by the
Authority. It is hoped a decision on this will be made
before the Authority’s meeting.
Superintendent Murray
All claims have now been settled therefore nothing more has
to be paid to him or his solicitors under the agreement.
Superintendent Greenwood
The legal costs of his representation at the inquests to be
borne by the Authority have not been finalised but are
unlikely to be more than £25,000.
Superintendent Marshall
Again his legal costs have yet to be finalised but it looks
increasingly unlikely that the Authority will have to pay any
part of his representation at the inquests.
PCs Illingworth and Smith
Details of costs incurred by these two officers is still
awaited but should be available by the time of the meeting.
An update on potential liability of the Authority under the
will be provided at the meeting.
Financial Assistance to Police Officers in Disciplinary
Proceedings
Home Office Circular No 77/1987 published on 4 December 1987
provides guidance to Police Authorities on the exercise of
their discretion in considering applications on behalf of
police officers for financial assistance towards the cost of
legal advice and representation arising from involvement in
legal proceedings which result from pursuance of their duties
in good faith of their duties or where the interests of the
Force as a whole are involved. It was under the terms of
this Circular that the Authority reached the agreement of
December last year to support the 6 police officers in their
legal representation at the Inquests.
As has already been stated at paragraph 2.2, the 2 officers
who are now the subject of disciplinary proceedings were
allowed to retain £10,000 exclusive of VAT from the £50,000
due under their insurance policy to enable them to be legally
represented at these disciplinary proceedings. It is
relevant to note again that the purpose of effecting these
insurance policies in the first place was to provide the
appropriate level of legal representation in disciplinary
proceedings.
The Disci pi iniary proceedings will be before a Tribunal
Chaired by Mr John Newing, Chief Constable of Derbyshire
sitting with 2 members of the Police Complaints Authority.
The officers are entitled to be legally represented at the
hearing and both have indicated that they would wish to be so
represented.
It is now anticipated that the cost of such representation
may exceed the £10,000 available to each officer. It is
impossible at this stage to say by how much; it all depends
how long the hearings last, but it is unlikely to be a quick
hearing. If the level of representation at the inquests
reflects the sort of representation which will be required at
the disciplinary hearings, which it is felt it does, then a
hearing lasting longer than a week will exhaust the £10,000
available to each officer. It is felt the hearings will take
several weeks.
Natural Justice would seem to demand that the officers are
legally represented throughout the entire course of the
disciplinary hearing. Natural Justice would not be served if
these officers were to lose such representation part way
through because they have run out of funds. In this respect
it is cogent to point out that officers of Superintendent and
Chief Superintendent ranks are at a disadvantage when
compared with members of the Federated ranks who are entitled
to and are regularly provided with free legal representation
through the Police Federation. No such facility is available
to officers of Superintendent rank.
Financial Implications
If the Authority were to provide financial assistance to the
2 officers the Home Office have confirmed this would not be
eligible for grant. However as has been pointed out in
paragraph 2.4 any payment made in connection with the
inquests is eligible for grant and arrangements can no doubt
be made with the officer’s insurers that if the Police
Authority were to pick up more of the inquest bill for legal
representation than under the agreement reached in December
last year, then they would use their policy monies to provide
the appropriate legal representation at the disciplinary
hearing. Any agreement with the Insurers would be subject to
     their liability being £50,000 at any time; that is liability
     for providing legal representation at both the inquests and
     the disciplinary proceedings. This would ensure that the
     Authority minimises its liability.
5    Recommendations
5.1 The Authority is recommended:
     1    To note the present financial position in connection
          with the inquests subject to a further report when the
          actual cost is known.
     2    To approve a commitment on the terms outlined in this
          report to ensure Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
          Superintendent Murray are adequately represented in the
          forthcoming disciplinary proceedings arising out of the
          Hillsborough Disaster.

                                                                 Ntfl &
R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer

R B Wells
Chief Constable



                              N O T FOR P U B L I C A T I O N as it
                              contains exempt information
                              within para. » . . % . * • • • • • • • °f
                              Sch.12A to the Local Government
                              Act 1972 as amended._ _ _ _ _ _ _ '
