SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                    i KGi fOH rUBliCAl ION ss ft
30 October 1998                                     !            exempt information
                                                        •5   K



Joint Report of the Clerk and Treasurer and Chi^f^oh'itSfale • .............          01
                                                    I Sen. l2 A io the Local Govsrnnnsnt
                                                    j Act 1972 as amended
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS4N-UEiGAI=--------------------------------------
PROCEEDINGS - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

1.    Purpose of the Report

To inform members of the recent applications made for financial assistance in
connection with legal proceedings related to the Hillsborough Disaster and to
consider the manner in which any further applications are to be dealt with.


      2.    Recommendations

      Members are recommended to:

      i)    receive the report; and

      ii)   to consider the manner in which any further
             applications for financial assistance towards legal
             representation are to be dealt with.



3.    Background Information

3.1   On the 28 February 1998, Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines
      informed members of the Authority of the findings of the Scrutiny
      undertaken by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith into the Hillsborough Football
      Stadium Disaster. The Home Secretary accepted Lord Justice Stuart-
      Smith’s findings that there was no fresh relevant evidence and that no
      new inquiry was warranted. Assistant Chief Constable Daines also
      informed members that there were indications that private prosecutions
      may be brought against some serving and retired officers.

3.2   In the event of private prosecutions being instituted, it was anticipated
      that applications for financial assistance towards legal representation
      would be received from the officers concerned. Bearing in mind the
      speed with which proceedings could move and the desirability of
      dealing with any applications for financial assistance expeditiously, the
      Authority was asked to consider authorising the Clerk and Treasurer to
      deal with such applications. The Authority agreed to this authorisation.
      Applications

4.1   Applications for financial assistance towards legal representation have
      been approved by the Clerk and Treasurer in respect of the following:

      i)     Former Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield who is
             represented by Winkworth & Pemberton Solicitors (London);

      ii)    Former Superintendent Bernard Murray who is represented by
              Walker Morris Solicitors (Leeds);

      iii)   Former Superintendent Roger Greenwood who is represented
              by Vizards Solicitors (London);

      iii)   Sergeant Trevor Bichard.

4.2   In June 1998 the Solicitors to the Hillsborough Family Support Group
      laid information at Bootle Magistrates against Mr Duckenfield and
      Mr Murray and summons were issued. Those proceedings ended
      because of a dispute over jurisdiction and costs were awarded to
      Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. Proceedings have now been initiated
      at Leeds Magistrates Court. Each of the now retired officers is alleged
      to have committed manslaughter in respect of two named individuals

4.3   The Authority is asked to consider how it wishes any further
      applications to be determined. In the event that the Authority is content
      for the Clerk and Treasurer to determine such applications on its behalf
      in accordance with Home Office Guidance, the Authority is asked to
      extend the delegation granted to the Clerk and Treasurer. A copy of
      the current Home Office Guidance is attached as an Appendix to this
      report for the consideration of members.

5.    Financial Implications

5.1   At the present time it is difficult to assess the financial implications
      arising from the approvals granted. However, the Solicitors acting for
      Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray will continue to seek to recover costs
      whenever possible.

W J W ilkinson                          M I Hedges
Clerk and Treasurer                     Chief Constable

Officer responsible:       Miss M V Oades, Assistant Clerk and Solicitor
                           Ian Daines, Assistant Chief Constable

Background papers used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection at the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, Barnsley.

Other sources and references: None


                                                                                 2
HOC 4/1998                                                                        17 February 1998

THIS CIRCULAR IS ABOUT:          FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN
                                 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

FROM:     POLICE RESOURCES UNIT                   EXPIRY DATE:     NONE

LAST DATE FOR
IMPLEMENTATION: IMMEDIATE                         THIS CANCELS HOC:     77/1987

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT:                     STEVE SCHOLEY
                                                  POLICE RESOURCES UNIT
                                                  ROOM 610
                                                  50 QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                  LONDON SW1H 9AT
                                                  TEL: 0171 273 3606
                                                  FAX: 0171 273 3742

THIS CIRCULAR IS ADDRESSED TO:                    CHIEF OFFICERS OF POLICE
                                                  (ENGLAND & WALES)

COPIES ARE ALSO BEING SENT TO:                    CLERKS TO THE POLICE AUTHORITIES
                                                  RECEIVER FOR THE METROPOLITAN
                                                  POLICE DISTRICT




        Dear Chief Officer/Clerk,

        This circular:

        • provides updated guidance to police authorities on financial assistance to police
          officers in legal proceedings.

        • distinguishes between officers involved in civil proceedings, criminal
          proceedings and other types of legal proceedings.

        • replaces HO Circular 77/1987.
Introduction

1.     It is important that police officers should be able to carry out their duties in
the confidence that their police authority will support them, if they act in good faith
and exercise their judgement reasonably. The following guidance, which has been
prepared in consultation with ACPO, the Superintendents Association, the Police
Federation and the Association of Police Authorities, should be read against this
principle.

Civil Proceedings

2.     Under section 88 (1) of the Police Act 1996 which re-enacts section 48(1) of
the Police Act 1964, chief officers are liable for torts committed by officers under
their direction and control. Section 88(2) provides that any damages or costs
awarded against the chief officer and any costs they incur themselves (which are not
recovered) should be met from police authority funds.

3.     Alternatively, a court may award damages against individual police officers.
Section 88(4) of the Police Act 1996 empowers a police authority “to such an extent
as appears to it to be appropriate” to pay any damages or costs awarded against
officers (this includes both officers of other forces serving in the police area under
mutual aid arrangements and special constables), any costs incurred by the officers
themselves and any sum paid in connection with the settlement of a claim. It is for
police authorities to decide when to make assistance available, taking account of the
circumstances of a particular case.

4.     Police authorities are reminded that the discretionary powers in sections
88(4) and (5) of the Act, enabling them to provide financial assistance to officers
involved in legal proceedings, apply to civil proceedings only. Sections 88(4) and
88(5) may also apply to police officers who were members at the time of the action
which gave rise to the claim but who are no longer members.

Criminal Proceedings

5.     Section 88(4) does not apply to criminal proceedings, but police authorities
may wish to consult their legal advisers as to whether they have any other power to
provide such assistance (whether in respect of private prosecutions or prosecutions
brought by the CPS). In this context, they may wish to note that section 111(1) of
the Local Government Act 1972 enables police authorities to do anything “which is
calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the discharge of any of their
functions”. The provision applies to provincial authorities (but not the Metropolitan
or City of London police) by virtue of Section 146A of the 1972 Act (as inserted
by Schedule 14 to the Local Government Act 1985 and amended by Schedule 4 of
the Police and Magistrates’ Courts Act 1994). It could be argued that to allow
 payment to be made to officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal
proceedings would in some way facilitate ox be c o n d u c t i d a u f h o r i l y l s
'broad functions. For example, failure to provide financial assistance could
 adversely affect the morale of the force if officers had to meet their own costs after
 an acquittal.

6.      It is for individual police authorities to decide in the particular circumstances
of a case, and on the basis of legal advice, whether to make financial assistance
available to officers in criminal proceedings.

Other_tvpes of legal proceedings

7.     Similarly, there is no express statutory authority for providing financial
assistance in proceedings brought against police officers in tribunals other than the
courts. It is for police authorities outside London (bearing in mind the
recommendations of chief officers) to decide whether to make financial assistance
available to officers (either former or serving) involved in Public Inquiries and
Tribunals. Police authorities will therefore need to consider whether section 111(1)
of the Local Government Act 1972 provides sufficient scope to enable financial
assistance to be given in any particular case. In this respect tribunals may include
certain industrial tribunals where it is clear that officers have acted in good faith in
pursuance of their duties and die interest of the force as a whole is involved. It is to
be expected that, where appropriate, the service’s grievance procedure
arrangements should be exhausted before there is recourse to legal proceedings.
These arrangements are set out in Home Office Circular 16/93, issued 10 March
1993.

8.     There are specific provisions in the Race Relations Act 1976 and the Sex
Discrimination Act 1975 for compensation, costs and expenses awarded against the
chief officer of police and any sum required for settlement, if approved by the
police authority, to be paid from the police fund.

9.     There is no express statutory authority for providing financial assistance to
an officer wishing to initiate court proceedings. The considerations set out in
paragraphs 5 to 7 above apply to such cases.




LYNDA LOCKYER
POLICE RESOURCES UNIT
