SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY       NOT FOR PUBLICATION as i t
                                       contains   exempt   information
FINANCE & GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE
                                       within para.                 of
15 SEPTEMBER 1989                      Sch.l2A to the Local Government t
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE          Act 1972 as amended.            !


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

1.     Matter for Consideration

       The provision of financial assistance to police officers involved in
       legal proceedings arising from the event at Hillsborough Football Ground
       on 15 April 1989.


2.     Background Information

2.1    Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987, provides
       guidance to Police Authorities on the exercise of their discretion in
       considering applications, on behalf of police officers, for financial
       assistance towards the cost of legal advice and representation arising
       from involvement in legal proceedings which result from the pursuance, in
       good faith, of their duties or where the interests of the Force as a
       whole are involved. A copy of the Circular is attached.

 2.2   Arising from the publication of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor
       into the Hillsborough Disaster, the subsequent appointment of the Chief
       Constable of the West Midlands Police to enquire into the justification
       for criminal proceedings arising from the disaster and the forthcoming
       Coroner's Inquest into the deaths, an application for assistance has been
       received from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who was involved m
       command of the policing arrangements for the football Semi-Final and
       similar applications from other officers similarly involved might be
       anticipated.


 3.    Comment

 3.1    Following the disaster and throughout the Public Inquiry the interests of
        the Police Authority, the Chief Constable and all officers of the Force
        have been represented by legal officers appointed by the Police Authority
        insurers. The legal officers appointed by the insurers have indicated
        that in relation to criminal proceedings they would be unable to provide
        representation for individual officers who should seek independent legal
        advice and representation.

 3 2    It will be seen from the Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, that the
        central principle which should guide consideration of individual cases is
        that, where a Police Authority considers that an officer has acted in
        good faith in pursuance of his duties or that where the interests of the
        Force as a whole are involved, the officer should have the support of the
        Police Authority to ensure that he has the services of a lawyer and that
        he should not be out of pocket.


 3 3    It will be further seen that in respect of criminal proceedings pursued
        by the Crown Prosecution Service against an individual officer he should
        be expected to bear the costs of his own defence and the Police
      Authority* at the conclusion of the proceedings, are able to consider, on
      the full facts, whether or not to reimburse any expenses incurred by the
      officer and not awarded by the trial court, even where proceedings have
      resulted in conviction in certain circumstances.   It will be noted from
      paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing to seek financial
      assistance should have the opportunity to submit to the Chief Officer an
      application for financial assistance, upon receipt of which the Chief
      Officer should refer the application to the Police Authority together
      with his own recommendation.   It will be further seen that the applying
      officer should normally be given the opportunity by the Police Authority
      to make representations to them if he wishes to do so. At this stage
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield wishes to reserve the right to so appear
      at a future date if necessary.

3.4   The events at Hillsborough were unique in respect of the potential
      criminal liability of police officers involved. The officers were acting
      in good faith in accordance with well established practices and any
      criminal proceedings will largely constitute a test case similar to the
      example provided in paragraph three of the Home Office Circular. The
      unique nature of the circumstances of this particular criminal enquiry
      with its wide implications for the interests of the Force as a whole is
      such that the Police Authority may wish to consider, at this stage, a
      commitment to the funding of independent legal advice for the officer(s)
      concerned. The financial commitment of the officers is likely to
      commence with advice and representation prior to and during interviews
      undertaken by West Midlands Police officers in the course of their
      enquiry.  It would be prudent for that representation to continue
      throughout the enquiry and any subsequent criminal proceedings and to
      extend to representation at the Coroner's Inquest which will ultimately
      be held.

3.5   At this stage it is anticipated that representation in any civil actions
      subsequently pursued will be provided by the Police Authority insurers.

3.6   It should be noted that there is available, to all officers of
      superintendent and chief superintendent rank who have chosen to
      contribute, a measure of personal liability insurance arranged by the
      Superintendents' Association of England and Wales. The individual
      liability limit of this insurance cover is £50,000.


4.    Financial Implications

      It is not possible at this stage to assess the financial implications of
      this matter which will depend entirely on the course and extent of the
      criminal enquiry and the ultimate outcome, and the duration of the
      Inquest proceedings. There is no specific provision in the Revenue
      Budget for this expenditure.


5.    Recommendation

      The Committee is recommended to approve a commitment to provide financial
      assistance for legal representation to the officer(s) concerned in
      accordance with the central principle of Home Office Circular No.
      77/1987.


P WRIGHT
CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                       HOM E OFFICE
                                          Q ueen A n n e ’s Gate L o n d o n ' S W 1 H 9 A T
                                                          D'.rici hr.e O i-213
                                                      Switchboard 01-213 3000


                      poL/87   1027/1/2
    Yt'UT r,-VrtH^V




    The Clerk to the Police Authority

    The Chief Officer of Police
                                                                                  4 December 1987



f

    Dear Sir


    HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 77/87

    FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


    There is statutory authority in section 48 of the Police Act 1964 for
    payments to be made from the police fund to meet expenditure incurred
    by police officers in defending proceedings in tort. Also, acting in
    pursuance of its general statutory duty to maintain an adequate and
    efficient police force for its area, the police authority has
    discretion to meet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds of
    legal proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in
    pursuance of their duties, or the interests of the force as a whole
flfeare involved.       The purpose of this circular is to give guidance to
/^police authorities to help them in considering requests on behalf of
^ o f f i c e r s for financial assistance. This guidance has been discussed
    and agreed with the local authority and with the police staff
    associations.

    2.    The central principle which should guide consideration of
    individual cases is that, where a police authority considers that an
    officer has acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties or that
    the interests of a force as a whole are involved, the officer should
    have the support of the police authority to ensure that he has the
    services of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket.     The
    following paragraphs provide general guidance to the different
    classes of proceedings.  Payments made to officers in accordance with
    this guidance will be eligible for police grant.



                                                                                                    1
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Prosecution bv the Crown Prosecution Service

3.   An officer who is the subject of a public prosecution for an
alleged offence committed while carrying out his duties as a police
officer is in the same position as any other defendant and must be
expected to bear the costs of his defence.   If he is acquitted, he
should,   like  any   other defendant,    look to the court for
reimbursement of his expenses.   If the costs are not paid, or not
paid in full from central funds, the police authority are in a
position to decide, on the full facts, whether or not to make a
payment to the officer or to the Police Federation if they have
provided the funding.    There may be cases where it is proper to
provide legal advice and/or legal representation even where the
officer is found guilty.   This may arise for example in test cases
where the officer has been carrying out a practice hitherto
approved of but is found guilty as a result of that practice being
found unlawful by the court in the light of the circumstances of
that particular case.


Private Prosecutions

4. A police officer should be able to carry out his duties in the
confidence that, if he acts in good faith and exercises his
judgement reasonably, his police authority will support him.    If,
in a case where a member of the public brings a prosecution against
an officer, the authority is satisfied that the officer has acted
in this way, the authority should provide or fund legal advice
and/or representation.

5.   Where a court decides that a prosecution brought against an
officer was not brought in good faith, it may order the prosecutor
to pay the whole or any part of the costs incurred by the defence;
again, if the officer is acquitted on indictment, his costs may be
met from central funds.  In either of these cases, the question of
the police authority providing financial support to the officer may
not arise.   However, where the costs of an acquitted officer are
not awarded by the court or awarded only in part, the police
authority should consider whether to reimburse any costs not
covered, taking into account the reasons, if any, given by the
court for failing to award all costs claimed.


CIVIL PROCEEDINGS

Civil Actions   Against   the   Chief   Officer   for   Wrongful   Acts   of
Constables

6.   Under section 48(1) of the Police Act 1964, the chief officer
of a force is liable in respect of torts committed by constables
under his direction and control (which includes special constables
and officers of other forces serving in the police area under
mutual   aid arrangements)     in the performance or purported
performance of their functions. Under section 48(2) any damages or

                                                                          2
        costs awarded against the chief officer in such Pfocf®*1^ ® ; a?y
        costs he incurs himself, and any sum paid in
        settlement of a claim, provided the settlement is ®PP^oved
        police authority, must be paid out of the police f^nd.      Instic
        cases, therefore, the police authority's discretion         only to
        whether or not to approve a proposed settlement of the claim.


        civil Actions Against Indiv idual Police Officers

        7.     A l t e r n a t i v e l y , th e p l a i n t i f f nay be awarded d“ »9e «’                “
        in d iv id u a l p o l i c e o f f i c e r , though he cannot r e c o v e r tt»«j. o f IhS
        t w ic e ov er a g a i n s t th e c h i e f o f f i c e r a s w e l l . S e c t io n 48 ( 4) o f th e
        Police Act 1964 specifically empowers a                        police    authority        to sucn
        IZtlnl «        th e y th ?n k f i t " t o W o B t .o f th e police
        or costs awarded against an officer, any costs he incurs himseir,
        and any sums paid in connection with the settiementof a =la£J^
        This   provision applies to actions against officers              ,.__
        authority's own force, officers of another force
        area under mutual aid arrangements, and                   Assistance
        police area.   In considering whether to give
<TsJ    the authority will wish to consider in particular w^ e^ ® 5
        officer concerned acted in good faith and               mav seek his
        reasonably. Where the court finds for the officer, h e m a y seek his
        costs from the plaintiff; should the costs          „*i{?erwhether
        awarded only in part, the police authority should consider whether
        to reimburse any costs not covered, taking into             C®ii COstI
        reasons, if any, given by the court for failing to award all costs
        claimed.
        8.       J o i n t a c t i o n s naming b oth th e c h i e f o f f i c M and an in d iv ic iM i
        p o l i c e o f f i c e r may be b rou ght in some c a s e s .          I n : s u c h =»®e s “
        ■inmortiant t h a t any d is c u s s io n o f th e m erits and cjuantuni
        S l p o s e f s e t t le m e n t sh o u ld in v o lv e a l l t h e p a r t i e s named in th e
        c la im t o g e t h e r w ith a d v is e r s even i f th e y a r e r e p r e se n te d by
        different advisers.

         rivil Act•!one Under the Data Protection A ct 1 9 M
         O    TTnder- sections 22 and 23 of the Data Protection Act 1984 an
 V3*?    individual the suffers damage as a result of the



         ^ J o n r ^ ; * 3                 amount t o         to rts   to    w h ic ^



         SH
         o f f i c e r f a l l i n g w it h in s e c t i o n s «   and »    in
                                                                                 s?t o s s             * £
                    S    t a      M        l    c l e a r b S f 1 ? U p o « i b i ? t h a t i n some c a s e s
to meet all costs, including any award of compensation, arising
from this liability.  It should be noted that the liability of the
"data user" under the Act is not vicarious but his personal
liability. Therefore his own care in having instituted a system of
obtaining, checking and racording data which would reasonably guard
against error and loss under section 23(3) of the Act should
his responsibility under section 22(3) and he should not be held
liable if one of his officers disregards the system established.

10.   Where compensation is sought from an individual officer, the
police authority will wish, in considering whether to meet the
costs which would otherwise fall on the officer, to take afcou”J
the same matters as in exercising their power under section ’°(4)
of the Police Act 1964 (see paragraph 7).        Police authorities
should apply the same broad principles and in particular, meet the
costs of any compensation awarded against a chief constable where a
non-police officer is at fault and the chief constable is found to
have liability for the actions performed.


Police Officers Bringing Civil Actions for Defamation
11.   There may be occasions when financial assistance is sought
from a police authority to enable an officer to bring or consider
bringing a civil action for defamation.              au^f5/£.y-
discretion to give such assistance but it will be eligible for
police grant only if the following criteria are all met:-

     (a)   the defamation is serious;
     (b)   it relates to the actions of an officer acting or
     said to be acting in the discharge of his duty;

     (c)   it has attracted public attention;
     (d)   to bring the action is considered to be in the
     interests of the force or of the police service as a
     whole; and
     (e)   the action stands a reasonable chance of success.

Criterion (d) is central. If only the reputation of the individual
officer is in question, he is in the same position as any other
citizen and must be expected to seek his own remedy.             But an
allegation against a particular officer may well reflect on the
reputation of the whole force or be an example of wider allegations
against the force or a significant section of it.         In such cases
the police authority, provided the other criteria are satisfied,
may Reasonably be e j e c t e d to help to defend the reputation of the
force.




                                                                      4
INQUESTS, PUBLIC ENQUIRIES AND TRIBUNAL

Legal Representation for Chief Officers
12.  Any interested arty may be legally r e p r e s e n t e d a t a n i n q u e s t
but at his own expense since expenses are payable only to witnesses
and jurors.   An interested party will normally be entitled t o b e
legally represented at a public enquiry or other public tribunal.
Where the interest of the force is affected, it will b*
for the police authority to provide at its expense for the
officer to be legally represented on behalf of the force.


Legal Representation for Individual Offi<y?r;s
13. Separate representation for individual o f f i c e r s t o t e m t
is involved may be necessary. For example, there will be occasions
when (a) the chief officer's legal representative cannot r<eajonably
be expected to represent the separate interests of such of i
and (b) the police authority considers that such             ^      ^
be represented.   In such cases the authority ®houl*                t he
assistance to the officers.        In considering   (b)
authority will wish in particular to           whether the officers
                                                 a   s   s   e   s   s


are at risk of being held to blame for actions in connection wixn
the death to which the inquest relates and whether any              *he
might give rise to legal proceedings for the costs of whi<ch        tne
police authority would be liable under section 48 (1) of the
Act 1964 or for which financial assistance might be app p
within the terms of this circular.


APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
 ia        An officer wishing to seek financial assistance from his
 police authority should have the opportunity in ?dyjn<ie              chief
 I s on the conclusion of the proceedings to submit to the chief
 officer an application for financial assistance. The chief
                   this toaether with his own recommendation to the police
 a S? h i r i ? f for d . c u T o n She officer should normally be given the
 opportunity by the police authority to make representations to the
 if he wishes to do so.
       T-f it decides to give financial assistance, the authority
 shiuld inior. ?Se o « ! c e r concerned that, if the i n f e c t i o n on
 which th.y based their decision to grant the
 subsequent legal proceedings to be inaccurate




 ini;“ :SCbythh.U^ffic.9r \ nn « « " i n g legal advice or assistanc.


                                                                                      5
Assistance from Police Federation Fuids

 16. Under Regulation 19 of the Police Federation Regulations 1969,
as amended, Federation funds may be used to defray legal charges
incurred by a member in v.onnection with criminal proceedings
brought against him for an offence under the road traffic
enactments (other than offences involving driving when impaired by
drink or drugs or taking a vehicle without authority), or for
offences of causing the death or injury of any person, or for any
assault, or in connection with his action for libel or slander. An
officer^ seeking financial assistance in circumstances covered by
Regulation 19 should seek such assistance from the police authority
in the first instance.   If the police authority does not consider
the request to fall within the terms of this circular, the
Federation may then consider the application within the terms of
Regulation 19.   If the officer receives legal assistance from the
Federation the terms of Home Office Circular No 26/1967 will
continue to apply.

17.   General enquiries about the content of this circular may be
addressed to Mr Waghorn, Home Office, FI Division on (01) 213 4208.

                                             Yours faithfully




                                             M J ADDISON
