NOT FOR PUBLICATION AS IT CONTAINS EXEMPT INFORMATION
WITHIN PARAGRAPH 1,5 & 12 OF SCHEDULE 12A OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ACT 1972 AS AMENDED

    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

    26 Mav 2000

    Report of the Clerk and Treasurer


    FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL
    PROCEEDINGS

    1■     Matter for consideration

    To update members on matters in connection with the Hillsborough
    prosecution.




          2.      Recommendations

          Members are asked to agree that daily transcripts of the trial
          should be obtained, and to note the position on the other
          matters.



    3.     Background

    3.1    Request for financial assistance to ex Superintendent Greenwood

    On behalf of Mr Greenwood, Vizard Oldham have asked for confirmation of
    the Police Authority’s decision not to make support available. Vizard Oldham
    reserve the right to consider the possibility of Judicial Review.

    Members will recall that Mr Greenwood has not been the subject of any
    prosecution, but has been requested to be interviewed by the Family Support
    Group.

    3.2    Estimated length of the trial

    The trial is still scheduled to start on 6 June. Initial estimates from the
    defence lawyers were 6 weeks, but dependent on how many witnesses are
    called and how the Judge conducts the hearing, one of the leading defence
    counsel now estimates that it could go up to 8 weeks. A letter has been
    received from Walker Morris (Solicitor for Mr Murray) asking the Authority to
    confirm that in this eventuality the Authority would extend the agreed rates for
    attendance of Counsel and Solicitor for the duration of the trial. While the
    length of a complex trial is extremely difficult to predict in advance, Garretts
    estimate that the cost of an additional two weeks would be £47,500 for Mr
    Murray and £52,500 for Mr Duckenfield.


                                                                                   1
3.3    Daily Transcripts

Leading counsel for the prosecution and the defences have asked for daily
transcripts of the trial. The total cost would be £1,000 a day, which would be
split. The additional cost to the defence would be between £20,000 and
£27,000 depending on whether separate transcripts for each officer were
obtained. Garretts have advised that the request seems reasonable. The
estimated costs can be contained within the provision which has been set
aside for Hillsborough costs.

3.4    Agreement on past costs

Garretts, in conjunction with the costs draftsman, are continuing to negotiate
with the officers solicitors on claims to date. A number of matters remain
outstanding. Advances have been made against the costs which have been
agreed but where significant differences of view remain it is possible that the
Authority may ultimately seek to have the costs reviewed by the Court.



W J Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer

Officer responsible: Bill Wilkinson, Clerk and Treasurer, South Yorkshire
Joint Secretariat - 01226 772803.

Background papers used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection at the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, Barnsley.

Other sources and references: None




                                                                                  2
