    South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
    P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
    Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
    Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899
    W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA- Clerk and Treasurer




    Our ref:     WJW/FS


    Your ref:


    Date:      1 July 1999


    This matter is being dealt with by:   Bill WilkinSOPI   Direct Line:   01226 772803

    TO: All South Yorkshire Police Authority Members
                                                                                   N


    Dear

^   Hillsborough

    1am writing to update members on progress since the last report to the Authority on 18
    June.

    The committal hearing is due to commence on 5 July at Leeds. As far as we know, up to
    2 weeks has been allotted. The matter could be resolved, or the magistrate might refer it
    to a full trial at a later date.

    I reported on 18 June that Garretts had been progressing the various costs issues. A
    costs draftsman has been engaged and has begun the process of reviewing costs
    incurred up to 5 February. With the proviso that we reserve our right to recover any
    excess following completion of the costs draftsman’s work, I have agreed to pay on
    account 50% of the sums claimed for work between July 1998 and February 5th 1999 on
    the proceedings in the Leeds Magistrates Court.

^   On the work since 6 February leading up to the current hearing, Garretts set out the basis
    on which the Authority was recommended to agree any support in the papers to the 21
    May meeting, and as I reported on 18 June both officers’ solicitors had accepted that
    basis in principle. Further detail has been confirmed since 18 June, so that we now have
    in position a framework constructed around:

    (a) a maximum cost estimate
    (b) an hourly rate for solicitors, leading and junior counsel
    (c) limits on the numbers of fee-earners who will be paid for by the Authority at meetings,
       conferences, and hearings

    The formal terms go into much more detail on fee levels and the level of legal support.
    These have been negotiated between Garretts and the two solicitors over the last few
    weeks, and the position is that formal letters confirming the basis agreed will shortly be
    sent by the Authority to the two former officers.
The terms also require the officers to take steps to recover costs and disbursements from
other sources, and provide protection for the Authority in the event of the case being
conducted unreasonably. Finally the Authority reserves the right to have its contribution
reviewed by a legal costs draftsman.

Taken as a whole, the package provides the Authority with a high degree of control over
its financial commitment. However, given the way in which the case is proceeding, it is
inevitable that there will be some uncertainty about the final figures i.e. while we can
specify precisely the number and seniority of legal advisers that we will fund and the
respective hourly rates, the actual hours worked will be influenced by the way in which
the prosecution develops. The Authority’s protection in that respect is through the quoted
maximum cost figure, and the subsequent right to bring in the costs draftsman.

A substantial part of the work was undertaken before the Authority agreed to make
support available, and work in connection with the committal has been ongoing while the
detailed terms have been under discussion. The solicitors for all parties have recognised
the situation, and the officer’s solicitors agreed in principle to the terms several weeks
ago. Unless anything unexpected occurs, therefore, the letters which finally pass
between the Authority and the former officers will be a formal statement of what has
previously been agreed.

The letter will however advise the officers that the terms on which the Authority will
contribute to the costs incurred are subject to the final approval of members. I want to
arrange that stage as early as possible. W e have an Authority meeting on 30 July, but if
Garretts and the solicitors have agreed the paperwork earlier, I may ask the Chairman to
call a special meeting of the Authority.

This letter is at this stage for information. I will incorporate the contents in my formal
report to the Authority.

Yours sincerely




Bill Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer
