                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C . Johnston B .A ., I.P.F.A .                                                                P .O .B o x 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                                   R egent Street
                                                                                                    Barnsley
                                                                                    South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
                                                                            Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222

Our Ref:   C0M/DV/JW/434A                   Your Ref:                             Dote:   23rd October, 1989
This matter is being dealt with by     Mr. D. Vaughan                             Telephone ext:   611



             Dear Member,

             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 17TH NOVEMBER, 1989
             As Members are aware, the next scheduled meeting of the Police Au t hority
             is that to be held on Friday 17th November, 1989 at Police Headquarters,
             Snig H i l l , Sheffield.
             After consulting the Chairman, Members are requested to note that this
             particular meet i ng of the A u t h or i ty will also incorporate the following
             matters

              (i)         consideration of the detailed report on the Recommendatio ns of
                          the Interim Report of the Inquiry by the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice
                          Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster (as it has not
                          been possible to select an acceptable date in October for a
                          Special Meeting and the Deputy Chief Constable is on holiday
                          during the first two weeks of November), and


              (ii)        in accordance with Minute 6 1 ( i ) of 18th August 1989, H.M.
                          Inspector of Const ab u la ry has been invited to lunch with the
                          A u t h o r i t y upon the conclusion of his Annual Inspection of the
                          South Yorkshire Police (from 13th to 17th November).


              Whilst the precise timetable for the day has yet to be determined, I am
              sure that Members will have already anticipated that it is likely that the
              meet in g will continue into an afternoon session.

              Yours faithfully,




              R. C. Johnston,
              Clerk and Financial Officer.


   r
              TO:       Members of the South Yorkshire
                        Police Aut ho ri t y
