South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899
W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA. Clerk and Treasurer




Our ref:    W JW /VS



Your ref:



Date:      1 November 1999


This matter is being dealt with by:   Bill Wilkinson         Direct Line:   01226 772803


To: Members of the South Yorkshire Police Authority

Dear

HILLSBOROUGH

I am writing to update you on a couple of matters. I took the opportunity of speaking
briefly to those members who were at last Friday’s Best Value discussion, so to those
members, most of this letter will be familiar.

1           Meeting with Minister

            The Chairman, the Chief Constable, Ian Daines and myself will be meeting Charles
            Clarke on 2 November. We are raising two issues - firstly the actual and potential
            costs of defending the two former officers; secondly the cost of meeting personal
            injury insurance claims. I am enclosing a copy of the note sent to the Minister’s
            office; some of the information in this note is highly confidential, so I would ask that
            you do not circulate it to anyone else.

2           Taxation

            At the 10 September meeting I reported on a view we had received that there might
            be an income tax liability attaching to the payment of legal costs. Subsequently our
            tax advisers made a detailed submission to the Inland Revenue, and last week we
            received a response from the Inspector. His view is that the payments arg taxable.
            Effectively that almost doubles the costs involved. Garretts consider that the
            Inspector has taken a very inflexible stance, and has ignored all of the case law
            and arguments put forward. The only official option available is to challenge the
            ruling via the Tax Commissioners. However the timetable is such that the process
            would be unlikely to conclude till well into next year, but the former officers will need
            to know if they have support within the next few weeks in order for the defence
            case preparation to go ahead.

            Irrespective of the Tax position, if the Authority was unable to make support
            available, the former officers’ only other option would be to seek Legal Aid, and
            they will have to do this soon, as applications cannot be retrospective.
          This is a further unexpected complication to what was already an extremely difficult
          issue. We are approaching it from several angles. At the Ministerial meeting we
          will ask Home Office if they are prepared to make approaches to Treasury for a
          special dispensation, or to expedite an appeal via the Commissioners. Garretts will
          try to find out more about the Inspector’s reasoning, and they will also seek Tax
          Counsel’s advice on the merits of the case. Suffice it to say at this stage that the
          Inspector’s ruling has implications throughout the public and private sector, and I
          will be surprised to find that any of the other Police Authorities which have
          previously paid defence costs of officers (and that includes the Met. Police) have
          deducted tax.

          Things may need to move rapidly over the next few weeks, and it is likely that we
          will need to call a special meeting of the Authority. I will keep members informed.

    3     Other meetings

          The Chairman and myself are meeting separately with representatives of the
          Superintendents’ Association and the Police Federation in the next few weeks, to
          discuss their views on the Hillsborough issue.

          Whilst mentioning special meetings of the Authority can I confirm that the Seminar
          on the Policing Plan scheduled for Friday, 12 November, w ill take place. It also
          seems likely that there will be a special meeting of the Authority on Friday, 19
          November, please note the date in your diary, along with the meeting of the
          Planning Performance and Audit Committee.

    Yours sincerely




^   Bill Wilkinson
    Clerk and Treasurer

    Enc
