SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
16 FEBRUARY 1990
                                                                         3A
PRESENT:    Cou nc i ll or Sir John Layden (in the Chair)
            Councillors: G Gallimore (Vice-Chairman), D A Axe,
            C J C Betts, J M Cromar, R Fisher, D W George,
            C Swindell, R Whitfield, J Wood.
            M a g i s t r a t e Members: Mrs B R Bullivant, K Goodall,
            E A Hancock, H D Hepworth, Dr H H Smith, D E Wilburn.

155   URGENT ITEM

       The Chairman reported that he had agreed that an urgent item relating to
       further complaints against the Chief Constable, received by the Clerk and
       Financial Officer in the last couple of days, should be considered later
       in the Agenda in order to progress consideration of the complaints
       w ithout delay.
       Whilst being an item already on the Agenda, the Chairman suggested and
       the A uthority agreed that Agenda Item No 10 (Hillsborough Stadium
       Disaster - Implementation of the Taylor Inquiry Report Recommendations)
       should be c on sidered as the last item prior to the exclusion of the
       public and press.
156   MINUTES
       A   5 January 1990

           In reply to queries from the Authority, the Chief C onstable confirmed
           that there had been little change in the involvement of the South
           Y orkshire Police in providing emergency a mb ulance cover during the
           c ontinuing industrial dispute in the Ambulance Service since the
           last meeting of the Authority, and that the Regional Health Authority
           were being charged at special service rates in accordance with Police
           Min ut e 119.2 of 17 November 1989.
           RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of the A uthority held on
           5 January 1990 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record, subject
           to:-

           (i)      the first 28 words of the third p aragraph'of the preamble to
                    Min ut e 120 of 17 November 1989 being deleted and replaced by
                    the following words -
                    "Accordingly, the Chief Constable submitted a report detailing
                    the action taken by the South Yorkshire Police Force in
                    implementing the r ecommendations of the Taylor Report," and
           (ii)     the consequent deletion of the words "both prior to and" in
                    the fifth line of the first paragraph of the preamble to
                    Min ut e 143 of 5 January 1990.
      B    30 January 1990
           RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the Special Meeting of the Authority
           held on 30 January 1990 be signed by the Chairman as a correct
           record.
M I N UT E S OF COMMITTEES, ETC
A   Catering DSO Sub-Committee - 18 January 1990
     The Minutes of the meeting of the Catering DSO S ub -Committee held on
     18 January 1990 were submitted.
    RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of the Catering DSO S u b ­
    committee held on 18 January 1990 (set out as Appendix "A" to these
    Minutes) be agreed and confirmed.
B   Accountability, Complaints and Discipline Committee - 19 January 1990
    The Minutes of the meeting of the Accountability, Complaints and
    Discipline Committee held on 19 January 1990 w er e submitted.
    RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of the Accountability,
    Complaints and Discipline C ommittee held on 19 January 1990 (set out
    as Appendix "B" to these Minutes) be agreed and confirmed.
C   Working Party on Equal Opportunities in the South Yorkshire Police -
    25 January 1990                                            ~
    The Minutes of the meeting of the Working Party on Equal
    O pp ortunities in the South Yorkshire Police held on 25 January 1990
    w ere submitted.
    The Aut ho r it y discussed the advantages to be gained by ACCESS Courses
    at local colleges of education, as highlighted in the fourth
    p aragraph of Minute 3, and reportedly applied successfully by
    commercial undertakings.
    RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of Working Party on Equal
    Opportunities in the South Yorkshire Police held on 25 January 1990
    (set out as Appendix "C" to these Minutes) be agreed and confirmed.
D   Finance and General Purposes Committee - 2 F ebruary 1990
    The Minutes of the meeting of the Finance and General Purposes
    Committee held on 2 February 1990 w er e submitted.
    RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of the Finance and General
    Purposes C ommittee held on 2 February 1990 (set out as Appendix "D"
    to these Minutes) be agreed and confirmed.
NOTES OF DIVISIONAL REVIEW PANELS
The Notes of the meetings of the following Divisional Review Panels were
considered:-
(i)   "C"    (Rotherham) - 12 January 1990
(ii) "F"     (Sheffield North) - 24 January 1990
(iii) "D"    (Sheffield Central) - 29 January 1990
The A uthority discussed various matters raised in the Notes.
RE S O L V E D -

1     That the notes of the Divisional Review Panels now submitted be
      received.
2     That, following the Court Hearings having been completed, the Chief
       Constable be requested to report to the Police Authority on the drugs
       raids in the Broomhall area of Sheffield.
RETIREMENT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE
The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on the notification
received in acc or d an ce with the provisions of the Police Pensions
R egulations 1987 (as amended) from Mr P Wright C B E , to retire as Chief
Constable of the South Yorkshire Police on 30 April 1990.
The Authority d is cussed the a rrangements for the appointment of his
successor.
RESOLVED -
1     That the report be received and its contents noted at this stage.
2     That a Special S u b - C o m m i t t ee Cc o ns is t in g of one Police Authority
       Mem be r from each of the Con st i tu en t District Councils, plus a
       M a g i s t ra te Member) be appointed with powers to:-
       (i)         m ee t on or after 19 March 1990 to select a short-list of
                   candidates for interview by the full Police Authority;
       (ii)        d e t er m in e the a rrangements for interview by the full Police
                   Authority.
3     That, w h i ls t all Police A ut hority Members are to be supplied with
       copies of the applications from the s hort-listed candidates, copies
       of all of the actual applications received be supplied to the Special
       S ub -C o mm it t ee only with a list of applicants being supplied to those
       Police A uthority Members not serving on the Special Sub-Committee.
CRIME SUMMARY AND STATISTICS
 The Chief C onstable submitted the Crime Summary and Statistics for the
 period 1 January to 31 December 1989.
 Compared with December 1988, t here had been an increase of 5.99% in
 recorded crime (6.04% over the whole period), with a detection rate of
 43. 44 % (46.46% over the w hole period).
 RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
 A PP OI N TM EN T OF FEMALE POLICE SURGEONS
 In a cc ordance with Min ut e 62.2 of 18 August 1989, the Chief Constable
 s ubmitted a report on the progress to date in recruiting additional
female medical practitioners to undertake police surgeon duties following
the amended Establishment for Police Surgeons approved by the Police
Authority.
On the assumption that the interested parties indicated w ere actually
recruited, the amended e st ab lishement of two female police surgeons
operating in the Doncaster area, one in the Barnsley area, one in the
Rotherham area and three in the Sheffield area, would be achieved.
The A ut hority discussed the involvement and role of the Sheffield City
Council's Mul ti - Ag en c y Working Party in the appointment of additional
female police surgeons.
RESOLVED -
1    That the current position regarding the recruitment of female police
     surgeons now reported be noted.
2    That the Clerk and Financial Officer be requested to report to the
     next meeting of the Police A ut hority on the terms of the Authority's
     original Resolution on the involvement of the Sheffield City
     C ou ncil's Mul ti - Ag en c y Working Party.
C H L 0R 0 FL U0 R 0C AR B 0N S (CFC's) IN BUILDINGS
In a cc or d an ce with M i n ut e 37.2 of 30 June 1989, a joint report of the
Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable was submitted on the
scope for using alternative or substitute products w h e re CFC's and
Halons were currently used.
So far as Police A uthority buildings were concerned, the Building
Research E st ablishment had issued an Information paper on the subject in
November 1989. In consequence, the Architectural Services Officer wou ld
continue to monitor the use of CFC's in Joint Aut ho r it y buildings and
continue d iscussions with the Chief Architects of the District Councils
in an effort to ensure that a co-ordinated approach was adopted.
So far as other materials, par ti c ul ar l y cleaning materials, in general
use within the Force were concerned, where possible, alternative products
would be specified during normal pruchasing procedures through the Force
Supplies Officer and the Yorkshire Purchasing Organisation.
However, it had to be pointed out that currently some alternative
products costed more than existing products, and also that insulation
values w o u ld be reduced (thus affecting heating costs).
RESOLVED -
1    That the contents of the report be noted.
2    That the Authority adopt a general policy of using alternative or
     sub st i tu te products w here CFC's and Halons are c urrently used, and
     that any exceptions to this general policy be only with the express
     approval of the a ppropriate specialist officer.
HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 62/1989 AND THE FINAL REPORT OF THE AMA WORKING
PARTY ON COMMUNITY CONSULTATION"
The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on the contents of
Home Office Circular No 62/1989 (which included a Report of an internal
Home Office review of the Con su l ta ti o n Arrangements set up under Section
106 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1964), as well as on the
Final Report of the related and over-lapping AMA Working Party on
Community Liaison and Consultation.
The report set out the main points of the Home Office Circular, the main
points of the AMA Working Party, and the comments of the Working Party on
the Circular.
The Clerk and Financial Officer reported on a p re li minary basis on the
Regional Crime Prevention Con fe r en ce to be hosted by the Police A ut hority
on 2 April 1990 at R ot herham at the request of the AMA. Formal
notification w ould be given to Police A uthority Members once the details
had been finalised.
RESOLVED -
1    That the contents of the report now submitted be noted.
2    That it be noted that a report is to be submitted to the meeting of
      the A uthority to be held on 30 March 1990 summarising the conclusions
      of the p re viously approved review of the South Yorkshire Consultation
      Arr an g em en t s and taking into account the contents of both the Home
      Office Cir cu l ar and the AMA Working Party Report.
3    That App en d ic es "A" and "B" of the report now submitted be referred
     to the Divisional Review Panels and the C ommunity and Police Liaison
     Forums for their information.
HOME OFFICE C I R C U L A R NO 98/1989.                   ETHNIC M IN ORITIES - POLICE CIVILIAN
staff    (I n c l u d i n g   t r a f f i c w a r d £n5 T ~                         ~
 The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on the contents of
.Home Office Circular No 98/1989, which detailed the outcome of a survey
 by the Home Office on the ethnic composition of police civilian staff
 undertaken in 1987 (and to be reported a nnually in future).
The report also reminded the A uthority of the initiatives proposed at the
meeting of the Working Party on Equal O pp ortunities in the South
Yorkshire Police held on 25 January 1990 (set out as Appendix C to
these Minutes) to deal with such matters, as well as u nd er - re presentation
of the d isabled in the civilian staff and the limited equality of
r ep resentation by females at s u p e r v is or y /m an a ge me n t levels.
RESOLVED -
 1      That the contents of the report now submitted be noted.
 2     That the report be referred to the Equal O pp ortunities Working Party
      t ogether w ith information on the ethnic and total populations in
      the other areas referred to in the report.
MAN AG E ME NT INFORMATION SYSTEMS ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITY SEMINAR
The Authority considered a copy of the details received from the
Institute of Local Government Studies of a one-day Seminar to be held
shortly on Man ag e me nt Information Systems on Equal Opportunity.
RESOLVED - That, in view of the similar invitations to the Constituent
District Councils, the Police Authority take no action on the invitation
to be separately represented at the Seminar.
MAINTE NA NC E OF RECORDS RELATING TO THE PROPORTION OF OFFENDERS WHO ARE
Bla c k                 :        ---- - ------------------------
As requested by Minute 148.2 of 5 January 1990, the Chief Constable
submitted a report recalling the adverse media and political comments
made in 1982 in relation to the M etropolitan Police's m ai nt enance of
records of black offenders, and reporting on the practical and resource
implications of instituting and maintaining such a recording system in
South Yorkshire.
So far as the South Yorkshire Police was concerned, no useful statistical
operational requirement for such information existed.
RESOLVED -
1   That the practical and r esource implications for the South Yorkshire
    Police be noted.
2   That the mat te r be referred to the AMA for consideration on a
    national basis.
LIST OF OUTSTA ND IN G AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
In a cc or d an ce with Finance and General Purposes Com mi t te e Minute 1.2 of
9 June 1989, a joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the
Chief Con st a bl e was submitted on outstanding and/or requested reports.
RESOLVED -
1   That the contents of the report be noted.
2   That the Clerk and Financial Officer be requested to query the
     current position on Item 13 (Transportation of Nuclear Weapons
     Materials) with the AMA.
3   That, whi ls t awaiting the further report on the possible extension of
    the South Yorkshire Lay Visiting Scheme, the Chief Constable be
    requested to submit a report for information on the Lay Visiting
    Scheme currently operated by the Dorset Police.
 REVENUE E ST IMATES AND CAPITAL PROGRAMME 1990/91
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was s ubmitted on the guidelines for the preparation of the Authority's
1990/91 budget, the review of the draft budget, the 1990/91 standstill
budget forecasts, the 1990/91 potential developments, contingencies
(both in respect of pay and price increases and for operational
purposes), reserves and the required consultation with non-domestic
ratepayers.
RESOLVED -

1    That a revenue budget of 149,620,500, including contingencies for pay
     and price increases, be a pproved for the financial year 1990 (this
     figure to be a Cash Limit with any changes in items within the Base
     Budget being accomm od at e d within this total).
2   That a c ontribution of 1 5 0 0 , 0 0 0 be made to balances to compensate in
    part for the amount spent in the current year in financing the West
    Midlands Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadi u m Disaster.
3   That the approved budget include provision for the appointment of 20
    additional Constable posts during 1990/91 and that the Home Office be
    informed that this provision has been made.
4   That the A ut hority precept on the District Council Collection Funds
    for a total of 150,120,500, and that the precept be apportioned on
    the basis of the relevant adult population figures notified    to the
    A u t ho r it y by the District Councils:-
       Bar ns l ey        18, 33 6 ,6 70
       Don ca s te r     110 ,8 6 8, 70 0
       R o t he r ha m   110 ,0 0 5, 47 0
       She ff i el d     120,90 9, 66 0
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM D ISASTER - IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TAYLOR INOUIRY
KEPORT R E C O M M E N D A T I O N ? ------ - - -----------------
At this point, Councillor Sir John Layden, vacated the Chair and left the
meeting, C ou nc i ll or G Gallimore taking the Chair for the item.
Following M i n ut e 143 of 5 January 1990, the Chief Constable submitted a
report giving written replies to t hree written questions from Police
A uthority Members on the implementation by the South Yorkshire Police of
the Recom m en da t io ns of the Taylor Inquiry Interim Report, together with
comment on the Recommendations contained in the Final Report of Lord
Justice Taylor (which had been p ublished on 29 January 1990).
A copy of the Final Report had been supplied to all Police Authority
Members by the Clerk and Financial Officer by letter dated 30 January
1990.
The number of Recommendations had increased from 43 in the Interim Report
to 76 in the Final Report, and generally m ight require some revision to
the amended policies in relation to the Police, the Local Authorities,
the Football Clubs and the other Emergency Services achieved following
the Interim Report Recommendations.
These issues were being addressed immediately, and w ould be the subject
of reports to the Police Authority along with the previously rquested
progress reports.
The Authority discussed two a pparent inaccuracies in the Chief
Constable's report and , whilst indicating that he proposed to put
further questions to the Chief C onstable in writing, Councillor
C J C Betts queried the accuracy of press reports in the "Guardian"
attributed to the Chief Constable.
The Chief C on stable replied that he was giving expression to feelings
within the South Yorkshire Police, but that he had not acutally given an
interview to the 'Guardian'.      The additional evidence mentioned m ight or
might not emerge at the forthcoming Coroner's Inquest.
RESOLVED - That the contents of the report now submitted be noted, and
that the further report on the amended policies which m ight be necessary
consequent upon the R ecommendations contained in the Final Report be
awaited.
ITEMS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE ABSENCE OF THE PUBLIC
RESOLVED - That, under Section 100(A)(4) of the Local Government Act
1972, the public be excluded from the meeting for the following items of
business on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure of exempt
information as defined in paragraphs 1 or 7 of Part 1 of Schedule 12A of
the Act as appropriate.
AMBULANCE SERVICE DISPUTE - CLAIM BY CATERING DSO
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted on a claim by the Catering DSO Manag e r for reimbursement of
catering costs incurred in providing catering services to Army personnel
during the a mbulance service dispute.
RESOLVED -
1   That the claim for catering costs incurred by the Catering DSO in
    providing catering services to Army personnel during the Ambulance
    Service Dispute be approved on the basis of the details contained in
    the report now submitted.
2   That the Police Authority seek reimbursement of such catering costs
    from the Regional Health Authority.
172    PERSONNEL
           A   A pplication for Payment of T ransfer Values
               A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
               Con stable was submitted detailing the reasons for the submission of
               an out-of -t im e application for the payment of transfer values by a
               former City of S heffield Police Officer, and on the discretion
               afforded to the Police Authority to deal w ith such applications by
               virtue of Regulation 4 of the Police Pensions (Supplementary
               Provisions) Regulation 1987.
               RESOLVED - That the Authority approve of a repayment of the refund of
               pension contributions by the former City of Sheffield Police Officer
               now named, and to the offering to the Department of Education and
               Science Pension Scheme of the Transfer Value now indicated, subject
               to that D ep ar t me nt funding the interest which has accrued in the
               interim period due to the fact that they did not properly advise the
               former Police Officer of the Rules of Transfer at the appropriate
               time.
           B   Applic at io n for V ol untary Early Retirement
               A joint report of the Chief C onstable and the Clerk and Financial
               Officer was submitted on an application by a Civilian Employee at
               Police Headquarters to retire under the Voluntary Early Retirement
               Scheme approved by Police A u t ho r it y Minute 154 of 8 April 1988.
               RESOLVED - That the a pp li cation by the C ivilian Employee at Police
               Headquarters now named to retire under the agreed Voluntary Early
               Ret ir e me nt Scheme be deferred, and that the Clerk and Financial
               Officer be r eq uested to r e-submit the report after obtaining the
               further information now requested.
173    THE POLICE (DISCIPLINE)(SENIOR OFFICERS) R EGULATIONS 1985
           In acc or d an ce with Min ut e 155, the Clerk and Financial Officer circulated
           to reach M e m be r present for the Authority's consideration further
           complaints which had been made against the Chief Constable by Mr TH and
           also by Mr PH by letters dated 7 and 8 February 1990, together with
           copies of m edia repots referred to in the letters.
           The Authority considered how best to deal with the complaints in view of
           their s tatutory responsibilities under the Regulations and the Police and
           Criminal Evi de n ce Act 1984.
           RESOLVED - That a Special Meeting of the Police Aut ho r it y be held as soon
           as con ve n ie nt l y possible to consider the complaints, and that the Clerk
           and Financial Officer be requested to report on the legal implications of
           such complaints.
174    C OM PLAINTS AGAINST THE POLICE
           The Force Complaints Book was a va ilable for Member's inspection.

CHAIRMAN
D 0C1322
