SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

8 January 1999

Report of the Clerk and Treasurer

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS

1.    Purpose of the Report

To consider a request from Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group (“HFSG”) to address the Authority meeting to be held
on the 15 January 1999.


      2.     Recommendations

      Members are asked to consider the request received from
      Trevor Hicks to address the Authority meeting on the 15
      January 1999.


3,    Applications for Financial Assistance

3.1   The Authority is aware from previous reports that applications for
      financial assistance made by Messrs David Duckenfield and Bernard
      Murray in connection with their legal representation in defending the
      private prosecution proceedings instituted against them by Ann
      Adlington, Solicitor to the HFSG have been approved by the Clerk and
      Treasurer on the basis of legal advice from the Assistant Clerk and
      Solicitor. Further applications for financial assistance have now been
      received for the purposes of judicial review proceedings:

      a)      to challenge the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not
      to intervene to take over the conduct of the prosecutions; and

      b)     to challenge any adverse ruling of the Clerk to the South Sefton
      Justices not to allow claims submitted for costs from central funds
      (note the Clerk has not reached a final decision on the claims yet).

      These further applications are to be the subject of a report to the
      special meeting of the Authority which is to be held on the 15 January
      1999.

3.2   On Wednesday of this week Ann Adlington, delivered written
      representations prepared on behalf of the HFSG in connection with the
      provision of financial assistance to Messrs Duckenfield and Murray for
      distribution amongst the members.
 3.3   She argues on behalf of the HFSG that the decisions taken to provide
       funding pursuant to the resolutions of the Authority on the information
       available to her appear to be “ ... unlawful, irrational, ultra vires and
       procedurally improper on various grounds.”, and states that the HFSG,
       supported by some South Yorkshire tax-payers, are considering an
       application for judicial review. She also states that an approach to the
       District Auditor is being considered and the Clerk and Treasurer has
       made the District Auditor aware of this.

3.4    Counsel’s advice has been taken with regard to the claims made by
       Ann Adlington on behalf of the HFSG and on the provision of financial
       assistance in matters of this nature. He is of the opinion that the
       HFSG will have difficulty in establishing locus standi for the purposes
       of an application for judicial review and that the decisions taken to date
       to provide financial assistance are not unreasonable within the
       “ Wednesbury principles”. He also advises that certain procedural
       matters raised by Ann Adlington in support of the claim can be
       addressed. All of these matters will be incorporated in the report which
       will be submitted to the Authority on the 15 January next.

4.     Request to address the Police Authority

4.1    Following receipt of the written representations referred to above the
       facsimile letter attached at Appendix 1 has been received from Trevor
       Hicks requesting the opportunity to address the Authority today. He
       has been advised that the applications for financial assistance are now
       to be considered on the 15 January next. Accordingly, his request to
       address the Authority is now a request to address that meeting. He
       has been informed that his request will be considered at today’s
       meeting.

4.2    The grant of the request made is a discretionary matter for the
       Authority. If the Authority is minded to grant the request, it is
        considered that Messrs Duckenfield and Murray should be offered a
        similar opportunity.

5.     Letter South Yorkshire Council Taxpayer

5.1    Attached at Appendix 2 is a letter received this morning from a South
        Yorkshire Council taxpayer.

W J W ilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer

Officer responsible: Miss M V Oades

Background papers used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection at the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, Barnsley.

Other sources and references:
                                                                                      r o i            tiO .


                                                                                    &PPEMUIA I
  V
                                                                                                       • - 1
**j          4 4 *        Oh                                                                          A t*            »•
                          o                                                                   7*                     o£3
      ■£t*     >»■■••"   £
             Sf/ppO^                                                                                   SUPP<$*
                               Hillsborough Family Support Group


                                       FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION


         TO:                    Maureen Oades
                                South Yorkshire Police Authority

         FA X NO:               01226 772899

         FROM :                 Trevor Hicks

         DATE:                  6 January 1999

                                        NO O F PAGES: 1 (inclusive)



         Dear Ms Oades

         Further to your communications with Ann Adlington and the Hillsborough Family Support '
         Group office, I write to formally request an opportunity to address the above Police Authority
         Meeting.

         Such an address would be short, perhaps 10-15 minutes, and I feet would be beneficial to the'
         members in understanding the position o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group in
         connection with our ongoing proceedings in respect o f the Hillsborough Disaster.

         An early indication o f the Authority’s decision would be welcome and I can. be contacted by
         telephone or fax on my direct line 01535 691483 or on my mobile 0973 411051.

         Yours sincerely




          revor Hicks
         Chairman




       NUN                                     VICE-CHAIRMAN/SECRETARY                             TREASURER
                                               P. Himaiond                                         Mrs. J. Trayncr
The Clerk to the South Yorkshire Police Authority
PO Box 37, Resent Street
BARNSLEY
South Yorkshire
S70 2PQ

07/01/99

Dear Sirs,

i understand that there wiii be a meeting- of SYPA the Friday 8th January 1899 to
decide on further costs in the defence of David OuckenfiekS and Bernard Murray in
relation to the private prosecutions against them by Ann Adlinytan on behaif c;s the
Hillsborough Family Supoort.Group.

As a South Yorkshire council taxpayer, i wish to have placed on record my objection
to such a large amount of public money being        if-, tb it
and open consultation

I also wish this letter to be put before tf«e "V?et<n2 mentioned above.

Yours faithfully
________ i________
