SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
2&   MAY 1991 : JOINT SECRETARIAT, BARNSLEY
                                                                                 3
PRESENT:    Councillor Sir John Layden (Chairman)                     ..
            Councillors: G Gallimore (Vice-Chairman), J M Cromar, R Fisher,
            R W Gillies, R P McCormick, C Swindell, C M Walayat, R Whitfield.
            Magistrate Members: Mrs B R Bullivant, Mr H D Hepworth,
            Mr.J Ludlam, Mr J F Staniforth.

168     ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE GRAHAM MOORE
        The Chairman welcomed to the meeting the newly appointed Assistant Chief
        Constable - Staff Services - Mr Graham Moore.
169     URGENT ITEM
        The Chairman announced that he was adding to the agenda an item dealing
        with a recent police operation in view of its importance to members ot
        the Authority.
170     MINUTES
        RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Authority held on
        12 April 1991 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
171     LAY VISITING
        The Clerk and Financial Officer referred to minute 150 of the meeting of
        the Authority on 12 April 1991. The details of the proposed revision
        session on lay visiting were being concluded. It was proposed that the
        session take place on the morning of Friday 12 July.
         The Authority attached particular importance to the number of custody
         sergeants who would be present; preliminary discussions had
         place on the subject but the Chief Constable undertook that whilst he had
         to maintain operational availability, he would try to make as many such
         officers available as possible.
         RESOLVED - That the report be received and the proposed date adopted.
 172     RACIAL ATTACKS AND HARASSMENT
         The Clerk and Financial Officer referred to minute 151A of the last
         meeting of the Authority and reported that the                           _
         Racial Attacks and Harassment was under discussion. Whilst there was
         still some way to go it was hoped to stage the seminar around J u l y / August
         time.
 173     CHILDREN'S ACT - FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS
         Following a reference by a member of the Authority to a recent seminar it
         was
- 2 -



         ESOLVED - That a report on the [financial/ implications for the Authority
        resulting from the new Children's Act be presented to a future meeting.
174     CHARGES FOR POLICING FOOTBALL MATCHES
        Following a question by a member the Chief Constable reported that the
        Clerk and Financial Officer and himself were making arrangements for a
        meeting with representatives of Football Clubs to discuss future charging
        arrangements.
        During the meeting the Clerk and Financial Officer circulated to members
        present a Home Office Circular on this subject received that morning.
175     COMMUNITY CONSULTATION : 'A'2 (THORNE) COMMUNITY AND POLICE LIAISON FORUM
        The Chief Constable referred to the decision taken at the meeting of the
        Accountability, Complaints and Discipline Committee on 15 March 1991,
        later confirmed by the Authority, supporting the initiative of the local
        Sub-Divisional Commander in suggesting a multi-disciplinary working group
        to tackle the problems in Stainforth. The Chief Constable thanked the
        Authority for their support in the face of a fairly difficult situation.
176     MINUTES OF COMMITTEES ETC
        A   Accountability. Complaints and Discipline
            RESOLVED - That the minutes of the Accountability, Complaints and
            Discipline Committee held on 26 April 1991, as set out in Appendix 1,
            be received subject to the addition of the following to the
            resolution to minute 7:
            "That a multi agency Working Party be established on Racial
            Harassment subject to further discussions at the seminar."
        B   Finance and General Purposes
            RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Finance and General
            Purposes Committee held on 3 May 1991, as set out in Appendix 2, be
            received.
        C   AMA Seminar - The Role of Police Authorities in Police Training
            RESOLVED - That the representatives of the Authority referred to in
            minute 4 of the Finance and General Purposes minutes be Councillors
            Walayat and Gillies.
        D   Working Party on Equal Opportunities in the South Yorkshire Police
            RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Working Party on
            Equal Opportunities in the South Yorkshire Police held on 16 May
            1991, as set out in Appendix 3, be approved.
177     AMA ANNUAL MEETING AND CONFERENCE
        A report of the Clerk and Financial Officer referred to the AMA Annual
        Meeting and Conference to be held at Huddersfield Polytechnic between 10
        and 12 September 1991.
- 3 -



        RESOLVED - That in view of the representation by the District Councils
        the Authority not be separately represented.
178     MEETINGS OF THE AUTHORITY AND ITS COMMITTEES IN 1991/92 AND
        ANNUAL MEETING 1991
        RESOLVED -
        1     That meetings of the Authority and its Committees during 1991/92 be
              held on the following dates:
        Accountability.             Finance and General       Police Authority
        Complaints and              Purposes Committee
        Discipline Committee
                           (All Meetings start at 11.00 am)
                                           1991
         7   June                    21   June                28   June
        19   July                     9   August              30   August
        13    September              27   September           11   October
        25   October                  8   November            29   November
        20   December

                                           1992
                                      3   January             17   January
        31   January                  7   February            21   February
         6   March                   13   March               27   March
        10   April                   24   April                1   May
        15   May                     22   May

        2     That the Annual Meeting of the Authority in 1991 be held on the same
              day as the ordinary meeting of the Authority scheduled for 28 June
              1991.
179     CRIME SUMMARY AND STATISTICS
        The Chief Constable submitted the crime summary and statistics for
        January to March 1991 including comments by the respective Divisional
        Commanders on the crime position in each of the six Divisions of the
        Force. In accordance with the usual practice the six Divisional
        Commanders attended the meeting to deal with questions relating to their
        respective Divisions.
        Compared with the same period in 1990 there had been an increase of
        10.52% in recorded crime with a detection rate of 38.46% (43.66% over the
        same period of 1990).
        The Police Authority discussed in particular:

        1     Following comments by the Divisional Commander of Barnsley Division
    whether or not schools should be encouraged to provide secure rooms
    to store expensive equipment. Following a discussion the Divisional
    Commander recalled that Barnsley Crime Prevention Panel were
    presently negotiating with manufacturers regarding the colour coding
    of equipment purchased by the Education authorities.
2   The comments by the Divisional Commander of Sheffield South Division
    about a number of bail hostel satellite houses in his Division. Some
    members of the Authority had reservations about revealing the
    location of such hostels but it was noted that they existed in every
    Division.
3   The reference to the death of a 52 year old pedestrian following a
     collision with a vehicle which had earlier been followed by a police
     car and the comment by the Divisional Commander of Sheffield South
     Division about early indications being that Force policy had been
     followed. The Authority discussed the application of the sub-judice
     rule in such circumstances.
4   The increasing crime rate in Sheffield Central Division. The
     Divisional Commander referred to initiatives underway at Meadowhall
     and various activities encouraging youngsters to get involved more
     with the police.
Along with this discussion there was a presentation on proposed revisions
to the presentation of crime statistics to produce a more informative
package.
RESOLVED - That henceforth Divisional Commanders attend meetings of the
Authority on an occasional basis as and when there is a particular Agenda
item of interest to them.
HALF YEARLY ESTABLISHMENT REPORT
A   Establishment and Strenoth
    The Chief Constable reported on the authorised establishment and
    actual strength of the Force as at 31 March 1991 and on the changes
    which had occurred since 1 October 1990. The report indicated the
    number of females included in the figures. The Force strength
    included 20 police officers from an ethnic minorities background. Of
    these, 11 were Asians (including 1 female), 8 Afro-caribbean
    (including 1 female) and 1 officer from Africa.
B   Probationer Constables
    The Chief Constable reported on the number of probationer constables
    as at 31 March 1991.
C   Commendations
    The Chief Constable reported on commendations by the Courts and
    himself during the period including a summary of such commendations.
D       Retirements
        The Chief Constable reported details of officers who had retired
        having completed 25 years or more of pensionable service with ill-
        health awards.

E       Pension Matters
        The Chief Constable reported details of pensions granted and the
        deaths of police pensioners.
F       Promotions
        The Chief Constable reported details of officers who had been
        promoted since 1 October 1990.
G       Complaints
        The Chief Constable reported that from 1 October 1990 to 31 Marc[] .
        1991 221 complaints had been received from 172 members of the public
        of which 1 had been found unsubstantiated, 41 had been withdrawn, and
        25 informally resolved.
H       Letters of Appreciation
        The Chief Constable reported that 312 letters of appreciation had
        been received in the period and some examples were quoted.
RESOLVED -
    1   That   the contents of the report be noted.
2       That the Chief Constable review the presentation and style of the
         half-yearly establishment report including the presentation of the
         various statistical information in a way which indicates the numbers
         of ethnic minorities included in the figures.
    HMI INSPECTORATE OF CONSTABULARY
    A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
    referred to:
    1    The report of Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary on the South
         Yorkshire Police for 1991.
    2   A change in the pattern of inspections of provincial police forces.
    3   Informal notification of the dates of the inspection of South
         Yorkshire Police in 1991.
    4    A change in HM Inspector of Constabulary for the region covering
         South Yorkshire.
    Copies of   the report of Her Majesty's Inspector of Constabulary on South
    Yorkshire   Police in 1991 had previously been circulated to members. The
    Authority   considered the report along with an analysis by the Chief
    Constable   of the report's recommendations.
- 6 -



        The Secretary of State had approved changes in the arrangements for
        inspecting provincial police forces so that in alternate years forces
        would normally have a "primary" inspection and an "intermediate"
        inspection. Primary inspections would be essentially the same as
        existing annual inspections; intermediate inspections would involve
        similar procedures but focusing on particular issues rather than the full
        range of subjects covered at a primary inspection. There would continue
        to be a published report on each force each year whether the inspection
        had been primary or intermediate.
        Advance notification had been received of a proposed primary inspection
        of the force between Monday 14 October and Friday 18 October 1991. The
        HM Inspector of 'C' region, which included South Yorkshire was now
        Mr Geoffrey Dear.
        RESOLVED -
        1 That the various questions raised by HM Inspector of Constabulary in
           his 1991 report on South Yorkshire Police be noted along with the
           analysis and action already being taken by the Chief Constable; and
           that further reports be awaited.
        2   That the Authority note the change in the pattern of inspections of
             provincial police forces involving primary and intermediate
             inspections and that the inspection of South Yorkshire Police in 1991
             will be a primary inspection.
        3   That the informal indication of the inspection dates of the South
             Yorkshire Police for 1991 ie Monday 14 to Friday 18 October be noted.
        4   That the Authority note that the HM Inspector of Constabulary for
             South Yorkshire is now Mr Geoffrey Dear.
182     EFFICIENCY MEASURES INTRODUCED AND UNDER INVESTIGATION
        A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
        referred to part 6 of the resolution to minute 135 of the meeting of the
        Authority on 1 March 1991 and itemised the various efficiency measures
        which had been introduced during the 1990/91 financial year and also
        those under examination.
        The AMA were reviewing 10 police papers produced by the Audit Commission
        in their report on the Metropolitan Forces. The results of the review
        would be reported to a future meeting of the Authority.
        RESOLVED - That the report be noted.
183     URBAN ACTION ACTIVITIES - FUTURE PROJECTS
        A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
        referred to Urban Action Activities. In accordance with the established
        policy that projects costing between £500 and £2500 be submitted for
        approval, details of projects involving a annual sporting competition;
        maintenance of urban action vehicles; leadership training courses were
        considered.
RESOLVED -
1       That approval be given to total expenditure of £14,000 to be met from
        the Headquarters main fund, to undertake the projects referred to.
2       That the Urban Action Activities report presentation be reviewed and
        revised particularly to include a statement of expenditure and funds
        committed and available.
CRIME AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
A report of the Chief Constable referred to part 2 of the resolution to
minute 13 of the meeting of the Authority on 24 June 1988 when he was
asked to report to a future meeting on the crime prevention model of best
practice then being investigated.
The pursuit of the effective use of all other police resources to
complement the work of the operational officer had been subject to
scrutiny during 1990/91. A major recommendation was to merge community
liaison and crime prevention and add to their complementary role, victim
support officers and crime reduction teams. The resulting specialist
sections at Force and Divisional level were known as Crime and Community
Services.
The report went on to itemise the aims of the new department, its broad
strategy and the model of best practice it would follow.
RESOLVED -
1        That the progress made be noted.
2        That the Authority encourage all sections of district local
        authorities to assist the police in their bold initiative to reduce
        crime and promote closer working of interested agencies.
PURCHASE OF SHIRTS. PULLOVERS. AND HELMETS
Ajoint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
referred to the tendering negotiation     for the supply of shirts and
pullovers already undertaken by Yorkshire Purchasing Organisation. It
was possible for the South Yorkshire Police to purchase these items under
the existing Yorkshire Purchasing Organisation contract.
In addition there was a need to purchase a supply of custodian police
helmets which were a proprietry item provided by Christy and Co Limited.
RESOLVED -
 1      That approval be given to the purchase of the various shirts now
        referred to from Sugden & Sons Limited.
 2      That approval be given to the purchase of 2000 heavy duty pullovers
         from Remploy Limited at £20,682.55.
    3   That approval be given to the purchase of 1000 custodian helmets from
         Christy & Co Limited at £29,000.
- 8 -



186     REVIEW OF REGIONAL CRIME SQUADS AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT UNITS
        A report of the Clerk and Financial Officer referred to minute 121 of the
        meeting of the Authority on 18 January 1991 when the Authority had
        considered and expressed views on a review of regional technical support
        units by the Executive Co-ordinator of Regional Crime Squads.
        Since that time there had been an exchange of correspondence between the
        Home Office, the Secretary of the Number 3 Regional Crime Squad, and
        clerks to police authorities. The Authority now considered details of
        additional points made by the No.3 Regional Crime Squad and the Home
        Office along with comments on the overall situation by the Clerk and
        Financial Officer. At the previous meeting of the Authority it had been
        noted that considerable debate was taking place about the future
        structure of regional crime squads and it was as a consequence of that
        proposal that the parallel recommendation had been made to restructure
        the regional technical support units. The report expressed the view that
        the restructuring of regional technical support units ought not to go
        ahead until the discussion on the regional crime squad proposals had been
        completed.
        RESOLVED - That the views expressed in the Clerk and Financial Officer's
        report be endorsed.
187     EUROPEAN CONFERENCE 1992 : QUALITY THROUGH EQUALITY
        RESOLVED - That the advance notice from the AMA of a European Conference
        "Quality Through Equality" to be held at the Police Staff College,
        Bramshill from 23 to 27 March 1992 be noted.
188     REPRESENTATION ON THE NATIONAL EMPLOYERS ORGANISATION
        A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
        referred to the views of the Provincial Employers Organisations and of
        the Local Government Management Board on the issue of provincial
        representation on the National Employers Organisations and the employers
        side of the National Joint Council.
        Agreement had been reached between the four local authority associations
        on a new constitution for the National Employers Organisation to ensure
        proper accountability of the employer side to local authorities. Whilst
        The Local Government Management Board recognised the important role of
        Provincial Councils in putting forward regional views and it had
        therefore been agreed that amongst their representation they would
        include two provincial employer members.
        The Provincial Employers Organisations had opposed the move and had
        produced a paper "In Pursuit of Harmony" which sought support for
        maintaining the existing position. The Provincial Employers
        Organisations were seeking support for their views.
        RESOLVED - That the Authority support the view taken by the Local
        Government Management Board.
189   LIST OF OUTSTANDING AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
      A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
      was submitted on outstanding and/or requested reports.
      RESOLVED - That the report be noted.
190   FAMILIARISATION SEMINAR
      WITHDRAWN.
191   INTERNATIONAL POLICE VISITS. TRAINING. AND EXCHANGES
      The Authority had before them, for information, a letter from the Home
      Office about the arrangements for the co-ordination of requests for
      police visits, exchanges, advice and training from other countries.
192   POLICE OPERATION
      A member of the Authority referred to a police operation the previous
      evening based on Hammerton Road and West Bar Divisions. Whilst the
      Chairman of the local Community and Police Liaison Forum had been
      involved along with a considerable press contingent the local Police
      Authority representative had not. The Chief Constable commented on the
      operation being referred to and the reasons why the press and Police and
      Community Liaison Chairman had been invited and felt that there could be
      a point regarding Police Authority member interests.




CHAIRMAN




 WP010793/SJL
