                                        N O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as it
                                        contains     exempt          information
                                        within para. ...7 1 .......... of
                                        Sch.l2A to the Local Government
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 3 AUGUST 1899 as amended.

CHARGES FOR POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS

Joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and Chief Constable

1     Matter for Consideration
      The Authority’s policy on charging for policing of special events, with
      specific reference to the policing of football matches.
2     Background
2.1 The 1990/91 football season is due to commence in about amonth’s time, and the
     Chief Constable has been reviewing the arrangements for policing of matches.
     There are two issues to consider - firstly the basis for providing cover, which
     is primarily an operational matter, and secondly the scale of charges, which is
     ultimately the Authority’s decision.
2.2   The Chief Constable is proposing to move to a new basis whereby matches are
      categorized into three types according to policing requirements. For each Club
      the fixtures will be divided into (A), (B) and (C) matches. Category (A)
      matches include local derbies, matches against the top clubs, or against clubs
      with a history of crowd trouble. Categories (B) and (C) represent lower risks
      in policing terms. The deployment levels have been worked out separately for
      each ground. The Chief Constable has calculated the officer requirements for
      both inside and outside the ground for each club and each category of match.
      These take account of Taylor and of the local conditions at and around each
      ground. They also reflect changes such as Sheffield United’s promotion to the
      first division.
2.3   The present contract with the clubs bases the charges on crowd size, although
      the number of officers charged for under the formula bears no direct relation
      to actual policing numbers, even inside the ground. It is quite easy to
      calculate the costs to the Authority of providing the recommended input at
      category (A), (B) or (C) levels but the issue that needs to be resolved is how
      far the Authority is prepared to move towards recovering total costs.
      In this respect, the proposals are only concerned with officers stationed
      inside the ground
      The most recent legal interpretation of the Authorities’ powers to charge under
      Section 15 of the Police Act 1964 states that other specific duties such as
      escorting fans to railway stations in the vicinity of grounds can be charged;
      this is under consideration but has not been included in the present proposals.
      Given the general performance of clubs at a particular time, or a particular
      game (such as a semi-final) it may be necessary to draw up an individual
      contract which would provide more officers inside the ground than the normal
      Category A deployment.
Recovering the costs
There are a number of options for recovery of costs:-
(a)   Recovery of full economic costs for all inside the ground officers, based
      on special services rates as calculated for the Yorkshire and Humberside
      Region.
(b)   Recovery of   our wages and directly related costs.
(c)   Recovery of ’marginal’ or     ’additional’ costs (the majority of officers
      are on overtime).
(d)   An increase calculated to reflect inflation plus the additional input
      resulting from the Taylor Report’s recommendations.
(e)   A percentage increase for 1990/91 calculated as part of a strategy to
      bring the charges more into line with costs over a period of more than *
      year.
(f)   Proposal by ACPO (July 1990). To apply a national all-in rate of £20.41
      per hour for a constable. This follows closely the formula developed
      independently by the Audit Commission (see Section 4).
Estimated Costs
Total costs of policing all league games in South Yorkshire at special services
rates are nearly £1.5 m gross, of which £1.2 m is for inside the ground
officers. Actual additional costs - overtime etc - are about £0.52m and the
Authority charges the clubs about £0.25 m a year. The net cost is eligible for
police grant. To recover its costs therefore, it would be necessary to at
least double the charges overall, allowing for inflation. Appendix A to this
report summarizes the position by each Club.
Advice from Home Office and District Audit
The District Auditor has recently completed a report on Police Service incomeijj
the main point of which concerned his views on charging for attendance at     ™
football matches. The District Auditor recommends strongly that the Authority
take steps to increase its charges so as to recover the costs for those
officers stationed in or immediately around the ground. An extract of the
District Auditor’s draft report is attached (Appendix B).
The Authority has also received, via AMA, a draft Home Office Circular on the
same subject. This also advises in the strongest terms that the Authority
should be seeking to recover the full cost of officers on football duty inside
the grounds. In places the Home Office Circular is very inflexible and does
not always acknowledge the policy issues involved. The Clerk and Financial
Officer has passed a number of comments back to AMA. A copy of the draft
Circular and the Authority’s reply is attached (Appendix C).
In addition to these items, an ACPO Sub-Committee has carried out a review of
charging policies, and their report will recommend that charges for policing of
football matches are calculated with a view to recovering the full costs of the
operation as far as the law allows. The proposed national rate is £20.41 per
hour for a constable.
Applying the ACPO proposal to the new deployment patterns would produce the
following increases in charges for 1990/91.
                 1989/90    1989/90    (Updated      ACPO    % increases
                 £000       £000       for
                                        inflation)
Sheffield Utd    74         81                       379     367


Sheffield Wed    74         81                       389     380


Barnsley         49          53                      211     298

Rotherham Utd     34         37                      170     359

Doncaster Rovs    22         24_                      92     283
                  £253       £276                    £1241   350

Football Clubs can reclaim a proportion of their charges for police services
from the Football Trust. Appendix E provides brief details of the Scheme. The
figures also show (based on 1988/89 season data) the charges paid by the five
South Yorkshire Football Clubs relative to those paid by other Clubs.
 Policy implications
 In deciding on its charging policy for the 1990/91 football season, the
 Authority has to be aware of the present circumstances surrounding the five
 clubs in South Yorkshire - this includes the clubs’ financial health, and the
 extent to which the Authority is prepared to add further to the financial
 burdens of some of the clubs. In addition, however, the decision on football
 match charges should not be taken in isolation, but should take in the wider
 considerations such as the Authority’s overall policy on charging for
 attendance at Special Events.
 Appendix D lists some of the special events policed in South Yorkshire.
 fe. The next Steps
    The Chief Constable is already talking to the Clubs and     while there is adegree
    of acceptance of the plan to categorize matches in the      proposed way the clubs
    are not unexpectedly asking about charges. If the agreement on football
    charges is to be concluded before the start of the 1990/91 season, it really
    needs a decision at today’s meeting. If the Authority is unable to reach a
    decision at this stage, it is proposed to take the following line with clubs:-
     (i)    The Authority is reviewing its charges which it intends will be effective
            from the start of the 1990/91 season.
     (ii)   The new charges will be determined by the Authority based on the new
            deployment patterns.
     (iii) If the Authority has not determined its charges by the time the season
           commences, as an interim measure it proposes to charge on the basis of
          (two thirds of the level proposed under the ACPO Scheme.) See           9
           recommendation (iv).
    Recommendations
     (i)    Members are asked to approve the introduction of the new deployment
            patterns based on categorization of matches.
     (ii)   Members are invited to agree a policy for the Authority on the subject of
            charging for attendance at special events.
     (iii) Members are asked to consider the level of charges to be applied for
           policing football matches in 1990/91, with particular reference to the
           national rates proposed by ACPO.
     (iv)   Members are asked to resolve on the interim charging basis should they be
            required.
     (v)    In the light of this the Authority is asked to agree that the Clerk a n d ^
            Financial Officer, in conjunction with the Chief Constable, be authorizs!^
            to conclude the agreements with the football clubs prior to commencement
            of the 1990/91 season.


R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer

R B Wells
Chief Constable
                                                          APPENDIX A

                     POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES
                SUMMARY OF COSTS AND RECOVERY OPTIONS

                   Estimated     Estimated   Estimated Estimated   Charges
                     Total         Total       Labour   Marginal   made in
                     Value         Cost         Cost      Cost     1989/90

                Special   ACPO
                Services Rates
                  Rates
                  £000   £000      £000       £000       £000       £000

Sheffield Utd      355    379       218        190        158           74

Sheffield Wed      364    389       224        194        186           74

Barnsley           198    211       122        106         88            49

Rotherham Utd      159     170       93         81          73           34

Doncaster           86      92       53         46          32           22

Rovers                               —         ____       ------       ------

                 1,162   1,241      710        617        537          253




Notes

Total Value - Manpower numbers at Special Services rates
Total Cost - Direct labour costs plus 15% overhead
Labour Cost - Direct labour costs only
Marginal Cost - Reduction to reflect those officers who are on normal duty time
                                                                                                                        APPENDIX B




 CHARGES TO FOOTBALL CLUBS


                 C h a r g e s to f o o t b a l l c lu b s s h o u l d be a d e q u a t e to c o v e r the cost o f p r o v i d i n g po lic e
 s e r v ic e s i n si d e f o o tb a ll g r o u n d s .




HOURLY RECHARGE RATES FOR POLICE SERVICES

                  H ourly recharge               rates s h o u l d       be a d e q u a t e   to c o v e r th e full co st o f p ol ic in g all
s p e c ia l e v e n t s i n c l u d i n g fo ot ba ll m a t c h e s .




         Possible Action

                  The       full co st o f p r o v i d i n g s e r v i c e s at s p e c ia l e v e n t s i n c l u d i n g fo otba ll m a t c h e s
s h o u l d be r e c o v e r e d by the F o r c e ’s c h a r g e o u t rate s.
                                                                    APPENDIX C



— — ract from Clerk and Financial Officer's Comments to AMA



J aS7nln ai9rk0ment wit!\the basic conclusion that football clubs as a whole are not
matrhpc nrnrflw         J6 C°u!' ° f the pollce resource deemed necessary to ensure that
matches proceed without problems. I do think, however, that there are important
tn hfSn°I aw0k ailk 2a^ re’ and broader policy implications which      are going to have
ho tho           L      •?V u ® Authorities> who after a11 is said and done are going to
be the bodies which will be seen by the clubs and the public as being the
instigators of the increased charges and whatever follows.
1    Definition of ’c o s t ’

               ci rcular talks about recovering ’costs’ . There are several ways of
     looking at this - do they mean the full economic cost (ie the special service
     rate)?; or the labour cost?: or just the marginal cost. All are valid in
     appropriate circumstances.
2   Coverage

     Ih!rnlnC fiar SrtmS t 0 .accePt tf31 only ’inside the ground’ officers may be
     i f    / I ' The "J?st/ « ent legal advice is to the effect that certain
      outside the ground staff are relevant if performing specific duties such as
     control of crowds around the turnstiles, or escort of fans to a railway station
     in the immediate vicinity of the ground.
3   Private security

    Not enough consideration has been given to the implication of clubs opting for
    private security firms instead of the Police. There is a considerable weight
    r l c n ^ ! 10n   f Sa^ S   Private security guards will not command the same
    respect as uniformed policemen, and therefore the potential for crowd trouble
    is increased. The response of many Chief Constables will be to have a reserve
    charged0t o ^ h e ^ l u b s ° f tr0uble‘ Provisi°n should be made for this to be

4   Effect on the clubs

               °3 in d ividiJal cJubs should not be ignored. The larger clubs can
    better afford to pay the charges. Within South Yorkshire it is quite clear
    that in relation to crowd size the smaller clubs are being adversely affected
    by the present charging system and this seems to be because there is a minimum
    policing requirement whatever the crowd size, and economies of scale apply
                  f?-V -ryo lde span of crowd sizes. Few of the existing charging
    systems are sufficiently sensitive to this, although the moves to categorise
    matches according to the policing requirement go some way towards recognising
    it. This should not necessarily influence the overall aim, but it should be a
    factor in the way by which each individual authority deals with the clubs in
    ixs area«
Policy on charging for special events
To a large extent this follows from the previous points. Authorities will
quite rightly have to consider their policy on charging for football match
duties, but this should be part of an overall strategy for charging for police
presence at special events. The focus is on football clubs, but there are many
other events which generate a policing requirement - cricket, rugby, athletics,
marathons and fun runs, stock car racing, and, outside the sporting sphere,
demonstrations, marches, conferences and exhibitions or shows. Section 15 of
the Police Act deals with al1 cases. The Home Office circular refers only to
football matches, and it should be within the discretion of each Authority to
decide its policy on charges as a whole. The Home Office circular tries to be
prescriptive on the subject but it should be perfectly acceptable for an
individual authority to opt for a policy which does not recover full costs in
the interests of wider policing or social considerations. In this context, we
should not underestimate the fact that football is a popular spectator sport,
and that many local members would not want to see the Police Authority b e i r m w
responsible for forcing a club over the brink. Again the answer is in allowing
local discretion in implementing charging policies, which is fully acceptable
as long as the financial consequences are made clear to members when the
decision is taken.
Rate of increases
If the South Yorkshire evidence is anything to go   by, the charges recover only
a proportion of total costs. Accepting that this    is unreasonable in the long
run, it should also be accepted that some sort of   lead-in time will be required
- say 2/3 years - to bring the present charges up   to the new levels.
                                                                  APPENDIX C

FOL/oS 4 0 4 / : / 9




The Clerx *: the Police Authcritv

The Chief Constable




Dear Sir

H0K2 c m c s     CIRCULAR NO           /19 9 0

CHARGZS TOR POLICING FOOTBALL MATCHES


1.    Lord     Justice       Taylcr's      report   or. his    inquiry     into     the

Killsbcrcugh           stadium disaster .recommended          (Seconmer.dation 53)
that:

        "Police Authorities should review the charges they make to

       clubs     for the costs of policing ir.sice grounds sc as to

       ensure that realistic charges are aade.                    The Home Office

       should      take      steps    to   ensure    consistency      of practice,

       subject to local discretion and the need to have regard to

       local circumstances.”



2.    The    reasoning        behind     this    recommendation      was   efiven    in

paragraph 210 of the report:



       "The temptation to the clubs to leave it all to the police

       is stronger           if they are not        required to make realistic

       payner.t        for   police    services.       No   charge    is aade       for

       officers outside the ground since maintaining lav ar.d order
     ir. the streets is a normal pur lie function of the polios.

     At the present tine, the practice as to recovering costs cf

     policing inside the grounds from cluts varies greatly from

     place to place,      different formulae beinc used.              In some

     areas, the charge aade is the actual cost of the officers

     attending    in    the   ground.        At others,    it is aade    cn a

     sliding scale, dependent on whether the Batch is category

     A (high risk), 3 or C.           At others, it is dependent cn the

     size of the crowd attending.               At scae,   it appears to re
     entirely arbitrary and at cne ground it is said to be nil.

     Tn -my view       a mere      consistent   ar.d businesslike     approach

     should be made to such charces.              If clubs were to find it

     acre   economical        to   recruit    efficient    stewards   than   to

     delegate duties to the police, thers could be a significant

     reduction     in   the number      of police    deployed at      football

     grounds, to the benefit of the community at large."



The statutory pos i t i o n

3.    Section 15(1)      of the Police Act 15 64 provides that "the

chief officer of police of any police force aay provide, at the

request of any person, special police services at any premises

or in any locality in the police area for which the force is

aaintained,    subject to the payment to the police authority of

charges on such scales as aay be determined by that authority".



4.    The expression "special police services" is not defined in

section 15 and must be given its natural meaning.                This is that

scecial services are services which would not, in the absence of
arrar.cesents under section 15, be provided in pursuance of the

general duties of the pclice to preserve law and order.



5.        Safety certificates are required for stadia designated by

the Secretary of State under section 1(1) of the Safety of Sports

Grounds Act         1975.      They are issued by local authorities and

contain such rules and conditions as the local authority consider

necessary or expedient t o ’secure reasonable safety at the ground.

Where         certificates      require     the      holder   to   arrange   fcr 'the

attendance of an adequate nunber of pclice officers within the

crounc,        the extent of the provision of police services must,

under section 2 of the 1975 Act as amended, be reserved fcr the

determination of the chief of'ficer of police of the force in

 question.



 The view of central Government
 6.          It has been the view of successive Governments since 1563

 that the costs of special services should be paid in full by

 those usinc the service and that no part of these costs should

 be allowed to add to the general level of police expenditure and

 thus to the burdens of taxpayers or ratepayers.                      Charges should

 be reviewed and adjusted as necessary - at least annually.                       The

 aim in principle should be to recover the full cost of those

 police officers            who   are deployed         at   football matches   solely

 within the ground.



     rv» —       ar.d d e p l o y m e n t policies

     7.      If the full ccst is to be recovered, there must be a direct
finds it necessary to deploy soieiy

          .he c . . sr.culd
              club       -j have wO rav
                                    pa/.                 Under present
                                                               *"■     charging
the acre the
policies this is net alvays the case.


8.      or.e reason for this' aay be that a force char?.* only for the

number of officers mentioned in an agreement made w- uh th

Eowever, if the chief officer of police considers i- necessary,

because’ of the nature of the match or the reputation cf the

visiting supporters, to deploy inside the ground more officers
                                      ••     j«    .k.                   IS 1B&C6 •
 than such an agreement provides .or, no met-a ch                    .
 This      practice    should    he   reviewed -and       any   agreements should

 specifically provide for special circumstances calling for the

 deployment cf acre officers than usual.


 9.        Other   forces   determine charges        on the basis of a fixe-

 formula.       Where the sane formula is used for both charging and

  deployment, the        economic     cost    is   recovered.       But where     the

  charging formula bears no relation to deployment (e.g. because

  deolovment is based on the chief officer's assessment of the

     need whereas charges are based on 2 constables - with supervismg

     officers         rata - per 1000 of actual attendance), charges are

     likely to fall some way short of recovering the full e c o n o m y

     costs.



     ^.rcal cPH g ^ eyat;-or*s
     10.   As Lord Justice Taylor acknowledged,                 local eircuas.ances

      car.nct he ignored and charging policies must leave scope fcr
0




          a.    The nature ar.c location of the ground and the standard

                 cf       physical      aids     to    crowd      control         are    ®a;cr

                 considerations in determining the nuaser cf of-icers

                 to be deployed inside the ground.                Facilities are.often

                 poorest at the grounds cf clubs who are least able to

                 pay the full economic cost,of policing.
                      *     /


          b.     The financial plight of many clubs cannot be lightly

                 dismissed.           Asking clubs to pay unrealistically high

                 charcres       for    policing       could     lead    to   prcciems      wiwn

                 recovering dept and even to bankruptcy.



    XI.    There are, however, steps which the poorer clubs could take

    to help themselves.               In particular, more,             and better trainee,

    stewards would help to reduce the policing requirement.                             Manning

    gates,      directing       spectators       to    the    correct        areas,     keeping

    car.gwavs clear and monitoring the density of packing m                             pens and

    enclosures are all mentioned by Lord Justice Taylor as examples

    of    duties which          could be       carried    out    by     suitable,       properly

    trained stewards.



    Recommendation
    12.    Police         authorities      and    chief       officers       of   police     are

    therefore advised that:
           a.     The aim in principle should be to recover the full

                  costs of all police officers deployed to duties solely

                  within the ground at football matches.
 there is a direct link between deployment and charges.



      cases where it would   clearly be unrealistic to

 require a club to meet the full costs of policing

 inside the ground, local discretion aay be exercised
 to reduce the scale of charges.



 It should, however, be made.clear in such cases that

 the club will be expected to take active steps (eg the

 provision cf mere effective stewarding arrangements)

 to   reduce the levels, of policing needed inside the
 ground.



additional   copy of this circular is enclosed for the




                                Yours faithfully




                                M j ADDISON
                                                           APPENDIX D
Examples of Special events and duties handled by South Yorkshire Police, and the
charging policy which has been followed

                            Charging Policy
War Memorial Parade         None
Royal Visits                None
FA Cup Semi-final           Yes (inside ground)
Peak Park Planning Survey   Yes (Special Service rates)
NUM Gala                    None (only Public Order duties)
RAF Finningley Open Day     None (mainly traffic duties)
Prison Dispute Cover        Yes (Mutual Aid rules)
Bruce Springsteen Concert
(Bramall Lane)              Yes (inside ground - special services rates)
Sport Aid 1988              No (traffic duty; Charity function)
St Ledger Race Meeting
(plus other racing)         Yes (inside course; special services rates)
Sheffield Eagles            Yes (inside ground only)
Film Company (traffic
control)                    Yes (special service rates)
Ambulance Dispute           Yes (special services rates)
Doncaster Rugby Club        Yes (inside ground)
Sheffield Marathon          No (traffic control; no work "inside
                            premises", charity function")
                                          APPENDIX E
EXTRACT FROM FOOTBALL TRUST PUBLICATION
Average police charge per match 1988/89
               £         Local Clubs               Position in league
                                             £     (hiqhest charge first)
Div 1          4,690     Sheff Wed          2990   16th out of 20
Div 2          2,610     Barnsley           1410   21st out of 24
Div 3          1,120     Sheff Utd          2100   3rd out of 24*
Div 4              540   Done Rovers         652   6th out of 24
                         Rotherham Utd      1065   1st out of 24
                                                                        *
All Divns      2,030

(*Not a realistic comparison as the Club is now in the first division)
Note:
The Football Trust reimburse all football league clubs a proportion of police
charges (for league matches only)
First Division Clubs:
35% of the net invoice value up to a maximum of £76,000 in Police charges (maximum
subsidy per season (£26,600).
Other Clubs:
At present, all clubs receive 35% of the net invoice value, with no limit. The
Trust are considering applying the First Division limit to clubs in the Second
Division also.
