SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY



17 NOVEMBER 1989
                                                                    17
REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE



ACTIONS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE FOLLOWING THE
PUBLICATION OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT



1.    Introduction

1.1   In the wake    of the disaster which occurred   at Hillsborough Stadium,
       Sheffield, on 15 April 1989, a Public Inquiry was commissioned to enquire
       into the events and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd
       control  and  safety at sports events.   The Inquiry was chaired by Lord
      Justice Taylor and it sat from 15 May until 14 July 1989.

1.2   Lord Justice Taylor published his Interim Report on 4 August     1989,  in
      which he made 43 interim recommendations.    He emphasised that these were
      designed   to prevent overcrowding and crushing on terraced areas in the
       short term,  and that long term recommendations fell to be considered in
      his Final Report.   A copy of the recommendations is appended.



2.    Implementation of Recommendations

2.1   The recommendations   contained in Lord Justice Taylor's  Interim Report
      included many which were already identified as necessary in the light of
      the events at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.   The South Yorkshire Police
      were therefore well prepared to ensure that they were swiftly implemented
      at the five football league grounds in the County.

2.2   The Chief Constable nominated Mr P Hayes    QPM LLB    MA,    Deputy Chief
      Constable, to liaise personally with the management of each football club
      and with each    local  authority concerned in respect  of future crowd
      safety.   Mr Hayes met with directors and secretaries of all five South
      Yorkshire   football league    clubs  on 24 August       1989    and  with
      representatives of the four local authorities on 18 September 1989.

2.3   To progress     the recommendations of the Taylor, Report the Deputy Chief
      Constable    appointed an 'Implementation Team' which included     the  local
      ground commanders who have a responsibility for policing each of the five
      football   league    clubs  in the County,   and officers with specialist
      knowledge in such areas as communications,     CCTV and training.    The team
      has met    under    the Deputy Chief    Constable's   chairmanship on seven
      occasions   since 4 August 1989 and each of       the recommendations which
      places   a responsibility with the police has been implemented at all
      football league grounds.      Those recommendations which were asterisked by
      Lord   Justice Taylor,      signifying their   immediate need,     were each
      implemented by      18 August - just two weeks after the publication of the
      Taylor   Report    and before the start of the current      league programme.
      Furthermore,    it is pleasing to be able to report that, with the positive
      co-operation     of    the  football  clubs,   signed    written   agreements
                                       -   2   -




       between   the clubs   and the police,     setting out     their   respective
       responsibilities for crowd safety, have been drawn up.

2.A    The    South Yorkshire    Police  have also addressed    the    remaining
       recommendations    for which they are not directly responsible. A   report
       concerning    these matters    has been forwarded to each of the     local
       authorities who have a responsibility for         safety certification at
       football grounds.

2.5    A copy of each written agreement together with a summary of the action
       taken on all relevant recommendations in relation to that football ground
       is appended.


3.     The Responsibilities of the Local Authorities for Safety at
       Sports Grounds

3.1    Any local authority within whose area there exists      a sports   stadium
        designated under   the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as amended)   is
        responsible   for the issue of a Safety Certificate in respect of that
        stadium.    Each of the   local authorities of Rotherham,   Barnsley and
        Doncaster have a responsibility for one football league ground, Sheffield
       has a responsibility for two.

3.2    The  certifying authorities   are called upon by the Taylor Report     to
        immediately review each Safety Certificate,    ensure that the operative
        conditions of the Certificate are complied with,  then add or substitute
        any condition shown to be necessary by the findings and recommendations
       of the Taylor Report.

3.3 The centrally directed police ’Implementation Team' has achieved as much
     as  it can by independent action.      The  local authorities in South
     Yorkshire,  which each have a responsibility under the Safety of    Sports
     Grounds Act,   have been provided with a comprehensive report of what the
     police have   so far achieved.   Where it has not been possible   for the
     South   Yorkshire   Police    to fully   implement   any   recommendation
     unilaterally,   proposals  are offered   to the responsible     certifying
     authority of how the recommendation might be progressed.



 4.    Increased Costs for Policing Football Matches

 4.1    Several    of the recommendations in the Interim Report of     Lord Justice
        Taylor impose additional duties upon the police at football matches.     For
        example,    (i) the deployment    of police officers,   to each gate in a
         perimeter fence,  authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators
         through a gate     to relieve overcrowding;    (ii)  the deployment of a
         reserve of police officers to each match who are not committed to any
         specific   duty and are therefore able      to deal with any unforeseen
         difficulties which arise inside or outside the ground;     and,  (iii) the
         deployment   of a sufficient number of skilled operators    in the police
         control room to enable all radio transmissions to be received,    evaluated
         and answered and to enable all the results of CCTV recording outside and
         inside the ground to be monitored and interpreted.

 4.2 It is        obvious from the implementation of these three recommendations
      alone     that  the cost of policing football matches will be greater t an
        ever before.
                                               - 3 -

A.3        Members will be aware that a proportion of policing costs is met by the
           football  clubs   themselves.  At present the financial  contribution    is
           determined by reference to a sliding scale of charges agreed      annually
           between the Police Authority,  the Chief Constable and each of the clubs,
           based upon a prior estimate of crowd size for a particular game.     In t e
           two  seasons   1987/88 and 1988/89 the total cost of policing    the   five
           football clubs in South Yorkshire,  both inside and outside the groun s,
           amounted to some £1.83 million and, of this figure, the clubs contributed
           £398,000 which amounts to 22% of the overall cost.

A. A       In the light    of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations many Police
           Authorities are now reassessing the charges levied on football clubs or
           special police services.

A .5       The   facility   to charge for police officers in these circumstances     is
            provided by Section 15 of the Police Act 196A,     which enables the Chief
            Constable,   at his discretion,    to provide,  on request,  special P°lice
            services   at any premises or in any locality in the police area.          e
            section   further empowers    the Police Authority to charge     for t ese
           services.

A.6        There is no precise definition ofthe term 'special police services   but
           the  case of Harris -v- Sheffield United Football Club 1986 held that the
           Chief Constable is not,   as part of his normal policing responsibility,
           obliged  to provide officers to react to potential breaches of the peace
           where the owner of private property creates such a risk on his property.

A.7         It would seem,  therefore, that officers provided to meet such a risk, as
            in the case of a football match, are within the meaning of special police
            services  and can be charged for.     Indeed,  Police Authorities have a
            fiduciary duty to the ratepayers of their area to make such charges.

 A.8        The   Harris case,  however,  does not fully resolve which officers can be
            regarded   as performing special police services.   It held that the   tact
            that   officers were   deployed on private property was    significant in
            tending to show their provision amounted to special police services,     u
            did not    deal with the question of officers deployed to perform duties
            outside   the ground - duties that arise directly from the event whic
            occurring inside the ground.    Legal opinion has,  therefore,  e "
            for clarification as to which duties performed by police officers        at
             football matches   can properly be regarded as 'special police    services

 4.9           Notwithstanding the question of payment for police deployment o u w i d .
               football grounds it is submitted that the level of contribution from the
               clubs  presently falls significantly short of the actual cost of
               inside the ground, and that the shortfall is set to viden in the light of
               the Taylor recommendations which necessitate an increase in the number of
               police officers deployed at football matches.


  5.           Criminal Investigation of South Y o rkshire Police Officers

  *        i              the   course   of   the   Hillsborough   Inquiry   the   question   of
       ‘       manslaughter  by the criminal   negligence of South                       *°:
               officers   was raised by counsel for the bereaved, Mr Benet           Hytner V!

  5 2          Because this matter was not dealt with in the Report of the
               Inquiry the Chief Constable,  on the morning of the Report s p u M i              >
               referred    it to the Director of Public  Prosecutions,  asking for
                                      -   4   -




      decision on the question of criminal liability of any member of the South
      Yorkshire    Police.    It was considered appropriate, at that   time,  to
      suspend   from duty the police commander of the Hillsborough event,  Chief
      Superintendent David Duckenfield,    pending the outcome of the Director's
      deliberations.     Mr Duckenfield remains suspended.

5.3   On 15 August 1989,    the Director wrote to the Chief Constable setting out
      his view    that   the matter    should be   subject  of a full    criminal
      investigation.    The West Midlands Police had already done considerable
      work in gathering evidence for Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.     It seemed
      sensible,   therefore,    to invite Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM DL LLB,      Chief
      Constable   of the West Midlands Police Force,          to undertake   this
      investigation.    His report,     in due course, will be submitted to the
      Director of Public Prosecutions.



6.    Matters of Complaint and Discipline

6.1   Additionally, the Chief Constable has asked that if, during the course of
      their  investigation,  the West Midlands Police officers discover     any
      matters which might suggest that offences were    committed against   the
      Police (Discipline) Regulations, of a non-criminal nature, those offences
      should be brought to his attention and,   where appropriate,  be enquired
      into by the West Midlands Police on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police.
      This is agreed.

6.2   There  are currently seven matters of public complaint about the actions
      of  South Yorkshire Police officers,     arising from the Hillsborough
      incident.

6.3   Three  of these matters have been raised by a single complainant.      Two
      relate   to the actions of the senior officers in command of the policing
      operation at Hillsborough on the day and these are being supervised by
      Captain E Noel Taylor      of the Police Complaints      Authority.    The
      investigation of these complaints is being conducted by Mr Geoffrey Dear,
      Chief Constable    of the West Midlands Police,  along with the criminal
      matters.   The third complaint is of incivility and is being investigated,
      unsupervised by the Police Complaints Authority, by Superintendent Ashton
      of the South Yorkshire Police.

6.A   A  fourth complaint is that an officer at the perimeter fence contributed
      to the death of the complainant's son by his failure to open the fence
      gate in good time.

6.5   A fifth complaint is that the failure by South Yorkshire Police officers
      to open perimeter fence gates caused the complainant to sustain injury.

6.6   A sixth complaint is made by a man who alleges that he was assaulted by a
      police officer whilst attending the football match.

6.7   These latter three cases are again to be investigated by Mr Dear's team
      and are likewise being supervised by Captain E Noel Taylor of the Police
      Complaints Authority.

6.8   There    is a seventh complaint of corruption,   namely of police officers
      offering    to allow fans into the ground on payment.   This complaint  is
      being investigated by Superintendent Carlisle of the Greater Manchester
      Poli c e.
Coroner's Inquest Regarding the 95 Deaths Which Arose

The   gathering  of evidence   on behalf   of HM Coroner,     Dr    Stefan
Popper LLB BMedSci    BM BS MRCGP,  in relation to the   95 deaths    that
occurred at Hillsborough, is continuing by the West Midlands Police.

The Coroner opened the inquests on 19/20 April 1989,  and adjourned them
to a date    to be fixed.   He had set aside three months  to hear   the
inquests beginning in January 1990.    I understand, however,  that  the
Director  of Public   Prosecutions  has recently written to Dr Popper
requesting that the inquests be deferred until after the results of the
on-going criminal investigation are concluded.



Civil Actions

To date eight writs have been served upon the South       Yorkshire ‘Police
alleging negligence by its officers on 15 April 1989,     leading to loss,
injury, damage and, in two cases, death.

The writs   are  to be defended by the Police Authority's       insurers,
Municipal Mutual Insurance Company.  It is understood that three of these
actions will be representative actions.

The presiding Northern Circuit Judge, Mr Justice Rose, has taken personal
charge      of  the interlocutory proceedings.    At a Directions Hearing on
26 October 1989 at the High Court in Manchester Mr Justice Rose set the
date      for commencement of the civil actions for 11 June  1990.  At  that
hearing Mr       Justice Rose expressed his satisfaction regarding the work
done by all parties to the claims to achieve a state of readiness        for
t ri a l .



The Effects of the Hillsborough Disaster on the Health
and Welfare of the Force

Twenty-three officers reported injuries sustained in the rescue of people
from the Leppings Lane terraces.  These injuries were, in the main, minor
strains and bruising to backs and limbs.

A  total of 58 officers subsequently took sick leave which was directly
attributable  to the disaster in the weeks which   followed  the event,
mainly due to the effects of shock and stress.  As a result, 356 working
days were lost.

Two officers remain on sick leave, suffering from stress, one of whom may
well  retire from the Force on the grounds of ill-health    in the near
future.

During week ending 23 April 1989 - the week immediately following        the
disaster - only 92 officers had taken sick leave,     compared with 101   in
the corresponding week in 1988.      The figure rose to a maximum of     143
officers  taking sick leave during week ending 30 April      1989,  compared
with  107 in 1988.    By week ending 21 May 1989,   however,   the number of
officers taking    sick leave   had  fallen to   105 which     corresponded,
identically, with the same period in 1988.

Any effects that    the Hillsborough disaster had upon the health and
welfare of the Force appear,  largely,  to have been short lived. It is
      thought that this is,  to a significant extent, due to the efforts of the
      Force Welfare Officer and our Consultant Counsellor who     started  their
      work at the ground within hours of the tragedy occurring.     The memories
      of the disaster,   and the emotions evoked by it, will remain with many
      officers for a long time.   The Force as a whole,  however,   has adjusted
      well.



10.   Recommended

10.1 The   Police   Authority note   the efforts made     to   implement   the
     recommendations of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor,  insofar as
      they relate to the police.

10.2 The Police Authority accept,   in principle, the need to review in detail
     and,  if necessary,   re-negotiate the basis for recovering the costs  of
     providing  special police    services  to the football   clubs in South
      Yorkshire.

10.3 The  Police Authority note    that the relevant   local authorities  are
     responsible  for the implementation of any outstanding recommendations,
     and  for  the enforcement of new or existing conditions  of the   Safety
     Certificate issued in respect of each football stadium.

10.A The Police Authority note     the progress   of the on-going     criminal
     investigation,  the  civil  litigation and the Coroner's Inquiry arising
     from the disaster at Hillsborough.   Further reports will be submitted in
      due course.




P Wright
Chief Constable
        D O C U M E N T    ( 1)




COPY OF CHAPTER 24 OF THE TAYLOR REPORT

          THE RECOMMENDATIONS
                               C H A P T E R 24 - T H E R E C O M M E N D A T IO N S

  315. The recom m end ation s which follow are the m inim u m necessary to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which i have heard at Sheffield and other
inform ation 1 have received. They com plem ent the recom m endations which M r Justice PoppieweJ] se: out
after his inquiry at Bradford.

   316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
started forthwith and com pleted as socn as possible.

M a xim u m C apacities for Terraces
★     1. W here a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safery Certificate
    should specify' the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

    A pen or area is to be deemed “ self-contained'* notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
    another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

★    2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with C hapter 16 of the Green
    Guide (“ the Green Guide figure*’) subject to the following qualifications:-

    (a) in arriving at 't h e Green Guide figure", proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
        which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
        in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide:

    (b) after assessing "the Green Guide figure", a deduction of l5°o should be made to improve the safecv
        margin.

★     3. Arrangements should be m aae:-

    (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
        figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
        ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

    (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


Filling and M onitoring Terraces
★     4. There should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
    responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
    other terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
    variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

★     5. At each match there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
    area, a steward (if the club is monitoring th at area) or a police officer (if the poiice are monitoring it) whose
    sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
    period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other steward
    or police presence. H e should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
    below, and by radio to the control room.


Fences and G ates
      6.     All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
    duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
    crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
    dem onstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
    different crowd densities.

★    7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
    different colour from the rest of the fence and m arked “ Emergency Exit” .
★          8. W here there are perimeter fences, all pates to the pitch should he kept fully open during the period
          w hen spectators are on the terrace.

★           9. There should be in respect of each pate in a perimeter fence (or proup of pates if they are close together)
          a police officer authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a pate to relieve overcrow ding.
          The officer so authorised in respect of each pate should be identified for each match and know n to be so by all
          stewards and police officers in that vicinity He should be able to make radio contact with the control room
          either himself or via an officer close at hand.

★          10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the d u b at each pround where there
          are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
          necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the firt
        . brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. W het her to use it should be a decision of a
          nominated >enior police officer at the pround.


Crush Barriers
★           11. All crush barriers should be visual h inspected im m ediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
          to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

★           12. The layout of harriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
          compiies with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not. the assessment of the
          maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 abo>e. should
          reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
             13. There should be an immediate review of each Safery Certificate by the responsible local authority,
          w hich should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
          ambulance service and the building authority. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
          object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
          substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
          recommendations in this report.

            14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 19"7? Act for
          which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthw ith to remedy the situation.

             15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
           Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


              16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
           amending and renew ing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
           accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
           effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
           with the local authority's roles.

              17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
           of appropriate m em bers of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and am bulance services, of
           the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters’ club. The Advisory Group s term s of
           reference should encom pass all m a tte rs concerned with crow d safety a nd should require regular visits to the
           ground and attenda nce at m atches. The Advisory Group should have a cha irm a n from the local authority,
           and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
           w ritten reports for consideration by the local authoriry.


    Duties o f each Football Club
    ★        18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
           inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
           anticipated.
★     19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
    as to ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
    turnstiles within one hour. If that cannot be done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced
    accordingly.

★     20. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capaciry of the area served by them is about to be
    reached and arrangements should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
    operators for this purpose.

      21. Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
    concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

★     22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
    reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simpie
    and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
    area.

      23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with
    the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
    should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

★    24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time snouid be reviewed
    by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the pianned arrangements for
    admitting spectators to the ground.

      25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters' club as to the provision of pre-match
    entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


P olice Planning
★    26. The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
    should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authorin
    concerned in respect of the safer}' and control of crowds.

★     27. T he Operational O rder for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of all
    officers on dun' there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding ana. if any
    is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

★     28. T he Operational O rder for each match at a designated stadium should enable the police to cope with
    any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
    sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

★    29. T he option to postpone kick-off shouid be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
    Crowd safer)' should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

       30.     There should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television
    monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
    at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
    in the interpretation and use of these data.


Comm unications
      31.     T here should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
    received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
    priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be
    used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
    sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.
      32. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines
    with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

      33. 'Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
    areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
    announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
    noise in the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on everv programme sold for even
    match.

      34.^ Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
    Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
    the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


Co-ordination o f Emergency Services
*       35. The police, fire and amhuiance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
    liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

*      36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire senice and
    ambulance s e n ic e are gi\en full details ahout the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
    spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and an\ anticipated or potential difficulties
    concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
    rooms of each of the emergency se n ices.

*       3 / . Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
    se n ic e s should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
    within the ground itself.

      38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency pians for
    the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such sen ices are called as to where and whv
    they are required.


First Aid, M edical Facilities and Ambulances
*     39. T here should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1.000 spectators. The
    club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

      40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. T he number of such rooms and the
    equipment to be maintained-within them should be specified by the local authority after taking professional
    medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

*     41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
    any medical exigency at the ground. H e should be trained and competent i r advanced first aid. He should be
    present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
    match. H is whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
    contactable.

*     42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
    attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5.000 or more.

      43. T he number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
    be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance se n ic e and should be made a
    requirement of the Safety Certificate.




                                                        60
            ACTION TAKEN BY

       THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

RESPECT OF SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

    FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

           THE INTERIM REPORT

                   OF

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
     rtis document    is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police            (hereafter

    referred to as      '?he Police') and Sheffield W e d n e s d a y   Football Club (hereafter

    referred to as      'The Club').




    This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

    recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

    Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of                15 April   1989.




    The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows:-




^fc Ma xi mu m Capacities    for Terraces
•w  The Club will be responsible         for limiting the number of spectators entering

    each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

    accordance with recociaendation two of the Interim Report.




    The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

    number of persons passing through each turnstile.




    The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

^^approaching        capacity.    The Club will be responsible for closing off further

f   access to a per. or area when its osxinrjE capacity is about              to be reacr.ec.   The

    Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,
                                   «#
     therefore,   The Police will provide assistance if necess-ary.




     The Police accept      that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

     public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

     prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.




     Filling and Monitoring Terraces

     The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

     terraced area during such tines that there are spectators in that pen or
fT rra c e d   area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.           The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing whe re         the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence             (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to                 „   .

 decide w h et h er or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve


 overcrowding.
               ««*


 All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

 at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be autnor.sed as above.

 Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contac. w^-th pol.ce

 ground c on trol and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




  The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

  issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

  crack will         communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought            to


   cheir attention by these stewards.




   Cutting Equipment

   The Club w il l provide and make readily available suitable ana s u f . - C - e n c

   cucting equipment co permic the immediate removal of enough fenc.ng to re.eas

   numbers of spectators if necessary.          This cutting equipment will be operated

   by e m p l oy e es of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

   equipment w i ll be at the discretion of the nominated senior police office,

   will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
         B e f o r e e a c h m a t c h b o t h p a r t i e s to t his a g r e e o e n t w i l l l i a is e in r e s p e c t of the
j
         following matters:-

                i)     the anticipated          number of spectators expected having                      regard

                        to the separate supporter groups;




               ii)     the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended                              to be    used;



                                                                                                                           ♦
             iii)      any information in relation to crowd problems;




              .iv)       the number and location of turnstiles to be made available
    ••                   to each group;




                 v)     an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

                         through the turnstiles;




               vi)      where tickets are used,               that the information on those tickets

                         corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

                         spectators to the ground.




    «•    ostponenent of kick-off is at the dis'cretion of the police officer in c o m m a n d

         at the ground.           It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone                                link
                                              t*
         between the r e f e r e e ’s room and the police control room.''




         The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

         being called to the ground.                  These include routes of access, rendezvous

         points,      accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.                                The Police will

         liaise wi th The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

         amended or as otherwise appropriate.
: T? .      ^

            rhief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,
         he 00
     Mr p«ter Hayes QP i \ LLB ttA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

     liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

     concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




     Any variation of this agreement     in respect of a particular match will be

         agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




         SIGNED                            on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
                                           Football Club




         SIGNED   .                        on behalf of South Yorkshire Police




                      \<o   - T> -
         DATE




*
RBOOWENDftTICW 1


It   is noted by the police that the current               Safety Certificate     for

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club has been amended to reflect the new

capacities of all standing areas as follows


Spion Kop                                        16,800

North West Terrace - Upper Level                  2,300

North West Terrace - Lower Level                    680

 (It is further noted that the Safety Certificate prohibits spectators

from standing on the West Stand, Leppings Lane, terraces.)




 RBCd^MEMDftTICM 2

 The     calculation      for     maximum        capacities,    proposed     by   this

 reconmendation, has been followed in determining the figure for each

 terraced area recorded above.



 REXXmENDftTICW 3


  (a) An electronic counting system is in place at Sheffield Wednesday’s

       ground   whereby     the   number    of    spectators    entering   each   self-

       contained area is contemporaneously recorded.



        The club has undertaken         (see written agreement) to monitor this

        counter and to limit the number of spectators entering any self-

        contained    area    to   the   maximum      capacity    figure    assessed   in

        accordance with Recorrmendation 2 above.




     (b) The club will achieve this by closing off the relevant turnstiles

        to prevent further access to such an area when its maxijnum capacity

        is about to be reached.         The police have agreed to assist the club

         in this regard, if requested so to do.
REJCOMENDftTICN 4

A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities for crowd
safety and control, has been approved and signed by representatives of South
Yorkshire Police and Sheffield Wednesday FC.

A copy of that agreement is attached at document (6).


RBCXfrMENDATION 5



At each match at Sheffield Wednesday's ground there are stewards

situated on the perimeter track at the Spion Kop end of the ground

whose sole duty is to check crcwd conditions in that area for possible

overcrowding or distress.                 The stewards regularly perform the same

duties,     as do the police officers authorised under Reccrrmendation 9

below.       The    parties   are    therefore     familiar to each other,            and the

stewards have ready access to these police officers who each have a

radio giving them contact with the police control room.



 RE0GMMENDATICM 6



All   police       officers   and    stewards      (not    just those authorised under

 Recoirmendat ions     5   and      9)   are    fully     briefed     with   regard    to     the

 recognition       of crowd densities           and to the recognition of             signs    of

 distress.         All officers      and stewards have been issued,              as an aide

 memoire, with a laminated card which identifies the signs of distress.



 Stewards are each issued with a copy of written instructions, by the

 club, which detail their duties.               The senior stewards are         briefed by a

 police     inspector,     before        each   match,     on   the    responsibilities        of

 stewards    for crowd safety and control and their duties in case of

 emergency evacuation.           The senior stewards are expected to brief the

 more junior stewards.



 Police officers are briefed by a Senior police officer before each
match on their complementary responsibilities and duties. The ccrmander

of each sector of the ground is responsible for further briefing his or

her officers on their specific duties within that sector.



The    South     Yorkshire   Police    are   presently   preparing   visual   aids,

designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crcwd

densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a little

more     about   crcwd dynamics.      The aids will      consist of a) Albums of

photographs      depicting the various       sections    of Sheffield Wednesday's

ground with different numbers of spectators therein, and b) A video

tape     film which highlights        crowd densities,    distress   and dynamics.

When completed these photographs and film will be shown to the Safety

of Sports Ground Advisory Group.



The Certifying Authority are asked to ensure that the club undertakes

and continues to undertake its own reponsibilities for staff training

as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'

- paras, 26, 177, 195 and Annex B to the Guide.



RBCXM4ENDATION 7



All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Sheffield Wednesday PC

are painted      white   which is a different colour fran the rest of the

fence.     Each is clearly identified by a sign which proclaims 'Emergency

Exit'.



RECOMMENDATION 8



All the gates in the perimeter fence at Sheffield Wednesday's ground
remain open while ever spectators are on the terrace.



RBOCWENDftTION 9



There is, in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fences, at least one

officer whose sole duty, whenever spectators are on the terraces, is to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through that gateway to relieve

overcrowding.    Such police officers are to be identified by means of a lime
                                                                   ♦



green tabard.    The officer is familiar to all stewards in that area (see

Reccrrcnendation 5 above), is known by them to be authorised to relieve

overcrowding, and is able to make radio contact with the police control

room.



RBOOWENDATION 10



Two sets of metal cutting equipment have been provided by Sheffield

Wednesday PC and are stored in boxes, adjacent to the fence, at either end

of the ground.     It has been agreed that, in case of need, employees of the

club trained in its use will be readily available to operate the equipment.



All stewards have been trained in its use and will respond to instruction

from police control (many of the stewards are in radio contact via the

club's radio system).



RECOMMENDATIONS 11 and 12



It is understood that City Council representatives on the Safety of Sports

Ground Advisory Group have carried out an inspection of all crush barriers.
REXXMMEMiATIONS 13 - 17



Safety Certification is obviously a matter for Sheffield City

Council.      In respect of Recommendation 17, the South Yorkshire

Police await notification of the constitution of the Advisory

Group.      It is the Police view, however, that this group should

supplement, and not replace, the existing Officer Working Group.




RECOMMENDATIONS 18 AND 19



It is understood that each turnstile has been inspected and its

potential rate of flow measured and that the maximum capacities

of   each    viewing   area    can    be   admitted   via   the   respective

turnstiles in less than one hour.



RECOMMENDATION 20



 (See Reccrrnendation 3b).         When the capacity of any viewing area

is   15%    below the maximum permitted, the figures displayed on the

 electronic monitor in the Club secretary's office begin to flash.The

 secretary, or his agent, will immediately pass a message via the

 club    radio   system   to   a     steward   at   the   relevant   bank   of

 turnstiles.     The turnstiles will be closed off and the police

 informed by club radio or telephone to police control.




  RECOMMENDATION 21



 Sheffield Wednesday PC currently have five CC TV cameras
installed around the ground.               A survey of the installation was

carried   out   by    a    trained       police   CC    TV   operator    (no expert

knowledge    is professed) and his report is attached at document

(3).




For your further information the General Purposes Committee of

the Association c£ Chief RQice Officers has convened a working group

to consider,      nationally,         the use of CC TV to promote public

safety at football grounds.              The group anticipate that it may be

possible to provide a 'package' of equipment for use as a test

for a cannon minimum standard of performance.                    They will report

back in due course.



RBCOMEMDftTION 22




Signposting for spectators both inside and outside the ground has

been   reviewed      by    the    City    Council      Safety   of   Sports Grounds

Advisory Group.           The police are generally satisfied with the

signposting.      Signposting at the West, Leppings Lane, end of the

ground will require revision in the light of any new turnstiling

arrangements which are proposed by Sheffield Wednesday PC, at

this end of the ground.



R E O dM acftncw s 23     am)    24



The South Yorkshire Police have had liaison with the club on the

question of ticketed matches.              The police are satisfied with the

arrangements and will ensure that the information on any ticket

corresponds with          their plans      for admitting spectators         to the

ground.
RECOMMENDATION 25



There is no regular pre match entertainment at football matches

at Sheffield Wednesday.        Police have no knowledge of whether the

club has held discussions with the recognised supporters club on

this matter.



 RBCCWENDftTION 26




The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes, OPM, LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of

each football club and local authority concerned in respect of

the   safety   and   control    of   crowds.   Mr   Hayes   has   met   with

Directors or     Secretaries of all five football league clubs in

the county, including Mr Mackrell of Sheffield Wednesday FC, on

24 August 1989.      He met with representatives of the four relevant

local authorities, including Messrs Ward and Bownes of Sheffield

City Council on 18 September 1989.        A copy of the minutes of that

meeting are attached at document (7).



RBOCtMEMDATION 27




Both the Operational Order and the pre match briefing of all

officers on duty at each match at Sheffield Wednesday PC alert

officers to the dangers of overcrowding, and if any should be

detected, of taking immediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.
The   proposed   training   by   way   of   photographs   and   video   (see

Recomrendation 6 above) will further emphasise these messages.



RBCXMMENDftTION 28



The operational planning for each match at Sheffield Wednesday PC

is intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns

in the arrival at, and departure frcm, any match by spectators.



The following scenarios are each catered for by way of police

contingency plans at Sheffield Wednesday PC:-



a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

b) Early arrival of spectators.

c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

f) Late arrival of spectators.

g) Emergency opening of external gates           (or forcing of external

      gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

h) Early departure of spectators frcm ground.

 i) Emergency evacuation.



 The police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable

 rapid deployment    to any difficulty which may arise inside or

 outside the ground.
The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves

that    the       club     have      made      contingency        plans    to    deal     with    a

situation where the available entrances might prove insufficient

to stop unduly large crowds gathering outside the ground.                                     Such

contingency plans are required by paragraph                               46of    the Guide to

Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'. :




RBQGWEUDftTION 29



The police officer in ccrrmand at Sheffield Wednesday PC is aware

of     the   option       to delay            kick-off,       and discusses       this matter,

before       each game,          with the match             officials.          The    option was

utilised          on     the      30        August      1989,    when     the     police     chief

superintendent            asked        for     the      kick-off, at      the    match     between

Sheffield Wednesday and Evertor> to be delayed for 15 minutes to

ensure       the    safety of the              crowd      still trying to         get      into the

ground at 7 . 1 5 pm.                The crowd was notified               ofthe delay by the

public address system.



To enable instant contact with the match referee vdien considering

 kick-off         delay,       the     police        request    that     the    club    install   a

 telephone link between the police control room and the player's

 tunnel. (See also Recamendation 32 below).




 RBOCMffiMDftTION 30



 There       is    available           in    the     police     control    rocm at       Sheffield

 Wednesday         PC,     the       results       of    the    closed    circuit       television
monitoring conducted by the police               both outside and inside the

ground.       There are, however, fifteen other CC TV cameras belonging

to the club which monitor turnstiles and areas behind turnstiles

throughout tte ground.          These are currently monitored in the club

control roan and the results of this filming are not available in

the police control roan.           The   certifying authority are asked to

ensure    that    this recommendation      is    ccttplied with.     There    is a

canputer      terminal    in the   club control roan which displays * the

record of the electronic counting of spectators into the ground.

The police have requested that the club make this same information

available in the police Control Room.             The certifying authority are

asked to ensure that this recorrmendation is carpi ied with.



Police officers who perform duty in the control roan are skilled in

the use and interpretation of the results of CC TV filming.                    Each

of these officers is to attend a CC TV operator's course which is

run by the Greater Manchester Police.



 REPOMMEHDR.TION 31



 There are sufficient operators employed in the police control rocm

 to   fteai    with    radio   communications.       New police    carmunications

 equipment       has   recently been     installed    at   Sheffield Wednesday s

 ground.      The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare

 station in case of radio failure on the primary station.                    It also

 has battery back-ip in case of power failure.                  This system also

 gives operators in the control roan priority over, and the capacity

 to override, others using the same channel.



 The police ground conm ander has the option of utilising, when

 he feels its necessary, an additional radio channel w h i c h provides
exclusive     ccrrmunication       between      himself     and     other     sector

conmanders.      This    executive     channel      would   be    utilised    in   an

emergency vdien the primary channel may become overcrowded.



The police control rocm at Sheffield Wednesday FC                      is inadequate

in terms of size and facilities.             The club have been made aware of

the police dissatisfaction with the present accomodation.                          Hie

certifying    authority      are     asked     to   oversee      the    design     and

construction of a new control rocm at the ground.



RBCOMEHDRTION 32



A survey of Sheffield Wednesday's ground has identified twenty key

points where    the     police would wish to see dedicated telephone

points    to enable direct         ccrrmunication with the police            control

rocrn.



Attached, at document (4), is a plan showing the location of those

points, together with an equipment specification prepared by the

South Yorkshire Police Corrmunications Department.                 The Certifying

Authority are asked to oversee its installation.



KBOOMSCftTION 33



There is in existence at Sheffield Wednesday PC                   a public address

system.       The   police   survey of the system has identified the

requirements for at least five further loud speakers as follows:-
a) A speaker outside turnstiles 77 to 88.

b) A speaker at the rear of the North Stand near to the police

   roan.

c) A speaker adjacent to Gate B.

d) A speaker adjacent to Gate C.

e) A speaker on the North West elevated section to service the

   Leppings *Ijane terraces.



The plans at (5) show the existing     system     andthe proposed siting

The Certifying Authority are asked    to oversee the installation of

an adequate public address system to ensure that it complies with

effective.    In so doing, the Certifying Authority will wish to pay

regard, also, to paragraph 194     (iii) of the Guide to Safety at

Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide' -     which lists the requirements

of an effective public address system.



The police have asked the club to ensure that the use of a loud

signal to precede important messages be advertised in the club's

programmes.




 RBCCMMEJOATION 34



 The illuminated advertising board at Sheffield Wednesday's ground

 is presently out of ccntnission and there are no plans to repair
A    series     of    hand     signals    for   use   by    police    officers   in    an

emergency is presently being, formulated, nationally, by a working

group of the Association of Chief Police Officers.                        The results

are awaited.



RBCCM4ENDATION 35




The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the South Yorkshire

Fire       Service        concerning   crowd    safety     at   Sheffield Wednesday's

stadium.

At     a    force     level,     the    Chief   Superintendent       (Operations)     has

regular meetings with senior officers frcm the other services.                         At

a local level the police match ccnmander meets with the ambulance

liaison officer at most if not every match.                     The fire service have

also had a liaison officer at at least one match this season where

he met with the police match corrmander.



REX3CWE3OATI0N 36




In advance           of    each match at Sheffield Wednesday's ground,                the

South Yorkshire Police forward to the Sou.th Yorkshire Fire and

Ambulance Services full details about the forthcoming event.



KBOGFMEMDftTION 37



Contingency plans for the arrival of emergency police, fire and

    ambulance    vehicles        at    Sheffield   Wednesday's       ground   have    been

    reviewed and prepared.             The contingency plan forms part of the
police operational order.



The Certifying Authority will wish to consider whether the club

have taken adequate account of paragraph 29(v) of the Guide to

Safety    at   Sports   Grounds   -   'The   Green    Guide'    - which    tasks

management     with     the   responsibility    for     preparing      emergency

contingency     plans    in   consultation     with    the     three   emergency

services.



RECQMjMDATICN 38



The police operational order for any event held at                     Sheffield

 Wednesday's ground contairs information, for officers deployed to

 entrances     to the ground,     as to the     contingency plans         for the

 arrival of the emergency services.



 RBCCM^ENDATICN 39 - 43



 These    recommendations     concern First Aid and Medical            facilities

 and, as such, are outside any police remit.             Under Reccnmendation

 41, however, the police control at Sheffield Wednesday's ground is

  told the identity and whereabouts of the 'club' doctor before each

 match.    He is readily contactable.
              ACTION TAKEN BY

        THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

IN RESPECT OF SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

      FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

             THE INTERIM REPORT

                        OF

            t.OBT)   .HISTICE TAYLOR
     This document is a vritten agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

     referred to as 'The Police') and   Sheffiela United Football Club (hereafter

     referred to as 'The Club').



     This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

     recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

     Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.



     The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows:*



       ximum Capacities for Terraces

     The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

     each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

     accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.



     The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

     number of persons passing through each turnstile. ^ xhe Spion Kop is divided

      into two pens.   One pen is entered via turnstiles in John Street, the other by

      turnstiles in Shoreham Street.    The Club will provide stewards to prevent a

      cross flow of spectators from one pen to the other. ^

••
      The Club will inform the police   control room when a particular   pen or area is

      approaching capacity.   The Club will be responsible for closing of* f_rthe»

      access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.       Th

      Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

      therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.



      The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

      public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Po

      prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.



The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.



All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, vill be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.



The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.



Cutting Equipment

The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
V

    Liaison

    B«for« each u t c h both parties to this agreement will 11,1s. In respect of the

    following matters:-
          i)        the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

                    to the separate supporter groups;



          11)       the method of crovd segregation (If any) Intended to be used;



         iii)       any information in relation to crowd problems.



    9      iv) ' the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

                     to each group;



                )    an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass
            v

                     through the turnstiles;



           vi)       where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

                     corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

                      spectators to the ground.



        postponement of klc*-off is at the discretion of the Police office, in command

        at the ground.      It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

        between the referee’s room and the police control room.



        The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

        being called to the ground.       These include routes of access, rendezvous

        poincs, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.       The Police will
                                               arrangements whenever these plans are
         liaise with The Club concerning these arrangeme.

         amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Pclice has nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.



Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED   ..                       on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club



SIGNED                         .. on behalf of South Yorkshire Police



DATE
               W
                           APPENDIX 'A ' - AMENDMENTS




CURRENT PROVISION                                  AMENDED PROVISION

Under the heading                                  The amended provision
Maximum Capacities for Terraces                    Maximum Capacities
                                                   for Terraces
The Club will do this by means of the
computerised system which records the               The Ciub will do this by means
number of persons passing through each              of the computerised system whi
turnstile. The Spion Kop is divided into            records the number of persons
two pens. One pen is entered via turnstiles         passing through each turnstile
in John Street, the other by turnstiles in
Shoreham Street. The Club will provide
stewards to prevent a cross flow of spectators
from one pen to the other.
RECOfffiaOftTICM 1



It is noted by the police that the current Safety Certificate for

Sheffield United Football Club has been amended to reflect the new

capacities of all standing areas as follows



Spion Kop                              14,550

Bramall Lane end                       5,660

John Street Terraces           West    '1,340

John Street Terraces           East      2.050



However, following an Inspection Meeting, at the ground, involving

the     South    Yorkshire     Fire   Brigade,   it     is    recommended       that   the

capacity for the Spion Kop terrace be revised downwards fran 14,550

to     11,040.     If   this    recarmendation     is      agreed by      the   licensing

authority then the Safety Certificate requires further amendment.




 REOCWEMDATIOU 2



 The     calculation      for     maximum   capacities,           proposed      by     this

 recaimendation, has been followed in determining the figure for each

 terraced area recorded above.



 RBOCMMEMDM’ICM 3



 a) An     electronic     counting     mechanism      is     in   place    at   Sheffield

       United's ground whereby the number of spectators entering each self

       contained area is contemporaneously recorded.
  The club has undertaken (see written agreement) to monitor this

  counter and to limit the number of spectators entering any self-

  contained       area   to   the    maximum   capacity     figure    assessed    in

  accordance with Recommendation 2 above.



b) The club will achieve this by closing off the relevant turnstiles

   to prevent      further    access   to   such an    area when      its maximum

   capacity   is about to be reached.             The police have agreed to

   assist the club in this regard, if requested so to do.



RBCXMTOPftTICM 4



   A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities

   for crowd safety and control, has been approved and signed by

   representatives of South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield United

   Football Club.        A copy of that agreement is attached as document (6J



RBCCfrMENDftTION 5



At each match at Sheffield United's ground there are six stewards

(two   to   the     Spion     Kop,   John   Street    and   Bramall     Lane     ends

respectively) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in those

areas for possible overcrowding or distress.              The stewards regularly

perform the same duties, as do the police officers authorised under

Recannendation 9 below.         The parties are therefore familiar to each

other, and the stewards have . ready access to these police officers

who each have a radio giving them contact with the police control
RECOMMENDATION 6



All police officers and stewards               (not just those authorised under

Recatmendations          5 and   9)   are   fully   briefed with    regard   to   the

recognition of crowd densities and to the recognition of signs of

distress.      All officers and stewards have been issued, as an aide

memoire,      with   a    laminated     card   which   identifies   the   signs   of

distress.



Stewards are each issued with a copy of written instructions, by the

club, which detail their duties.                 The stewards are briefed by a

police inspector, before each match, on their responsibilities for

crowd    safety and control           and their duties      in case of    emergency

evacuation.



Similarly, police officers are briefed by a Senior police officer

before     each   match     on   their      complementary   responsibilities      and

duties.



The   South    Yorkshire Police         are presently preparing visual        aids,

designed      to enable stewards         and   officers to recognise different

crowd densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a

little more about crowd dynamics.                   The aids will consist of a)

albums of photographs depicting the various sections of Sheffield

United's ground with different numbers of spectators therein, and b)

a video tape film which highlights crowd densities, distress and

dynamics.      When completed these photographs and film will be shown

to the Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group.
The     certifying    authority      are    asked   to    ensure   that    the   club

undertakes and continues to undertake its own responsibilities for

staff training as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds -

'The Green Guide'         - paras 26, 177, 195 - 199 and Annex B to the

Guide.



RBOOHaCftTION 7



All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Sheffield United are

painted in the international safety colour -white                    - which is a

different    colour       fran the   rest    of the      fence.    Each is clearly

identified by a sign which proclaims 'Emergency Exit'.                    Furthermore,

a notice is displayed on the electronic scoreboard, beforeeach game

ccrtmences, asking all spectators to identify their nearest emergency

exit.



RBCXMffiMDATION 8




All the gates in perimeter fences have been removed at Sheffield

United's ground.



RBOOHaCftTION 9



There i% in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fences, at

least one police officer whose sole duty whenever spectators are on

the     terraces,    is   to decide whether         or   not   to allcw    spectators

through that gateway to relieve overcrowding.                  Such police officers

are to be identified by means of a lime green tabard. The officer
is familiar to all stewards in that area                        (see Recarmendation 5

above),     is    known      by     them    to    be   authorised      to     relieve    over­

crowding,    and      is     able    to make        radio    contact    with     the    police

control roan.



KBOOMBOATION 10



Four sets        of   metal       cutting        equipment    have     been    provided .by

Sheffield United Football Club.                    It has been agreed that, in case

of need, employees of the club trained in its use vail be readily

available to operate the equipment.                     Two operatives are deployed

to either end of the ground and are in radio contact, via the

club's radio system, with both the club safety officer and the

police control room.



A test of the ability of the operatives to muster and make the

equipment        ready      for   use      was    performed    by    the      police    ground

canmander    at       the    Sheffield       United     vs    Hull   City      match    on   23

September 1989.          He was satisfied with the response.



RBOCHMEWDflTIONS 11 AIP 12



It is understood that City Council representatives of the Safety

of Sports Ground Advisory Group have carried out an inspection of

all crush barriers.



RBOCmEMDftTICWS 13 - 17



Safety Certification is obviously a matter for Sheffield City Council.

In respect of Recommendation 17, the South Yorkshire Police await
notification of the constitution ofthe Advisory Group.               It is the

police view,    however,   that this Group should supplement, and not

replace, the existing Officer Working Group.



KBQOflENCftTIONS 18 AM) 19



It   is   understood   that   each   turnstile     has    been   inspected,   its

potential rate of flew measured and that the maximum capacities of

each viewing area can be admitted via the respective turnstiles in

less than one hour.



RECCMMEMDftTIOW 20



 (See Recormendation 3b ) When the capacity of any viewing area is             10%

 below the     maximum permitted,    an    alarm   sounds at     the electronic

 monitor in the Club Secretary’s office.                 The secretary,   or his

 agent, will iirmediately pass a message via the club radio system to

 a steward at the relevant bank of turnstiles.              The turnstiles will

 be closed off and the police informed by club radio or telephone to

 police control.



 RBOGMMBOftTICH 21



 Sheffield United Football Club currently have four CC TV cameras

 installed around the ground.          A   survey of       the installation was

 carried oat by a trained police CC TV operator (no expert, knowledge

  is professed) and his report is attached at document (3).
Since       that     survey     was           completed,          the    club       have        applied        to

the      Football       Ground       Improvements                Trust        for    funds         to    exp a n d

the CC      TV system,          to e n s u r e        c o m p l i a n c e w i t h this p a r t i c u l a r

recommendation.                However,              the    Trust       have        declined            to   fund

s uc h    expansion           until           the     final         Report          of    Lord          Just i c e

T aylor      is p u blished.



For y our       further        information             the G e n e r a l Purposes C o m m i t t e e

of    the      Association          of C h i e f       Po l i c e   Officers             has       convened      a

working         group    to    consider,             nationally,              the    use       of CC TV         to

promote         public        safety           at     f o o tball        grounds.                  The       group

anticipates            that    it m a y        be     possible          to    provide          a    'package'

of e q u i p m e n t    to use       as a test             for a common m i n i m u m s t a n d a r d

of p e r f o r m a n c e .     The y w i l l report bac k                    in due course.



RECOMMENDATION 22



Signposting             for     spectators                both      inside          and        outside         the

g round        has     been     reviewed             by     the     City       Council             Safety       of

Sports         Grounds         Advisory              Group.             The     pol i c e          have       made

certain         suggestions              to    the    club       which        they       have       agreed      to

i m plement            and          thus          ensure            compliance                 with           this

Recommendation.



RECOMMENDATIONS 23 and 24



The      South       Yorkshire           Police       have       had     liaison          with       the      club

 on      the     question           of        ticketed        matches.               The        police         are

 satisfied           with     the        arrangements             and    wil l       ensure          that      the

 information           on     any    ti c k e t      corresponds             with        their      plans      for

 admitting spectators                    to the ground.
RECXM4ENDATI0N 25



Following     discussions         with        Sheffield        UnitedFootball           Club   it    is

understood         that    the    club       will       make       provision      for    pre     match

entertainment after consulting with the recognised Supporter's Club*

at those matches which are considered appropriate.

RBCXM4ENDATI0N 26



The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable naninated his Deputy, Mr

Peter Hayes, QPM,           LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of each

football club and local authority concerned in respect of the safety

and    control      of    crowds.            Mr   Hayes       has    met   with    Directors        and

Secretaries        of     all    five    football            league    clubs      in    the    county,

including Messrs Dooley and Capper of Sheffield United PC, on 24

August 1989.         He met with representatives of the four relevant local

authorities,        including Messrs Ward                    and    Bownes of Sheffield City

Council,      on    18 September         1989.          A    copy of the minutes of that

meeting are attached at document P ).



RB0CM1EMDATI0W 27



Both    the    Operational          Order         and   the     pre-match      briefing        of   all

officers on duty at each match at Sheffield United PC alert officers

to the dangers of overcrowding and, if any should be detected, of

taking immediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.



The    proposed          training       by    way       of    photographs      and       video      (see

Recaimendation 6 above) will further emphasise these messages.
RECOMMENDATION 28



The operational planning for each match at Sheffield United PC is

intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns in

the arrival at and departure frcxi) any match by spectators.



The    following scenarios     are    each   catered   for by way      of    police

contingency plans at Sheffield United PC:-



a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

b) Early arrival of spectators.

c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of a ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

f) Late arrival of spectators.

g) Emergency    opening   of   external      gates   (or    forcing   of    external

      gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

h) Early departure of spectators frcm ground.

i) Emergency evacuation.



The police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable

rapid deployment to any difficulty which may arise inside or outside

the ground.



The certifying authority may, hcwever, wish to satisfy themselves

that the club have made contingency plans to deal with a situation

where the available entrances might prove insufficient to stop unduly

large crowds gathering outside the ground.                 Such contingency plans

are     required by paragraph        46 of   the Guide to Safety at           Sports

Grounds - The 'Green Guide'.
KBOCWEMDAlTICM 29



The police officer in ccrrcnand at Sheffield United PC is aware of the

option to delay kick-off     and discusses this matter, before each

game,   with the match   officials.   The option was utilised on 12

August 1989, when the police superintendent asked for the kick-off

at the match between Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday to be

delayed for fifteen minutes to ensure the safety of the crowd still

trying to get into the ground at 2.45 pm.   The crowd was notified of

the delay by the public address system.



To enable instant contact with the match referee when considering

kick-off delay, the police request that the club install a telephone

link between the police control roan and the referee's roan.      (See

also Recarmendation 32 below).



RBCOMENDATION 30



There is available in the police control roan at Sheffield United

 the results of all closed circuit televisioa monitoring outside and

 inside the ground.   There is also a carputer terminal which displays

 the record of the electronic counting of spectators into the ground.



 Police officers who perform duty in the control roan have attended a

 CC TV Operator's Course run by the Greater Manchester Police.     They

 are therefore skilled in the use and interpretation of the results

 of CC TV filming.
REOOfgaOftTION 31



There are sufficient operators employed in the police control rocm

to   deal   with   radio camunications.          New police     ca m t u n i cations

equipment has been camtissioned, and is about to be installed at

Sheffield United's ground.



The equipment consists of a tvro-bay radio set with a spare station

in case of radio failure on the primary station.                   It also* has

battery back-up in case of power failure.            This system also gives

operators in the control rocm priority over, and the capacity to

override, others using the same channel.



The police ground corrmander has the option of utilising, when he

feels it necessary,         an additional   radio channel which provides

exclusive      communication      between   himself       and    other      sector

commanders.        This    executive   channel   vrould   be    utilised     in an

 emergency when the primary channel may become overcrowded.



 The police control rocm is to be replaced by Sheffield United PC

 in the near future       The club is aware of the requirements of sound­

 proofing etc.      The certifying authority are asked to oversee the

 construction of this new control rocm.



 RBXMMBPftTICM 32



 A survey of Sheffield United's ground has identified twenty eight

. key points where the police would wish to see dedicated telephone

 points to enable direct caimunication with the police control roan.



 Attached, at document (4), is a plan showing the location of those

 points, together with an equipment specification prepared by the

  South Yorkshire Police Cormrrunications Department.
Sheffield    United   FC have   subsequently agreed to fund,   using a

Football Trust grant,     a network of telephones.      The certifying

authority are asked to oversee its installation.



RBCQMBPftTiaN 33



There is in existence at Sheffield United PC a public address

system.     However, at a meeting between the police and the club on

5 August 1989,    it was agreed that there was a need for a more

efficient system to enable effective ccnntunication with individual

areas both inside and outside the ground.



Sheffield United PC have caimissioned a new public address system

and work     is progressing.     The plan at document   (5) shows the

existing    system and   site   of new loudspeakers.    The certifying

authority are asked to oversee the installation of this public

address system to ensure that it complies with this reccrmendation

and that it is effective.       In so doing, the certifying authority

will wish to pay regard, also, to paragraph 194 (iii) of the Guide

to Safety at Sports Grounds - The 'Green Guide' - which lists the

requirements of an effective public address system.



The police have asked the club to ensure that the use of a loud

signal to precede important messages be advertised in the club's

programmes.



RBOCmENQATiaN 34



The illuminated advertising/score board at Sheffield United's grouid
is utilised by the police to broadcast safety messages to the crowd.

An   example   is    'Identify   your   nearest   emergency   exit'   which   is

displayed   before    the   start of    each game.     The advertising/score

board cannot be seen by every spectator in the ground and so it is

treated very much as a secondary medium for caimunication.



A series of hand signals for use by police officers in an emergency

is presently being formulated, nationally, by a working group of the

Association of Chief Police Officers.         The results are awaited.




RBCOMENDATION 35



The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance          Service    and the South Yorkshire

Fire Service concerning crowd safety at Sheffield United's stadium.



At a force level       the Chief Superintendent (Operations) has regular

meeting with senior officers fran the other services.                 At a local

 level the police match carmander meets with the ambulance liaison

 officer at most if not every match.         The fire service have also had

 a liaison officer at at least one match this season where he met

 with the police match catmander.



 REDOfOCftTION 36



 In advance of each match at Sheffield United's ground, the South

 Yorkshire Police forward to the South Yorkshire Fire and Ambulance

 Services full details about the forthcoming event.
REOCFMEUDATICN 37




Contingency plans     for the arrival        of emergency police,            fire and

ambulance vehicles at Sheffield United's ground, have been reviewed

and   prepared.     The     contingency    plan     forms    part    of    the   police

operational order.         On 20 August      1989 the three services held a

practise exercise.        The contingency plans worked well.



The certifying authority will wish to consider whether the club have

taken adequate account of paragraph 29 (v) of the Guide to Safety at

Sports Grounds - The 'Green Guide' - which tasks management with the

responsibility      for    preparing      emergency       contingency       plans    in

consultation with the three emergency services.



KBOOMaPftnON 38



The   police   operational     order   for    any    event    held    at     Sheffield

United's   ground    contain    information,        for   officers        deployed   to

entrances to the ground, as to the contingency plans for the arrival

of the emergency services.



RBCCMMBPRTIONS 39 - 43



These reccmnendations concern First Aid and Medical facilities and,

as such, are outside of any police renit.             Under Recaimendation 41,

however, the police control at Sheffield United's ground is told the

identity and whereabouts of the 'club' doctor before each match.                     He

is readily contactable.
           ACTION TAKEN BY

      THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

RESPECT OF DONCASTER ROVERS FOOTBALL CLUB

   FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

          THE INTERIM REPORT

                  OF

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
 This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

  referred to as   'The Police’)and Doncaster Rovers Football Club (hereafter

 referred to as    'The Club’).



 This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

 recommendation    four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

 Lord Justice Taylor     into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.



 The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows



 Maximum Capacities for Terraces

^^ie Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

 each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

 accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.



 The Club will do this by means of a ticketing arrangement which will record

 the number of persons passing through each turnstile.     Each of the four banks

 of turnstiles will be monitored by a steward aware of the maximum capacities

 for each of the individual areas.



^ ^ e Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

 approaching capacity.    The Ciub will be responsible for closing off further

 access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.       The

 Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

 therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.



 The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

 public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

 prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.



The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.



All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.



The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.



Cutting Equipment

The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.    This cutting equipment will be operated

by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.    The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Liaison

Before each natch both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following matters:-

     i)    the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

           to the separate supporter groups;



    ii)    the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




    iii)    any information in relation to crowd problems;
                                                                              *




     iv)    the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

            to each group;



      v)    an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

            through the turnstiles;



     vi)    where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

             corresponds with the planned arrangeaents for admitting

             spectators to the ground.



 postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of tb. police officer in command

  at the ground.   It is therefor..... ntial The Club provide a telephone link
                              *
  between the referee’s room and the police control room.



  The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of eae.gency

  being called to the ground.    These include routes of access, rendezvous

  points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.    The Police will

  liaise with The Club concerning these arrangeaents whenever these plans are

  amended or as otherwise appropriate.
r   The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

    Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

    liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

    concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.



    Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

    agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




    SIGNED ..                         on behalf of Doncaster Rovers Football Clfib




    SIGNED                         .. on behalf of South Yorkshire Police




     DATE
KECOtteNEATIGN 1



Doncaster Rovers Football Club has several viewing terraces at its ground

which are each self-contained with fixed capacities.         The existing safety

certificate does not, at this time, reflect the maximum capacities.

K B D C M C N D M ’ICN 2



The calculation for maximum capacities, proposed by this reccrrmendation, has

been followed in determining a figure for each self-contained terraced area

as follows:-

Main Stand Terrace              2125      Rossington End Terrace    1700

Popular Stand Terrace           1700      Town End Terrace           510

KBOOtffiMEftTICN 3



(a) There are currently two systems of counting spectators into the various

      sections of Doncaster Rovers' ground.       At the Rossington Road End (the

     visitors end) a physical counting system exists whereby the number of

      spectators entering that section is contemporaneously recorded by a

      steward.       This system is experimental and may replace the system that

      pertains throughout the remainder of the ground whereby spectators are

      issued with a ticket upon entering an individual turnstile.          The number

      of tickets issued is collated by a steward from all the turnstiles at

      intervals to monitor the total number of spectators entering any

      particular section       of the ground.

      (When the club decide on a standard counting method, the written

      agreement - document (6) will be amended to reflect this).       In any event,

      the club has undertaken to limit the nunber of spectators entering any

      self-contained area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance

      with Reccmnendation 2 above.
 b) The   club     will   achieve   this        by    the   steward,   who   is   counting

    spectators into the ground, causing the relevant turnstiles to be

    closed thereby preventing further access to such an area when its

   maximum capacity is about to be reached.                  The police have agreed to

    assist the club in this regard, if requested so to do.                        The club

   will inform the police by means of the club radio system when the

   turnstiles sure tc     be closed.


                                                                                  *



KBOOMBPftTIOK 4



A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities for

crcwd     safety    and    control,       has        been   approved   and    signed   by

representatives of South Yorkshire Police and Doncaster Rovers PC.                      A

copy of that agreement is attached at document                 (61

RBCXMffiaBM'ICH 5



At each match at Doncaster Rovers ground there are eight stewards (four

to the Rossington End Terrace, two to the Popular Stand Terrace and one

each to the Main Stand Terrace and Town End Terrace respectively) whose

sole duty is to check crowd conditions in those areas for possible

overcrcMiing or distress.           The    stewards regularly perform the same

duties,   as do the police officers authorised under Reccrrmendation 9

below.     The parties are therefore familiar to each other, and the

stewards have ready access to these police officers who each have a

radio giving them contact with the police control roan.                      Fbur of the

stewards, being senior stewards, are also equipped with a club radio

giving them direct ccrrnunication with the club control roan and the

police control roan.
REOOWENDftTICN 6



All   police   officers    and    stewards       (not    just those authorised under

Recarmendations      5   and     9)    are     fully    briefed    with   regard    to    the

recognition of crowd densities and                to the     recognition of signs of

distress.      All   officers and stewards have been issued, as an aide

memoire, with a laminated card which identifies the signs of distress.



Stewards are each issued              with acopy of written instructions,            by the

club, which detail their              duties. The chief stewards are each            briefed

by a police inspector, before each match, on the responsibilities of

stewards    for crowd     safety and control            and their duties in case of

emergency evacuation.          The chief steward is expected to brief the other

stewards.



Police   officers are briefed by a Senior police officer before each

match on their complementary responsibilities and duties.



The   South    Yorkshire       Police    are    presently     preparing     visual       aids,

designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crcwd

densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a little

more about crowd dynamics.               The aids will consist of a) Albums of

photographs depicting the various sections of Doncaster Rovers ground

with different numbers of spectators therein, and b) A video tape film

which    highlights      crcwSdensities,           distress       and   dynamics.         When

completed these photographs and film will be shown to the Safety of

Sports Ground Advisory Group.
The Certifying Authority are asked to ensure that the club undertakes

and continues to undertake its cwn reponsibilities for staff training

as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'

- paras, 26, 177, 195 and Annex B to the Guide.



RBOCMMBPftTION 7
                                                                          ♦




All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Doncaster Rovers PC are

painted white which is a different colour from the rest of the fence.

Each is clearly identified by a sign which proclaims 'Emergency Exit'.




RB0CM4E«DMTCH 8



All perimeter fence gates to the pitch are kept fully cpen during the

period when spectators are on the terraces.



RB0CM4E«DMTCH 9



 Uiere is, in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fence, or group

 of gates   where they are close together and where there is only a snail

 number of spectators occupying the terrace behind the gates, at least

 one police officer^ whose sole duty, whenever spectators are cm the

 terraces, is to decide whether or not to allow spectators through the

 gateway    to   relieve   overcrowding.   Such police   officers   are       to be

 identified by means of a lime green tabard,      lhe officer is familiar to

 all stewards in that area        (see Recemendation 5 above), is known by

 them to be authorised to relieve overcrowding, and is able to make
      radio contact with the police control roan.



RBOCMMBOftTIOW 10



Metal cutting equipment has been provided by Doncaster Rovers PC.                  It

has been agreed that, in case of need, employees of the club trained in

its    use    will   be   readily available   to   operate   the   equipment.      An

operative is deployed to the Rossington Road Bid of the ground and is

in    radio contact,      via the club's radio system, with both the club

safety officer and the police control roan.



KBCXMEflDftTIOKS 11 AND 12



It is understood that Doncaster Borough Council representatives on the

Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group have carried out an inspection

of all crush barriers.



KBOOWBCftTICHS 13 - 17



Safety       Certification   is   obviously   a   matter   for   Doncaster Borough

Council.       In respect of Recarmendation 17, the South Yorkshire Police

await notification of the constitution of the Advisory Group.                   It is

the Police view, hcwever, that this group should supplement, and not

replace, the existing Officer Working Group.
KBOCM IBBflTICKS 1 8 AND 19



It is understood th a t each turnstile has been inspected and its

potential rate of flow measured and that the maximum capacities

of   each   viewing   area   can    be   admitted via the representative

turnstiles in less than one hour.



RBCXMOPATION 20



(See Reccmnendation 3b above).           When the capacity of any viewing

area is about to be reached,             the club have an arrangement to

close   down   the    relevant turnstiles     that service   that viewing

area.   The Police will be informed at this time by club radio or

by telephone to police control.



RBCHMEHDBTION 21



Dcncaster Rovers PC currently have two CC TV cameras installed at

the ground.     A survey of the installation was carried out by a

trained police CC TV operator( no expert knowledge is professed),

and his report is attached at document          (3J .



For your further information the General Purposes Ccmnittee of

the Association pf n-vigf tKHrr> nFfirFt-ghas convened a working group

to consider,    nationally,        the use of CC TV to promote public

safety at football grounds.          The group anticipate that it may be

possible to provide a 'package' of equipment for use as a test

for a canton minimum standard of performance.           They will report
back in due course.



RBCOMBPftTICIN 22



Signposting for spectators both inside and outside the ground has

been reviewed by the Doncaster         Borough Council Safety of Sports

Grounds   Advisory     Group.    Hie    police   are   satisfied with      the

signposting.



RBOGMMEM»TICMS 23 AND 24



The South Yorkshire Police have had liaison with the club on the

question of ticketed matches.          The police are satisfied with the

arrangements and will ensure that the information on any ticket

corresponds     with   their plans     for admitting spectators to the

ground.



BBCOWBPftTION 25



At Doncaster Rovers PC there is no pre match entertainment.                The

police have no knowledge of any discussions between the club and

a recognised supporters club on this matter.




  KBOCMMBCftTIOH 26



 The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable ncminated his Deputy,

 Mr Peter Hayes, QPM, LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of

 each football club and local authority concerned in respect of

 the   safety   and    control   of   crowds.    Mr    Hayes   has   met   with
Directors and Secretaries of all five football league clubs in

the county,   including Mr C h a p p e l l axlMrs   Oldale of Doncaster

Rovers FC, on 24 August 1989.      He met with representatives of the

four   relevant   localauthorities,      including Messrs    Paxton       and

Harvey of Doncaster Borough Council on 18 September 1989.             A copy

of the minutes of that meeting are attached at document ^             •



RBCCmEtOftTION 27



Both   the Operational Order       and the pre match briefing of all

officers on duty at          eachmatch at Doncaster Rovers       PC alert

officers to the dangers of overcrowding, and if any should be

detected, of taking inmediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.



The    proposed   training    by   way   of   photographs   and video (see

 Recamendation 6 above) will further emphasise these messages.




 KBOOMMENDATICM 28



 The operational planning for each match at Doncaster Rovers PC is

 intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns in

 the arrival a t , and departure frcn, any match by spectators.



 Hie following scenarios are each catered for by way of police

 contingency plans at Doncaster Rovers PC:-



 a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

 b) Early arrival of spectators.
c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

f) Late arrival of spectators.

g) Emergency opening of external gates          (or forcing of external

   gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

h) Early departure of spectators from ground.

i) Emergency evacuation.



The police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable

rapid deployment      to any difficulty which may arise inside or

outside the ground.



The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves

that   the   club   have   made   contingency    plans   to   deal   with   a

situation where the available entrances might prove insufficient

to stop unduly large crowds gathering outside the ground.               Such

contingency plans are required by paragraph 46 of the Guide to

Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'.



 RBCXMflBOftTION 29



 The police officer in catmand at Doncaster Rovers PC is aware of

 the option to delay kick-off, and discusses this matter, before

 each game, with the match officials.           To enable instant contact

 with the match referee when considering kick-off delay, the club

 have installed a direct telephone link between the police control

 roan and the referee's roan.
  RKXfcMENDATION 30



 There is available in the police control roan at Doncaster Rovers

     PC,    the   results      of   all    closed   circuit       television monitoring

  outside and inside the ground. The stewards also pass, by means

     of    club   radio,      regular     updates   on    the    numbers of    spectators

  entering the          ground.      Police officers who perform duty in the

     control roan are skilled in the use and interpretation of the

  results         of   CC   TV    filming,    and   are    due    to attend       a    CC   TV

     operators course which is run by the Greater Manchester Police.



KBOPM5NDBTION 31



There are sufficient operators employed in the police control roan

to    deed    with     radio communications.              New police ccmnunications

equipment has been catmissioned, and is about to be installed at

Doncaster Rovers's ground.



The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare station

in case of radio failure on the primary station.                            It also has

battery back-up in case of power failure.                       This system also gives

operators in the control roan priority over, and the capacity to

override, others using the same channel.



The police ground ccmnander has the option of utilising, when he

feels it necessary, an additional radio channel vdiich provides

exclusive          communication          between   himself        and    other       sector

ccrmanders.            This      executive   channel      would    be    utilised     in    an

emergency when the primary channel may become overcrowded.
The     p o lic e        c o n tr o l   room   at   D o n c a ste r   R overs   PC i s   a d e q u a te ly

s o u n d -p r o o f.



RBCXMODRTION 32



A   survey          of     Doncaster       Rovers's       ground       has   identified      six key

points where the                    police would wish to see dedicated telephone

points       to      enable direct             ccrmunication with the police control

room.



Attached, at document (4) , is a plan showing the location of those

points, together with an equipment specification prepared by the

South Yorkshire Police Communications Department.                                  The Certifying

Authority are asked to oversee its installation.



RECOMMENDATION 33



There is in existence at                       Doncaster Rovers PC a public address

system of six loud speakers.                            The police survey of the system

identifies the need for at least four additional speakers in the

following locations



a) Popular Side/Town End C o m e r

b) Popular Side/Rossington Rid C o m e r

c) Between Gates 2 and 3 facing out of the ground towards the car

      park.

d) Between Gates 5 and 6 facing out of the ground towards the car
The    p u b lic    a d d ress   s y s te m     at    D o n ca ste r    R overs    ground     is        not

adequately         zoned.        There        is     no facility to precede               important

messages with a loud signal.                       (Eventually,             w h e n this f a c i l i t y is

a vailable, the club should be asked to advertise the fact in the clit's pxgrarrm

Tile Certifying Authority are asked to oversee the installation of

an adequate public address system to ensure that it complies with

this recaimendation and that it is effective.                                     In so doing, the

Certifying Authority will wish to pay regard, also, to paragraph

194 (iii) of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green

Guide'      - which         list    the        requirements            of   an   effective     public

address system.



RBCCMMEM»TION 34

There is no illuminated advertising board at Doncaster Rovers.



A     series       of   hand     signals        for     use    by       police     officers        in    an

emergency is presently being forumulated, nationally, by a working

group of the Association of Chief Police Officers.                                      The results

are awaited.


RBOOMBDRTIOM 35

Tile South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the South Yorkshire

Fire Service concerning crori safety at Doncaster Rovers stadium.



At     a   force        level,     the        Chief    Superintendent             (Operations)          has

regular meetings with senior officers fran the other services.                                           At

a local level the police match commander has met with the local

ambulance liaison officer.



The attendance figures at Doncaster Rovers PC have not been
sufficient, so far this season, to varrant the attendance of an

ambulance.



RBDOMEMDRTION 36



In advance of each match at Dencaster Rovers ground, the South

Yorkshire Police forward to the South Yorkshire Fire and Ambulance

Services full details about the forthcoming event.



RBCCMffiNDATION 37



Contingency plans for the arrival of emergency police, fire and

ambulance vehicles at Doncaster Rovers ground have been reviewed

and prepared.           The contingency plan      forms part of the police

operational order.



The Certifying Authority will wish to consider whether the club

have taken adequate account of paragraph 29(v) of the Guide to

Safety   at     Sports    Grounds   -    'The   Green    Guide'    -   which   tasks

management       with     the   responsibility     for     preparing      emergency

 contingency      plans    in   consultation     with     the     three   emergency

 services.



 RBOOMMHOATIOM 38



 The   police    operational     order   for    any event held at Doncaster

 Rovers's       ground contains information, for officers deployed to

 entrances      to the ground,      as to the contingency plans             for the
arrival of the emergency services.



HBOaMBPftTION 39 - 43



Hjese    recaimendations concern   First Aid and Medical   facilities

and, as such, are outside any police remit.     Under Reccnmendation

41, however, the police control at Doncaster Rovers's ground is

told the identity and whereabouts of the 'club' doctor before each

match.    He is readily contactable.
              ACTION TAKEN BY

        THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

IN RESPECT OF ROTHERHAM UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

     FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

            THE INTERIM REPORT

                    OF

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

 referred to as   'The Police') and Rotherham United Football Club (hereafter


 referred to as 'The Club ).




 This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuan

 recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

 Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.



 The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows-



^ Maximum Capacities for Terraces

  The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

  each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

  accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.



  The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

  number of persons passing through each turnstile.



   The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

   approaching capacity.    The Club will be^responsible for closing off further

^ a c c e s s to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.

   Police accept The Club may' on occasions have difficulties in this regar

   therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.



    The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

    public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police

    prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.



    Filling and Monitoring Terraces

    The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

     terraced area during such ti.es that there are spectators in that pen or
terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.



The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.



All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.



The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.


                             *
Cutting Equipment

The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Liaison

Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following matters

     i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

          to the separate supporter groups;



    ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;



   iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;



    iv)   the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

          to each group;



     v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

          through the turnstiles;



    vi)   where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

          corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

          spectators to the ground.



Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

at the ground.      It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

between the referee's room and the police control room.



The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

being called to the ground.     These include routes of access, rendezvous

 points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.     The Police will

 liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

 amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QP.M LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.



Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED
                              . on behalf of Rotherham United Football Club



SIGNED .'
                                 n behalf of South Yorkshire Police
RBCOMENDATION 1




It is noted by the police that the existing Safety Certificate for

Rotherham       United    Football       Club    was     issued     in    1984    by    the    South

Yorkshire County Council.            Capacity figures for the various sections of

the    ground    are     therefore    out       of    date.     New      capacities     have    been

calculated and the certificate requires updating.



RBOQWEMDftnON 2



The     calculation        for       maximum          capacities,         proposed       by     this

recommendation, has         been     followed         in determining a figure for each

terraced area at Rotherham United's ground.                     The maximum capacities are

as follows



Tivoli End                                             SI 2 9

Railway End                                            4,508

South West Corner                                        394

Grandstand Terrace                                     2,298



RBCOMBCftTION 3



(a) An electronic counting mechanism is in place at Rotherham United's

      ground    whereby     the    number        of    spectators        entering      each    self-

      contained area is contemporaneously recorded.



      Ihe club has undertaken             (see written agreement) to monitor this

      counter and to limit the number of spectators entering any self-

      contained     area     to    the     maximum       capacity        figure     assessed     in

      accordance with Reccrrmendation 2 above.
(b) The club will achieve this by closing cff the relevant turnstiles

   to prevent further access to such an area when its raaximum capacity

    is about to be reached.     The police have agreed to assist the club

    in this regard, if requested so to do. It is considered that the

    club would be better able to undertake this task if the stewards

   with the responsibility for closing off access were issued with

    radios providing direct contact with the club control rocm.              The

    police have asked the club to consider this suggestion.



RECOMMENDATION 4



A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities fcr

crowd   safety     and   control,   has   been   approved   anc     signed    by

representatives of South Yorkshire Police and Rotherham United PC.             A

copy of that agreement is attached at documenr (6) .



REO>MENDATION 5



At each march at Rotherham United's ground there are four stewards (two

to the Tivoli end’, and one at the Railway end and in front of the

Grandstand respectively) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions

in those areas for possible overcrowding or distress.             The stewards

regularly perform the same duties, as do the police officers authorised

under Recommendation 9 below.       The parties are therefore familiar to

each- other and the stewards have ready access to these police officers

who each have a radio giving them contact with the police control rocm.
RECOMMENDATION 6


All   police    officers    and    stewards         (not    just    those    authorised under

Recommendations       5   and     9)    are   fully        briefed    with    regard     to    the

recccr.ition    of    crcwc densities         and    to the        recognition   of    signs of

distress.       All   officers     and    stewards have been issued,              as an aide

memoire, with a laminated card which identifies the signs of distress.




The club has been asked to issue each steward with a copy of wriCtefn

instructions which detail their duies.The cbief staecds                      are each briefed

bv a police insosctor, before each match, on the responsibilities of

stewards    fcr crcwc      safety       and   control and their duties            in case of

emeroencv evacuation.           The chief steward is expected to brier the otner

stewards.



Police    officers     are briefed        by a Senior police officer beiore eacn

match on their complementary responsibilities and duties.



The     South   Yorkshire       Police     are      presently       preparing    visual       aids,

designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crowd

 densities,     to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a little

 more    about crowd dynamics.            The aids will            consist of a) Albums of

 photographs depicting the various sections of Rotherham United's ground

 with different numbers of spectators therein,' and b) A video tape film

 which     highlights      crowd       densities,     distress        and    dynamics.         When

 completed these photographs and film will be shown to the Safety of

 Sports Ground Advisory Group.




 The Certifying Authority are asked to ensure that the club undertakes

 and continues to undertake its own reponsibilities for staff training
as set out in the Guide to        Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The GreenGuide'

- paras, 26, 177, 195 and Annex B to       the Guide.



RECOMMENDATION 7



All   gateways    in radial or perimeter fences a* Rotherham United are

painted yellow, which is a        different colour from the rest of the fence.

Each is clearly identified        by a sign which proclaims'Bnergency Exit'*
                                                                            «




RECOMMENDATION 8



All perimeter gates to the pitch, at Rotherham United's ground,                      are

keot fullv ODen at any time when spectators are on the terraces.



RECOMMENDATION 9



There is, in resDect of each gateway in tr.e perureter fences (or group

of gates where these are close together and where only a small number

of spectators are occupying the terrace behind these gates), at least

one police officer whose sole duty,          whenever spectators are on the

terraces, is to decide whether or not to allow spectators through that

gateway   to     relieve   overcrowding.   Such   police   officers   are       to    be

identified by means of a lime green tabard.        The officer is familiar to

all stewards in that area         (see Recommendation 5 above), is known by

them to be authorised to relieve overcrowding, and is able to make

radio contact with the Police Control Roan.




 RECOMMENDATION 10



A set of metal cutting equipment has been provided by Rotherham United
     PC.     It has been agreed that, in case of need, an                        employee of the

club     trained     in    its    use will    be    readily        available     to operate   the

equipment.          An    operative      is deployed to Railway end of the ground

immediately adjacent to the police control rocm.                         He is readily to hand

should the need arise.

RBCOMENDATIONS 11 AND 12



It is understood that Rotherham Borough Council representatives on the

Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group have carried out an inspection

of all crush barriers.                 The capacity for the terrace in front of the

main       grandstand       has    been     reduced          to   its    present     figure   (See

Recommendation 2) as a result of this inspection.




RECOMMENDATIONS 13 - 17



Safety      Certification         is    obviously       a    matter     for   Rotherham   Borough

Council. The Council are reminded, however, that the Safety Certificate

issued in 1984 by South Yorkshire County Council, does need updating at

a very early stage.



In   respect    cf       Rfeccnmendation     17,    the       South Yorkshire        Police await

notification        of    the constitution         of       the Advisory Group referred to

therein.       It    is    the police       view,       however,      that    this   Group should

supplement, and not replace, the existing Officer Working Group.



RBCCPMENDATIONS 18 AND 19



It is understood that each turnstile has been inspected, its potential

rate of flow measured and, even at a rate of only 500 per hour, the
maximum capacities of each viewing area can be admitted via the

 respective turnstiles in less than one hour.



 RBCCM-ENDATION 20




 (See Recommendation 3b).            When the capacity of any viewing area

 is    10%    below    the maximum    permitted,    an alarm   sounds    at the

electronic       monitor      in    the   Club   Secretary’s   office.       The

secretary, or his agent, will imnediately pass a message to the

steward at the relevant bank of turnstiles.              The turnstiles will

be closed off and the police informed by telephone cr personal

messenger to police control.              The club are encouraged to acquire

a     radio   system     to enable    immediate    contact with   all    parties

should capacities be about tc be reached.

RECOMMENDATION 21




Rotherham United FC currently have three CC TV cameras installed

around the ground.          A survey of the installation was carried out

by    a   trained     police CC     TV operator    (no expert knowledce      is

professed) and his report is attached at document (3).



For your further information the General Purposes Committee of

the Association cf Chief M i a * Officers has convened a working group

to consider,          nationally,   the use of CC TV to promote          public

safety at football grounds.           The group anticipate that it may be

possible to provide a          'package' of equipment for use as a test

for a camion minimum standard of performance.              They will report

back in due course.
 RECOMMENDATION 22



 Signposting for spectators both inside and outside the ground has been

 reviewed       by the      Rothernam Borough          Council Safety of Sports               Grounds

 Advisory Group.           The police are satisfied with the signposting.                      Worthy

 Oi. particular mention is the colour coding of sicms - red for home

 supporters, blue for away supporters - this is eye-catching, simple and

clear.



RBCOMENDATIONS 23 AND 24



The     South    Yorkshire     Police       have      had    liaison with the         club    on     the

question        of   ticketed matches.             The      police    are   satisfied    with        the

arrangements         and    will    ensure      that        the   information    on    any     ticket

corresponds with their plans for admitting spectators to the ground.



RECOMMENDATION 25




There has been,tc c?te, no pre match entertainment at Rotherham United

PC apart        from records        played      over the public address              system.       The

police    have       no    knowledge       of   any    liaison       between   the    club     and    a

recognised supporters club.



RECOMMENDATION 26



The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable nominated his Deputy, Mr

Peter    Hayes,      QPM,    LLB,    MA,    to liaise with the management                    of each

football club and local authority concerned in respect of the safety

and control of crowds. Mr Hayes has met with Directors and Secretaries

of all five football league clubs in the county, including Mr Darnillof

Rotherham United PC, on 24 August 1989.                      He met with representatives of

the four relevant local authorities, including Messrs Crosby and Da]ey
cf Rotherham Borough Council           on 18 September 1989.             A copy of the

minutes of that meeting are attached at document (7) .



RECOMMENDATION 27



Both the Operational Order and the pre match briefing cf all officers

on duty at each match at Rotherham United PC alert officers to the

danaers    of overcrowding, and        if any should be detected, of taking

immediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.



The     proiDcsed    training    by    way     of     photographs    ar.d      video     (see

Reccrrmencation 6 above) will farther emphasise these messages.




RECOMMENDATION 28



The    operational    planning   fcr each match          at   Rothernam Unitec         FC   is

intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns in the

arrival at, and departure frctn, any match by spectators.



 The    following    scenarios   are    each        catered   for   by   way    of     police

 contingency plans .at Rotherham United PC:-



 a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

 b) Early arrival of spectators.

 c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

 d) Individual section of ground approaching capacity.

 e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

 f) Late arrival of spectators.

 g) Errergency opening of external gates (or forcing of external gates),

       thereby allowing an influx of spectators.
h)   Early departure of spectators from ground.

i)   Emergency evacuation



Ths police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable rapid

deployment   to   any difficulty which may arise   inside or outside   the

ground.



The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves that

the club have made contingency plans to deal with a situation w h e r e the

available entrances might prove insufficient to step unduly large crowds

gathering outside the ground.     Such contingency plans are required by

paragraph 46 of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds        -   'The Green

Guide'.



KBCXM-ffiMATION 2 9




The police officer in cortnand at Rotherham United PC is aware of the

option to delay kick-off, and discusses this matter, before each game,

with match officials.



To enable instant contact with the match referee when considering kick-

off delay,   the police request that the club install a telephone link

between the police      control roan and the referee's roan.      (See also

Recorrmendation 32 belcw).
RECOMMENDATION 30



There is available in the police control rocm at Rotherham Unitec Jie

results cf all closed circuit television monitoring outside and inside

the ground.



The ccmD’
        jreris 3d turnstile counting system currently terminates in the

Secretary's ofiice at Rotherham United.     A link, frcm this system, to

the police control rocm, is sought.    The approximate cost of installing

such a link would be £“00.


Police officers who perform duty in the control rocm are skilled in the

use and interpretation of the results of CC TV filming.      Officers will

attend a CC TV Operator's Course run by the Greater Manchester Police.




 RECCMMENDATION 31



 There are sufficient operators employed in the police control room

 to   deal   with   radio ccnmunicaticns.   New police ccmnunications

 equipntent has been commissioned, and is about to be ins called at

 Rotherham United's ground.



 The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare station

  in' case of radio failure on the primary station.       It also has

  battery back-up in case of power failure.     This system also gives

  operators in the control room priority over, and the capacity to

  override, others using the same cnannel.



  The police ground commander has the option of uti-ising, when he
feels    it necessary,         an additional radio channel which provides

exclusive        communication          between        himself        and     other     sector

commanders.        This    executive          channel        would    be     utilised   in   an

emergency when the primary channel may become overcrowded.



The     police   control       rocm     at   Rotherham United              PC is    adequately

sound-proofed.       The club propose to extend the police control room

and this proposal is welcomed by the South Yorkshire Police.



RECCMMENDATION 32



A survey of Rotherham United's ground has identified fifteen key

points     where   the    police        would wish to see dedicated telephone

points to enable direct communication with the po_ice control room



Attached, at document (4) , is a plan showing the location cf those

ocints, tccether with an equipment specification prepared by the

South Yorkshire Police Communications Department.                             The Certifying

Authority are asked to oversee the installation cf this telephone

system.


                                    «


RBCCM1ENDATIQN 33



There     is in existence at Rotherham United PC a public address

system.      The police have carried out a survey of this system and

have     identified      the    requirements           for    at     least    two   additional

speakers, both of which could be utilised to address spectators

awaiting     admission         to   the      ground.         The     police    recormend     one

additional speaker to address spectators in Masbrough Street and
one additional speaker to address spectators in Miliir.ccr Lane.

(See plan attached at document (5).



 The Certifying Authority are asked tc oversee the installation cf

an adequate public address system tc ensure that it complies with

this recommendation and that it is effective.                     In so doing, the

Certifying Authority will wish to pay regard, also, tc paragraph

194    (iii) of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green

Guide' -       which lists the requirements of an effective public

address system.



The police have asked the club tc install the facility tc precede

P.A. messages with a loud signal and, when installed, tc advertise

this facility in the club's programmes.



RECOMMENDATION 34

There     is   r.c   illuminated      advertising score       board   at   Rotherham.

United's ground.



A     series   of    hand   signals    for    use   by   police    officers   in   an

emergency is presently being formulated, nationally, by a working

group of the Association of Chief Police Officers.                     The results

are awaited.



RECOMMENDATION 35



The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the South Yorkshire

Fire     Service     concerning       crowi   safety     at   Rotherham     United's

football ground.
At   a   force    level,    the    Chief     Superintendent        (Operations)    has

regular meetings with senior officers frcm ether services.                        At a

local level the police natch cc.Txar.der meets with the ambulance

liaison officer at most if not every match.                   The fire service have

also had a liaison officer at at least one match this season where

he met with the police match commander.



RECOMMENDATION 36



In advance cf each match at Rotherham United's ground, the South

Yorkshire Police forward tc the South Yorkshire Fire and ambulance

Services full details about the forthcoming event.



RBCOMENDATION 37



Contingency plans         for the arrival cf emergency police,              fire and

ambulance      vehicles     at Rotherham          United’s    ground,      have    been

reviewed and prepared.            The contingency plan forms part of the

police operational order.



The Certifying Authority will wish to consider whether the club

have taken adequate account of paragraph 29(v) of the Guide to

Safety    at     Sports    Grounds   -     'The    Green     Guide' -   which     tasks

management       with     the     responsibility       for     preparing    emergency

contingency       plans     in    consultation      with     the   three    emergency

services.
RECOWENDATIGN 38



The police operational order for any event held at Rctherhair, United's

crounc ccntairs imcrmation, for ofucers cecioved to entrances to the

ground, as tc the contingency plans fcr the arrival of the emergency

services.



RECOMMENDATIONS 39 - 43



These recommendations concern First Aid and Medical facilities and, as

such, are outside any police remit.   Under Recommendation 41, however,

the police control at Rotherham United's ground is told the identitv

and whereabouts cf the 'club' doctor before each match.   He is readilv

cor.*       •
          ACTION TAKEN BY

    THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

IN RESPECT OF BARNSLEY FOOTBALL CLUB

 FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

        THE INTERIM REPORT

                OF

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
       This document            is a u r i f f «
                                                      agreement between South Yorkshire Police (he-ea'
       referred to as              'Th« p „ h                                                  vne^ea. ter
                                         f o u c e , and Barnsley FootbaU Club (herea
       as   'The Club').                                                                                          referred            to




    ThlS                         sl8" ' d «         b . b . « of both p a r t l e s l s „
    recommendation              fou r of the Int                 •   *                                     " PUrSUanCe °f

   U
   «r-d
      «         j   ,
                Justice T aylor lBt0 the H m                               ”    °f         lnqUlry hel,i b? Th' »* Hon
                                                                                            d i s a st er of   15 A p r i l   1989.




   ^        *gI" " ent bet“» "                                   » < * * Club is as follows:-


  ^.xinum                  .....     for Terrarcc



  e ach          ,f       U be r ' SPOnS11>:le f 0 r                           t h . number of s p e c t e t o r s e n te r in g
            —         —               Pen o,               t0 the aaxiBUB e.paeIty                             .......

  accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




            “ b will do this by means of . mechanical number recorder fitted                                            to    each



       "t whe.e they „ U 1 be colisted by an employee of The Club.




 approaching          capacitv          n .     n     ■      „       ■
                                        The Cluo will be responsible for closing off furthe-
 access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity                                                  •'
                                                                          cap acity .s about to be reached .                   The

            ‘ CC'Pt Th' C 1 “b -                «                        - v . difficulties in this regard,
t.e.e.ore. The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Policewill
Prepare co„ti„g „,cy plans „                        deal ^           ^
Filling   and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perineter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

terraced area.     The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police v i l l provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through 2 gate to relieve

overcrowding.




All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept       fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




The   stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

 track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

 their attention by these stewards.




 Cutt i n g Equipment

 The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

 c u t ting equipment   to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

 numbers of spectators if necessary.       This cutting equipment will be operated

 by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.       The use of such

 equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

 w i l l be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Before each match both parties to this agreement will      liaise in respect of the

following matters:-

     i)    the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

           to the separate supporter groups;




    ii)    the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




   iii)    any information in relation to crowd problems;




    iv)    the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

            to each group;




     v)    an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

            through the turnstiles;




    iv)    where   tickets are used,   that the information on those tickets

            corresponds with the planned arrangements    for admitting

            spectators to the ground.




Postponement of kick-off     is at the discretion of the police officer m      command

 at the ground.     It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

 between the referee's room and the police control room.




 The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

 being called to the ground.     These include routes of access, rendezvous

 points,   accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.     *he Police will

 liaise w i t h The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

 amended or as otherwise appropriate.
T„e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e of South Y or ks h ir e P o l i c e has nominated h i s Deputy,

Mr peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




               /
SIGNED    .j                           ...   on   behalf of Barnsley Football Club           A.'TO




SIGNED                                _ . . on behalf of South Yorkshire Police
KETOMENDftTICH 1



Barnsley Football Club has several viewing terraces at its ground which

are each self-contained with fixed capacities.               The existing safety

certificate does not, at this time, reflect the maximum capacities.




RBOOMENDftTICH 2



The    calculation         for     maximum    capacities,    proposed      by    this

recommendation,      has   been    followed   in determining a figure for each

terraced area as follows:-



Pontefract Read End                            8,670

Brewery Stand                                  7>500

Main Stand Terrace North                       3,315

Main Stand Terrace South                       3,145

 Spion Kop                                     5,250

 (Pre Taylor, the capacity of the Spion Kop was 7,500, calculated upon a

 density factor of 54 persons per 10 square metres.                In reducing that

 figure by 15%, as recommended by Taylor, the Spion Kop area can safely

 hold 6,375.       However,      on the basis of the correlation between this

 viewing area and the turnstiles serving it, only 5,250 spectators can

 be accomodated on the Spion Kop within one hour - calculated at 750

 per turnstile per hour.          (See Recommendation 19). )

 The   c e r t i f y i n g a u t h o r i t y are asked to r e - e x a m i n e the ca pacity of

 M a i n S t a n d T e r r a c e North.   On 17 October 1989 before the match between

 Barnsley and Sheffield United, the club secretary at Barnsley PC closed off

 access to the Terrace in the interests of the safety of those spectators

 occupying the terrace.           The collated count from the turnstiles in that area

  indicated that only 2402 spectators had entered - some 913 below permitted
KBOOWENDftTION 3



(a) Barnsley PC has a mechanical counting system in respect of each

    turnstile.   The club undertook to check the counting mechanism of each

    turnstile at 15 minute intervals and to relay that information to the

    police control rocm at the ground.   To date, however, the club have not

    performed such checks in relation to the whole of the ground.     The club

    state that they are not in a position to do so, in the whole of the

    ground, because of the inadequate mechanical counting system on the

    turnstiles and insufficiency of staff.   The club did in fact experiment

    at one game with the Brewery Stand but the trial was unsuccessful.



    It is the police view that, unless the club meet the responsibility to^

   count the spectators entering the ground, there is a real danger of

   this recommendation being breached.   It is noted, that at a meeting of

   the Officer Working Party held on the 10 August 1989, the club

   undertook in the long term to install an electronic monitoring system.

   Notwithstanding this carrmitment, the Certifying Authority are asked to

   ensure immediate ccnpliance with this recommendation.



(b) In the written agreement between South Yorkshire Police and Barnsley

   FC, (see Reccrrmendation 4), the club undertook to close off the

   relevant turnstiles to prevent further access to any viewing area when

   its maximum capacity is about to be reached.   The Certifying Authority

   are asked to ensure that the club continue to meet their

   responsibilities in this regard.
RBOOMENDATICW 4



A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities for

crowd     safety      and    control,           has   been     approved       and   signed   by

representatives of South Yorkshire Police and Barnsley PC.                            A copy of

that agreement is attached at document (6) .                     Whilst there have been no

variations to this agreement since it was signed by the club on the 22

August 1989, it is clear that the club are failing to comply with the

agreement. (See Recommendation 3 above).



RBCXfrMETOATION 5



Barnsley PC claim that there are a number of stewards, deployed to each

side of the ground, whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in

those areas for possible overcrcwding or distress.                       However, despite an

undertaking in the written agreement with the South Yorkshire Police,

and numerous subsequent requests made to the club secretary, the club

have    not   yet     provided a         plan    of   the    ground    indicating where      the

stewards, who have this responsibility, will be situated.



There are at each match, a number of stewards who appear to be under­

taking these responsibilities and the stewards have ready access to

police officers, authorised under Reccmmendation 9 below, who each have

a radio giving them contact with the police control rocxn.

KBCXM4BEa!H0M 6



All     police   officers     and    stewards         (not    just those      authorised under

Recarmendations        5    and     9)    are     fully      briefed   with    regard   to   the

recognition      of    crcwfl densities          and to the       recognition       of signs of
distress.     All officers   and stewards have been issued,           as an aide

memoire, with a laminated card which identifies the signs of distress.



Stewards are each issued with a copy of written instructions, by the

club, which detail their duties.           The chief stewards are each briefed

by a police inspector, before each match, on the responsibilities of

stewards    for   crcwd safety     and control and their duties in case of

emergency evacuation.     The chief steward is expected to brief the other

stewards.



Police officers are briefed by a Senior police officer before each

match on their canplementary responsibilities and duties.



The   South   Yorkshire   Police     are   presently   preparing    visual   aids,

designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crow3

densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a little

more about    crowd dynamics.       The aids will consist of a) Albums of

photographs depicting the various sections of Barnsley's ground with

different numbers of spectators therein, and b) A video tape film which

highlights    crowd   densities,    distress   and dynamics.       When completed

these photographs and film will be shown to the Safety of Sports Ground

Advisory Group.




The Certifying Authority are asked to ensure that the club undertakes

and continues to undertake its own reponsibilities for staff training

as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'

- paras, 26, 177, 195 and Annex B to the Guide.
 REOttMOtoftTION 7




 All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Barnsley PC are painted

 in the        international      safety colour       - green - which is a different

 colour frcm the rest of the fence.                   Each is clearly identified by a

 sign which proclaims 'Emergency Exit'.



KBOOMBCftnCW 8




Only the Spion Kop end of the ground has a perimeter fence.                        The three

gates in this perimeter fence have been removed and easily-broken tape

has     been    placed     across    the   openings    in   the   fence.     This tape     is

respected by the spectators, who have not made any attempts to invade

the pitch, but vrould be no barrier in case of emergency.

KEXXWENDftTION 9




There is, in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fence, a police

officer        whose sole duty, whenever spectators are on the terrace, is to

decide    whether     or    not     to   allow spectators     through      the   gateway   to

relieve overcrowding.             Such police officers are to be identified by

means of a lime green tabard.               The officers are regularly deployed to

such duties and are therefore familiar to all stewards in that area#

(See Recoinendation 5 above), are known by them to be authorised to

relieve    overcrowding, and are able             to make     radio contact with the

police control roan.




  RBOOMEMDftTION 10




  A set of metal cutting equipment has been provided by Barnsley

  PC.      It has been agreed that, in case of need, an                    employee of
the club trained in its use will be readily available to operate the

equipment. An operative is deployed imnediately adjacent to the police

control roan.        He is readily to hand should the need arise.



KBOOMMENDftTICHS 11 AND 12



It is understood that Barnsley Borough Council representatives on the

Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group, have carried out an inspection

of all crush barriers.



RECOMMENDATIONS 13 - 17



Safety     Certification     is   obviously    a    matter   for   Barnsley   Borough

Council.     At a meeting of the Officer Working Party on the 9 August

1989, it was decided to review the Safety Certificate in due course and

thereafter conduct an annual review of the certificate.



In   respect    of    Recommendation    17,   the   South Yorkshire    Police     await

notification of the constitution of the Advisory Group at Barnsley.                    It

is the police view, however, that this Group should supplement, and not

replace, the existing Officer Working Group.



RBCCMMEMDATICINS 18 AND 19



It is understood that each turnstile has been inspected and its

potential rate of flow measured.          The correlation between each

v i e w i n g area of the s t a d i u m and the turnstiles           serv i n g   it

has been c a l c u l a t e d and,      as a result,     the c a p acity of the
Spion Cop terrace has been reduced to 5250 because there are only

seven turnstiles to service this part of the ground.

Similarly the- capacity of the Brewery Stand terrace has been reduced

to 7500 because there are only 10 turnstiles to service that part of

the ground.

RBCOMEMDftTICM 20



This    reccrrmendation   is   linked   directly with   Recarmendation   3

 above.    It is suggested that Barnsley PC do not have adequate

 arrangements for monitoring the number of spectators entering the

 ground and for limiting further access when capacities have been

 ai    are about to be reached.     The Certifying Authority are asked

 to ensure compliance with this reccrrmendat ion

 REOCMMEUDftTICW 21



 Barnsley PC currently have two CC TV cameras installed at the

 ground and proposals to install a further tvro cameras.         A survey

 of the installation has been carried out by a trained police CC

 TV operator (no expert knowledge is professed) and his report is

 attached at document {3\

 For your further information the General Purposes Ccnmittee of

 the Association cf Chief Police Officers has convened a working group

 to    consider,   nationally,   the use of CC -TV to promote public

  safety at football grounds.       The group anticipate that it may be

  possible to provide a 'package' of equipment for use as a test

  for a cannon minimum standard of performance.          They will report

  back in due course.
RECXM4E3CATION 22



Signposting for spectators both inside and outside the ground has

been reviewed by the Barnsley            Borough Council Safety of Sports

Grounds     Advisory    Group.     The    police   are    satisfied with      the

signposting.



RBDOMMEMjftTIOMS 23 AND 24



The South Yorkshire Police have had liaison with the club on the

question of ticketed inatches.           The police are satisfied with the

arrangements and will ensure that the information on any ticket

corresponds     with    their plans      for admitting spectators        to the

ground.



RBOCWENDATION 25



At Barnsley PC there is no pre match entertainment and the club

do    not   recognise     any    supporters     club     as   representing    the

interests of the spectators in general.

RECOMMENDATION 26



The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes, QPM, LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of

each football club and local authority concerned in respect of

the   safety    and    control   of   crowds.      Mr    Hayes   has   met   with

Directors and Secretaries of all five football league clubs in

the county, including Messrs Dennis and Spinks of Barnsley PC, on

24 August 1989.        He met with representatives of the four relevant
local    authorities,    including       Messrs    Harper   and     Jackson    of

Barnsley Borough Council on 18 September 1989.                 A copy of the

minutes of that meeting are attached at document (7).



RBCXMffiaOATION 27



Both the Operational Order and              the pre match briefing of all

officers on duty at each match at Barnsley PC alert officers to

the dangers of overcrowding, anti if any should be detected, of

taking immediate and appropriate           steps to remedy it.



The     proposed   training   by   way     of     photographs and    video    (see

RecoTmendation 6 above) will further emphasise these messages.



RBOCMMENDftTION 28



The     operational   planning     for     each     match   at BarnsleyPC     is

intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns in

the arrival at, and departure frcrn, any match by spectators.



The following scenarios are each catered for by way of police

contingency plans at Barnsley PC:-



a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

b) Early arrival of spectators.

 c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

 d) Individual section of ground approaching capacity.

 e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

 f) Late arrival of spectators.
g) Emergency opening of external gates           (or forcing of external

   gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

h) Early departure of spectators fran ground.

i) Bnergency evacuation.



The police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable

rapid deployment        to any difficulty which may arise inside or

outside the ground.



The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves

that   the   club   have    made   contingency   plans   to   deal   with   a

situation where the available entrances might prove insufficient

to stop unduly large crowds gathering outside the ground.               Such

contingency plans are required by paragraph 46 of the Guide to

Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'.



RBOOMEMDATION 29



The police officer in ccmand           at Barnsley PC is aware of the

option to delay kick-off, and discusses this matter, before each

 game, with the natch officials.         To enable instant contact with

 the match referee when considering kick-off delay, the club have

 installed a telephone link between the police control roan and

 the referee's rocn.



 RBOCM*ffiaOftTION 30



 There is available in the police control roan at Barnsley PC, the

 results of all closed circuit television monitoring outside and
inside the ground.        Police officers who perform duty in the

control room are skilled in the use and interpretation of the

results of CC TV filming, and are to attend a CC TV operators

course which is run by the Greater Manchester Police.




RBOOMMBDftTION 31



There   are    sufficient    operators     employed    in the police

control roan to deal with radio ccrnnunications.                  New police

carmunications      equipment     has     recently     been   installed    at

Barnsley PC's ground.



The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare

station in case of radio failure on the primary station.                   It

also has battery back-up in case of pcwer failure.                This system

also gives operators in the control roan priority over, and the

capacity to override, others using the same channel.



The police ground ccrmander has the option of utilising, when

he   feels    it   necessary,    an     additional    radio   channel    which

 provides     exclusive     communication    between    himself    and   other

 sector carmanders.       This executive channel would be utilised in

 an emergency when the primary channel may becane overcrowed.



 The police control roan is purpose built and was only recently

 completed. The sound-proofing is adequate.



 RBCCMMENDAOTION 32



 A survey of Barnsley PC's ground has identified sixteen key points
where the police would wish to see dedicated telephone points to

enable direct connunication with the police control roan.



Attached, at document (4) , is a plan showing the location of those

points, together with am equipment specification prepared by the

South Yorkshire Police Ccrmunications Department.                The Certifying

Authority are asked to oversee the installation of this telephone

system.




RBCCEMEHDATION 33



There is in existence at Barnsley PC a public address system.

However, a survey of the system has identified the requirement for

six additional speakers, all of which would be utilised to address

spectators     waiting   to     gain   admission   to   the    ground.     It   is

recemended at the speakers be positioned as follows



a)     Adjacentto Gate 12.

b)     Adjacentto Gate 9.

c)     Adjacentto Gate 8.

d)     Adjacentto Gate 5.

e)     Adjacentto Gate 3.

f)     Adjacentto Gate 2.



The plan at (5)      shows the existing system and the proposed site

for new loud speakers.            The Certifying Authority are asked to

oversee the installation of any public address system to ensure

that     it   complies   with     this   reccrmendation       and   that   it   is
effective.       In so doing, the Certifying Authority will wish to pay

regard,   also, to paragraph 194               (iii) of the Guide to Safety at

Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide' -                  which lists the requirements

of an effective public address system.



It is noted that the club have equipped the public address system

with the facility to precede any messages with a .loud signal. The

police    have     asked    the   club    to    ensure      that   this   facility   is

advertised in the club's programmes.



KBCCWENDATION 34



There is no illuminated advertising/score board at Barnsley PC.



A    series   of    hand    signals      for    use    by   police   officers   in   an

emergency is presently being formulated, nationally, by a working

group of the Association of Chief Police Officers.                        The results

are awaited.



RBCCfrMBTOftTION 35



The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and; the South Yorkshire

 Fire Service concerning          ctcmA   safety at Barnsley PC's stadium.

At    a   force    level,    the    Chief      Superintendent        (Operations)    has

 regular meetings with senior officers frcrrt the other services.                     At

 a local level the police match cortmander meets with the ambulance

liaison officer at football matches Ijeld at Barnsley FC.
RECOMMENDATION 36



In advance of each match at Barnsley's ground, the South Yorkshire

Police forward to the South Yorkshire Fire and Ambulance Services

full details about the forthcoming event.



RB0CM4ENDATI0N 37



Contingency plans for the arrival of emergency police, fire and

ambulance vehicles at Barnsley's ground         have been reviewed at a

meeting held at Barnsley Police Station on the 14 August 1989,

with the other emergency services.          The contingency plan prepared

as a result of that meeting forms part of the police operational

order.

The Certifying Authority will wish to consider whether the club

have taken adequate account of paragraph 29(v) of the Guide to

Safety   at   Sports   Grounds   -   'The   Green    Guide'    -   which   tasks

management    with     the   responsibility    for     preparing      emergency

contingency    plans    in   consultation     with    the     three   emergency

services.



RBCXM-ffiNDftTION 38



The police operatioral order for any event held at Barnsley PC's

ground contaiis information, for officers deployed to entrances to

the ground, as to the contingency plans for the arrival of the

emergency services.
RBOCMffiNDATION 39 - 43



These    reccmnendations   concern   First Aid   and Medical facilities

and, as such, are outside any police remit.        Under Reccmmendation

41, however, the police control at Barnsley PC's ground is told

the   identity and whereabouts       of the   'club' doctor before each

match.    He is readily contactable.
