           H- n u                                                              /j -7

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                    NOT FOR PUBLICATION AS IT CONTAINS EXEMPT INFORMATION
4 February 2000 WITHIN PARAGRAPH 1, 5 & 12 OF SCHEDULE 12A OF THE LOCAL
                    GOVERNMENT ACT 1972 AS AMENDED
Joint Report of the Clerk and Treasurer and the Chief Constable


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS


1    Purpose of the Report

     The purpose of this report is to consider developments relating to the
     decisions taken by the Authority on the 21 May 1999 and on the 26
     November 1999 to provide financial assistance to Mr Bernard Murray
     and Mr David Duckenfield, including:

     1.1    To consider the applications heard before the trial judge, Mr
            Justice Hooper:

            a.     On the 20 December 1999, seeking to exclude from the
                   trial evidence given by the former officers to the Taylor
                   Inquiry; and

            b.     On the 4 January 2000, seeking to strike out the
                   prosecutions on the grounds that they are an abuse of
                   process.

     1.2    To consider an application received from Mr Murray’s solicitors
            for authorisation to obtain a transcript of the proceedings
            between the 4th and 7th January 2000 before Mr Justice Hooper.

     2.      To consider and approve the Funding Letters relating to the
            provision of the financial assistance:

            a.    From the 5 February to the end of the committal
                  proceedings;

            b.    For the applications before Mr Justice Hooper in
                  December 1999 and January 2000.

     3.     To con sid er:

            a.    The decision of the Chief Clerk to the South Sefton
                   Magistrates Court to only approve the payment from
                   central funds of part of the legal costs and
                   disbursements incurred by Mr Murray in the criminal
                   proceedings in the South Sefton Magistrates Court;



                                                                               1
     b.     The request from Mr Murray’s solicitors that the Authority
            either meet the shortfall in costs, or authorise them to
            challenge the decision of the Chief Clerk by way of
            judicial review;

4    To consider:

     a.     The decision of the Chief Clerk to the South Sefton
            Magistrates Court to only approve the payment from
            central funds of part of the legal costs and
            disbursements incurred by Mr Duckenfield in the criminal
            proceedings in the South Sefton Magistrates Court;

     b.     The request from Mr Duckenfield’s solicitors that the
            Authority either meet the shortfall in costs, or authorise
            them to challenge the decision of the Chief Clerk by way
            of judicial review;

5.   To consider the costs claimed by the Director of Public
     Prosecutions from Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield in pursuance
     of the costs order made against them in the judicial review
     proceedings involving the DPP.

6.    To consider the further steps taken to seek clarification of the
     tax position applicable to the financial support provided to the
     two former officers.

7.   To consider the Clerk and Treasurer’s discussions with the
     Minister on the provision of Home Office funding towards the
     costs arising from the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.


2    Recommendations

Members are recommended to:

1.   Receive the report;

2.   Approve the Funding letters relating to the provision
     of financial assistance to the two former officers in
     respect of the legal proceedings identified in
     paragraph 4 of the report.

3.   To authorise the Clerk and Treasurer to issue the
     Funding letters referred to in paragraph 4 of the
     report.

4    To consider an application received from Mr Murray’s
     solicitors for authorisation to obtain a transcript of
              the proceedings before Mr Justice Hooper between
              the 4th and 7th January 2000.

       5.    To consider the applications made on behalf of
              Mr Murray as a result of the decision of the Chief
              Clerk of the South Sefton Magistrates Court to only
              approve the payment from central funds of part of the
              legal costs and disbursements incurred by Mr Murray
              in the criminal proceedings in the South Sefton
              Magistrates Court;

       6     To consider the applications made on behalf of
             Mr Duckenfield as a result of the decision of the Chief
             Clerk of the South Sefton Magistrates Court to only
             approve the payment from central funds of part of the
             legal costs and disbursements incurred by
             Mr Duckenfield in the criminal proceedings in the
             South Sefton Magistrates Court;




3      December 1999 and January 2000 Court Applications

3.1    December 1999 Application

       This application, the purpose of which was to exclude evidence given
       by the former officers to the Taylor Inquiry, was unsuccessful. Garrets
       have provided a brief summary of the main points of the judgment
       delivered on the 22 December 1999 and this is attached at Appendix 1.
       Any member requiring to read the full judgment can obtain a copy from
       the Clerk and Treasurer

32    January 2000 Application

       These proceedings which involved an application to stay the criminal
       proceedings instituted against the former officers on grounds that they
       are an abuse of process have been adjourned until 16 February 2000
       to give the Judge more time to consider his decision. In connection
       with these proceedings an application has been received from Walker
       Morris for authorisation to incur the cost of obtaining the transcript of
       the proceedings (details attached at Appendix 2).

4     Funding Letters

4.1   Financial Support from the 6 February 1999 to the end of the
      Committal Proceedings

4.1.1 As repotted on the 10 September 1999, letters of agreement, setting
      out the conditions attaching to the Authority’s offer of financial support,



                                                                          3
        have been agreed with the solicitors acting for the two former officers.
        In view of the need to obtain clarification of the taxation status of the
        financial support, the Authority deferred making a decision to approve
        the letters on the 10 September 1999.

4.1.2 Since that date the Authority has obtained the advice of Mr William
      Massey QC on the taxation status of the payments. As members are
      aware. Counsel has advised that the financial support offered to the
      two former officers is not taxable either as an emolument nor as a
      retirement benefit.

4.1.3   In view of the tax advice received the Authority is recommended to
        approve the funding letters agreed, and to authorise the Clerk and
        Treasurer to issue these to the two former officers for signature.
        Copies of the agreed letters are attached at Appendix 3.

4.2     December and January Applications

4.2.1 The terms of the financial support approved by the Authority on the 26
       November 1999, for the legal costs and disbursements incurred by the
       two former officers in these proceedings, have been notified to their
       solicitors by Garretts. Copies of the formal funding letters drawn up by
       Garretts setting out these terms are attached at Appendix 4. Walker
       Morris have approved the letter drawn up in favour of Mr Murray.
       Confirmation is awaited from Winkworth Sherwood that the letter
      drawn up in favour of Mr Duckenfield is also agreed.

5       South Sefton Criminal Proceedings

f>.1    The prosecutions brought against the two former officers were
         commenced in the South Sefton Magistrates Court but discontinued on
         a jui isdictional point. An order was made that the costs of the former
        officers be met from central funds. The Chief Clerk to the South
         Sefton Magistrates questioned whether the former officers costs
         should be met from central funds in the light of the financial support
        offered by the Authority. Eventually, as reported on the 26 November
         last, he accepted that their costs could be met from central funds.

5.2.1   Walker Morris on behalf of Mr Murray submitted a claim for £4, 999.50,
        together with VAT. The Chief Clerk , on the 15 December 1999
        notified Walker Morris that he will pay costs of £2475 from central
        funds. In the light of the shortfall Walker Morris on behalf of their client
        have submitted an application dated the 12 January 2000 to Garretts,
        for a decision from the Authority on whether it will meet the short fall, or
        authorise Walker Morris to challenge the decision by way of Judicial
        Review. Copies of the bill submitted to Chief Clerk, the letter from the
        Chief Clerk to Walker Morris, and Walker Morris’s letter to Garretts are
        attached at Appendix 5.1.




                                                                                    4
5.2.2 Winkworth Sherwood on behalf of Mr Duckenfield submitted a claim for
       costs in the sum of £8,716.63. This was made up of £6,111.58
       professional fees, disbursements of £1,348 (which included £1,000 for
       Counsel fees) together with VAT of £1,252,05. The court has allowed
       costs at £2,320.67. In the light of the shortfall Winkworth Sherwood
       have submitted an application dated the 25th January 2000 to Garretts
      for a decision from the Authority on whether it will meet the shortfall, or
      authorise Winkworth Sherwood to challenge the decision by way of
      judicial review. Copies of this letter and the letter from the South
      Sefton Magistrates' Court to Winkworth Sherwood are attached at
      Appendix 5.2.

5.3.1   Garretts have advised that the costs of judicial review are wholly
        inappropriate having regard to the amounts in issue. In all the
        circumstances they believe it would not be unreasonable for the
        Authority to decline:

        i)     To meet the costs of the applications to support judicial review
               proceedings; or

        ii)    To meet the difference between the costs allowed by the South
               Sefton Magistrates Court and the amount claimed by each
               officer.

5.3.2 Garretts have suggested another option. This is that the Authority
      could decide to meet the difference between the amounts allowed by
      the South Sefton Magistrates Court and the sums which were
      reasonably incurred in the South Sefton proceedings in the context of
      the prosecution as a whole.

5.4     Garretts have provided the Hillsborough Family Support Group with an
        opportunity to comment on the applications. Any representations
        received will be reported to the Authority.

6       Judicial Review Proceeding - Director of Public Prosecutions’
        Costs

        Members will recall that on the 21 May 1999 the Authority resolved to
        make no decision on applications submitted by the former officers for
        payment of the costs of the Director of Public Prosecutions which were
        awarded against them, until the amount of those costs was known.
        The DPP has now submitted a bill of costs to Winkworth Sherwood.
        The total amount claimed in that bill is £3,250.96 costs and
        disbursements of £5,380.04, making a total of £8,630. Additionally, a
        small sum of £110.33 interest is sought. It appears that this bill should
        be apportioned between Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. Pending
        clarification of the apportionment of the bill, the Authority is
        recommended to simply note the position.




                                                                                  5
7      Taxation Update

7.1     In accordance with the advice reported to the Authority on the 26
        November 1999;

        i.    The Clerk and Treasurer has arranged payment of the legal
        costs and disbursements incurred by Mr Murray in the Leeds criminal
        proceedings up to 5 February 1999, in the sum of £130,000 plus VAT.
        This payment has been discharged without any deduction of tax or Nl.
        Payment will be made to Mr Duckenfield’s solicitor when details are
        formalised.

        ii.   Garretts have informed the Inland Revenue of the payment and
        have provided a copy of the tax advice obtained by the Authority to the
        Inspector dealing with the matter. A copy of Garretts letter to the
        Inspector is attached at Appendix 6.

7.2    Following the meeting on 2 November between the Minister, Charles
       Clarke, the Chairman, the Chief Constable and the Clerk and
       Treasurer, formal representations to the Minister have been made on
       the Authority’s behalf by the Superintendents Association, the Police
       Federation, and ACPO. The APA has also been briefed. All of the
       organisations have stressed the potential wider implications of the
       case.

7.3    No formal response has been received from either the Home Office or
       the Inland Revenue, but we have been informed by the
       Superintendents Association that the Inland Revenue Inspector has
       indicated that he wishes to resolve the matter and is keen to meet with
       Garretts.

8____ Home Office - Application for Financial Support

fl.T   The Authority has sought assistance from the Home Office on two
        grounds:

       i)     Towards the cost of defending the officers, on the grounds that
               there are implications for the whole police service.

       ii)    Towards the cost of outstanding personal injury insurance
               claims, on the grounds that the Authority had taken out
               reasonable cover and could not have foreseen the extent to
              which claims would eventually exceed the insured limit.

8.2    The Minister offered no assurances on either issue, but did state that,
       of the two, he would be prepared to consider if the Home Office could
       provide assistance towards insurance costs. Informal contact with
        Home Office finance staff recently indicates that this is still being given
       serious consideration. The Authority requested grant and/or borrowing
       approvals to enable the costs to be spread.


                                                                                  6
9       Further Funding - Timetable

9.1    The 2000/2001 budget timetable and resolution of the various matters
       relating to Hillsborough are inextricably linked. The key issues are:

       i)     Whether payments to the officers are subject to tax. This will
              affect any future costs but also payments already made;

       ii)    Whether Home Office will provide any financial assistance to the
              Authority for either the defence or the insurance costs;

       iii)   The outcome of the January 2000 hearing, and whether this
              affects the future course of the case; arising directly from this,
              the receipt and consideration by the Authority of further
              applications from the officers for support towards the trial.

9.2    The Authority must set its budget by 28 February. Ideally it needs to
       know the outcome of all three Hillsborough related issues referred to in
       paragraph 9.1 before taking its budget decision. It is still not certain
       that this will be the case. However, the judge will deliver his decision
       on 16 February and if the outcome of this is that the officers still wish to
       make applications to the Authority for further support, it would be
       possible to consider these at a special meeting in late February. That
       meeting would require extensive preparation and background briefing,
       as in order to avoid challenge the Authority would need to revisit all of
       the issues, including financial implications and the potential impact of
       tax. If the tax issue were not to be resolved before the meeting it
       would complicate the decision by introducing a major element of
       uncertainty on total costs.

       As soon as the judge's decision is known, and any ruling is received
       from Inland Revenue, it will be necessary to ask the Chairman to
       consider the arrangements for taking Hillsborough forward. This may
       require a special meeting or combining Hillsborough and budget issues
       in a single meeting at the end of February.

W J W ilkin so n                          Mike Hedges
Clerk and Treasurer                       C hief Constable

O fficers re spon sib le:    W J Wilkinson, Clerk and Treasurer
                             M V Oades, Assistant Clerk and Solicitor

B ackground papers used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection at the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, Barnsley.

O ther sources and references:

I ypists/MVOa<les/Reports/WP041951
                                                                 APPENDIX 1


                ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE HEARING
          20 DECEMBER 1999 LEEDS CROWN COURT BEFORE
               THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HOOPER

                                 SUMMARY


It was submitted on behalf of Mr Duckenfield that:

1      A statement made by Mr Duckenfield on or about 5 May 1989; and

2      The answers he gave to the Taylor Inquiry

were inadmissible in the forthcoming manslaughter trial on two grounds,
namely, public policy at common law, and by virtue of Section 78 of the Police
and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.

Public policy at common law

The argument on public policy at common law was rejected. Witnesses are
sometimes given an undertaking that their evidence to an Inquiry will not be
used to their prejudice in any criminal proceedings. There would be no need
for such an undertaking if it were the law that all witnesses who gave
evidence at public inquiries should not have the evidence given used against
them in subsequent proceedings.

PACE 1984

 The second ground is based on the proposition that, under s78 PACE 1984,
the evidence should not be allowed as it would have “an adverse effect on the
fairness of the proceedings". Under this ground, the court dealt separately
with the statement made on 5 May 1999 and the answers given before the
Taylor Inquiry.

I he statement of 5 May 1989

The couit felt that, taking into account Mr Duckenfield’s experience as a
senior police officer and that he knew what use could have been made of his
statement, there was no justification for concluding that its admission would
have an adverse effect on the fairness of the proceedings.

Evidence and Taylor

On the matter of the answers given to the Taylor Inquiry, it was contended
that this should be excluded on the grounds that Mr Duckenfield

      was not represented before the Inquiry,


                                                                                8
      was not made aware of allegations that were to be made against him
      and the evidence in support of them; and

       he did not receive a caution before giving his evidence.

In rejecting this submission, the court recognised

      once again that Mr Duckenfield was a very senior police officer

      that the Inquiry and Counsel for the Inquiry would have raised the issue
      of cautioning had it felt that any witnesses were laying themselves
      open to a criminal charge but did not feel it necessary to caution
      Mr Duckenfield; and

      that Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police Force (who it was
      accepted was not acting for Mr Duckenfield or any particular officers)
      did suggest to Mr Duckenfield that he ought to obtain legal advice but
      that despite this advice, Mr Duckenfield chose to go into the witness
      box (although it is not clear whether Mr Duckenfield sought
      independent advice himself).




                                                                               9
                                                                                                                              V '-     -
                        Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 283
                  racsirr.ilc 0113 245 9412. D ocum ent Exchonge 12051 Leads 24. E-mail R B M ^ a l k c r m o t r j i X c u J c _ . ./
                                                           Web: http'/wvAv.vialkermords.co.uk


         Mr D Harlock                                                                       Our               ref         REM/BQW/MURRAY
         Garretts
         Solicitors
         D X 26444                                                                         Your               ref       DK/KH
         LEEDS PARK SQUARE

                                                                                       26 January 2000                                     2   ?   JAN 2000

         Dear David

         A diington -v- Duckeafield and Murray

         I am advised by the shorthand writers that they now have a transcript available for the
         proceedings between 4 and 7 January. Whilst I have not been given a cost, 1 anticipate that it
         wiH be similar to the usual daily rate and the amount which -we paid for the December hearing.
         Since I do not think that the cost o f the transcript was specifically provided for in the terms
         agreed, but yet I know that you would like a copy o f the transcript would you please confirm
         to me that I am authorised t o obtain this transcript. There will not be any duplication o f costs
         because I wii! agree with Winckworth Sherwood that we will share the copy obtained.

         ^ours sincerely



         R B M anning
         PA R T N E R




           A Ih-I of the partners' namt-is npen lo inspection at the   address. P.ipilatedl v i/ie />r» j'ncicrv in the conduct of bvesrtittu Au.<>»cn




ZOO -J                                                                                           3HVQ0S /iiO I                                 SO:SI (MU-)00 . ‘K:VP-
                                                                              'h
[SYPA headed note-paper]

Mr D Duckenfield




Dear Mr Duckenfield

Committal Proceedings, Leeds Magistrates Court ("Leeds Proceedings") - Provision of
fu n d in g of your legal costs by South Yorkshire Police A uthority ("The Authority")

I write further to the Authority's meeting on Friday 21 May 1999.

As you are aware, the Authority decided to make a contribution to certain legal costs incurred
by you as a consequence of the Leeds Proceedings brought by Ms Adiington on behalf of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group. I attach a copy of the letter sent by our solicitors to
yours on 28 May 1999 detailing the Authority's decisions.

This letter sets out the terms on a formal basis upon which the Authority will make their
contribution to your legal costs incurred in relation to the Leeds' Proceedings from and
including 6 February 1999 until and including the last day of the committal hearing.

Accordingly, the Authority agrees to reimburse your legal costs and disbursements up to a
fixed am ount of £176,250 (inclusive of all disbursements and VAT) provided th a t:

1. no more than two fee-earners (and only if reasonable and proper for more than one to co
   so) mav attend meetings (save for internal review and briefing meetings ), consultations
   and conferences with counsel or court hearings ("fee-eamer " to include trainees);
2. fee-eamers will be charged out at a blended rate of £125.00 plus VAT per hour;
3. a partner should attend all court hearings, conferences and consultations with counsel and
   is tc supervise all correspondence relating to the Leeds Proceedings;
4. Leading counsel to be charged out at an hourly rate of £250.00 plus VAT per hour and
   Junior counsel to be charged out at a rate of £125.00 plus VAT per hour for time properly
   and reasonably spent undertaking work outside the scope of the brief fee;
5. ^uunsei are not to charge for daily meetings/consultations immediately before, auraig or
   after the committal hearing in addition to their brief fees;
6. Leading counsel's brief fee and refresher fee not to exceed £12,500 and £1,250 plus VAT
   respectively;
7. Junior counsel's brief fee and refresher fee not to exceed £ 6,250 and £ 625 plus VAT
   respectively;
8. Junior counsel to be used for all court hearings other than the committal hearing unless it is
   reasonable for Leading counsel to attend; and
9. Leading and Junior counsel may both attend the committal hearing.

Further, please note that:

1. Your legal team should comprise of a partner, an assistant solicitor, a legal executive and a
   consultant, Leading Counsel Mr William Clegg QC and Junior counsel, Mr Paul Isaacs
   (unless further legal support is reasonably required);

le-00100.doc
2. the legal costs m ust be monitored and reported to the Authority regularly;
3. the Authority's contribution to your legal costs and disbursements (including any costs
   m et on an interim basis) may be w ithdrawn a n d / or clawed back if you have misled the
   A uthority about your case, failed to provide adequate evidence of the costs or
   disbursements incurred or otherwise conducted your case unreasonably;
4. the A uthority reserves the right to have its contribution to your costs and disbursements
   reviewed by a legal costs draftsman appointed by the Authority and to pay such costs and
   disbursements only to the extent that the Authority is satisfied that they are reasonable and
   have been reasonably incurred;
5. You m ust use reasonable endeavours to recover costs and disbursements you have
   incurred from such other sources as may be available to you at the end of the proceedings
   including central funds and the prosecution; and any sums recovered shall be applied first
   in reduction or satisfaction of any contribution you have received from the Authority.
6. the A uthority will not be liable for any costs or disbursements that you incur over and
   above the limits imposed by this letter; and
7. nothing in this letter
   i. affects the liability you have to your solicitors in respect of their fees, or creates any
       liability for the Authority to your solicitors;
   ii. shall prevent the Authority from deducting from the contribution sums necessary to
       meet anv obligation it may have to account for PAYE a n d /o r national insurance
       contributions or creates on the Authority an obligation to make any farther payments
       that would enable you to receive the contribution net of all liability to pay tax.

Please sign the enclosed copy of this letter in order to confirm your agreement to its terms.

I look forward to receiving your response.

Yours sincerely



Bill Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer
South Yorkshire Police Authority

Enclosures (letter 2S May from Garretts to Winckivorth Shenvood)


Acceptance

I hereby accept the offer from South Yorkshire Police Authority to meet certain legal fees and
disbursements I incur, on the terms of this letter.




D Duckenfield                                                Date




le-00100.doc
  [SYPA headed note-paper]

 Mr B D Murray




 Dear Mr Murray

 Committal Proceedings, Leeds Magistrates Court ("Leeds Proceedings") - Provision of
 fu nd ing of your legal costs by South Yorkshire Police A uthority ("The Authority")

 I write further to the Authority's meeting on Friday 21 May 1999.

 As you 2 re aware, the Authority decided to make a contribution to certain legal costs incurred
 by you as a consequence of the Leeds Proceedings brought by Ms Adiington on behalf of the
 Hillsborough Family Support Group. 1 attach a copy of the letter sent by our solicitors to yours
 on 28 May 1999 detailing the Authority's decisions.

 This letter sets out the terms on a formal basis upon which the Authority will make their
 contribution to your legal costs incurred in relation to the Leeds' Proceedings from and
 including 6 February 1999 until and including the last day of the committal hearing.

 Accordingly, the Authority agrees to reimburse your legal costs and solicitor's disbursements
 up to a fixed am ount of £158,625 (inclusive of all disbursements and VAT) provided th a t:

1. no more than two fee-earners (and only if reasonable and proper for more than one to do
   so) may attend meetings (save for internal review and briefing meetings ), consultations
   and conferences with counsel or court hearings ("fee-eamer " to include trainees);
2. fee-eamers will be charged out at a blended rate of £125.00 plus VAT per hour;
3. a partner should attend all court hearings, conferences and consultations with counsel arid
   is to supervise all correspondence relating to the Leeds Proceedings;
4. Leading counsel to be charged out at an hourly rate of £250.00 plus VAT per hour and
   Junior counsel to be charged out at a rate of £125.00 plus VAT per hour for time properly
   and reasonably spent undertaking work outside the scope of the brief fee;
5. counsel are not to charge for daily meetings/consultations immediately before, during or
   diier the committal hearing in addition to their brief fees;
6. Leading counsel's brief fee and refresher fee not to exceed £12,500 and £1,250 plus VAT
   respectively;
7. Junior counsel's brief fee and refresher fee not to exceed £6,250 and £625 plus VAT
   respectively;
8. Junior counsel to be used for all court hearings other than the committal hearing unless it is
   reasonable for Leading counsel to attend; and
9. Leading and Junior counsel may both attend the committal hearing.

Further, please note that:

1. Your legal team should comprise of a partner, two trainees and a paralegal, Leading
   Counsel Mr Michael Harrison QC and Junior counsel, Mr Simon Myerson (unless further
   legal support is reasonably required);
2. the legal costs m ust be monitored and reported to the Authority regularly;

le-00102.doc
3. the Authority's contribution to your legal costs and disbursements (including any costs
   m et on an interim basis) may be w ithdraw n a n d /o r clawed back if you have misled the
   Authority about your case, failed to provide adequate evidence of the costs or
   disbursements incurred or otherwise conducted your case unreasonably;
4. the A uthority reserves the right to have its contribution to your costs and disbursements
   reviewed by a legal costs draftsman appointed by the Authority and to pay such costs or
   disbursements only to the extent that the Authority is satisfied that they are reasonable and
   have been reasonably incurred;
5. You m ust use reasonable endeavours to recover costs and disbursements you have
   incurred from such other sources as may be available to you at the end of the proceedings
   including central funds and the prosecution; and any sums recovered shall be applied first
   in reduction o r satisfaction of any contribution you have received from the Authority.
6. the Authority will not be liable for any costs or disbursements that you incur over and
   above the limits imposed by this letter; and
7. nothing in this letter
   i. affects the liability you have to your solicitors in respect of their fees, or creates any
      liability for the Authority to your solicitors;
   ii. shall prevent the Authority from deducting from the contribution sums necessary to
       meet any obligation it may have to account for PAYE a n d /o r national insurance
       contributions or creates on the Authority an obligation to make any further payments
       that w ould enable you to receive the contribution net of all liability to pay tax.

Please sign the enclosed copy of this letter in order to confirm your agreement to its terms.

I look forward to receiving your response.

Yours sincerely



Bill Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer
South Yorkshire Police Authority

Enclosures (letter 28 May Garretts to Walter Morris)



Acceptance

I hereby accept the offer from South Yorkshire Police Authority to meet certain legal fees and
disbursements I incur, on the terms of this letter.




B D Murray                                                   Date




le-00102.iioc
                                                                                       A-
                                 [ON SYPA HEADED NOTE PAPER]



 Mr D Duckenfield




Dear Mr Duckenfield

Criminal prosecutions, Leeds Crown Court ("the Proceedings") - Provision of funding of
vour legal costs by South Yorkshire Police A uthority ("the Authority")

I write further to the Authority's meeting on Friday, 26 November 3999 and to my letter of [
                ] in relation to the funding approved by the A uthority on 21 May 1999.

As you are aware, the Authority decided to make a contribution towards the costs of the
following applications you have made in the Proceedings ("the applications"):

1       Your application to exclude the testimony you gave to the Taylor Inquiry from being
        adduced at the trial of the proceedings. This application is due to be heard on 20
        December and is estimated to last for 3 days; and

2       Your further application to have the proceedings struck out as an abuse of process. This
        application is due to commence on 4 January 2000 and is estimated to last 4 or 5 days.

I attach a copy of the letter sent by our solicitors to yours on [10 December] 1999 detailing the
Authority's decision.

This letter sets out the terms on a formal basis on which the Authority will make their
contribution to your legal costs incurred in relation to the applications. I should point out that
the resolutions do not provide for the costs that have been incurred since the end of the
committal proceedings except to the applications.

Accordingly, the Authority agrees to reimburse your legal costs and solicitors' disbursements
for the applications up to a fixed am ount of £131,600 (inclusive of all disbursements and VAT
but exclusive of reasonable travel and subsistence costs of your legal representatives) provided
that:

1. no more than two fee-eamers (and only if reasonable and proper for more than one to do
   so) may attend meetings (save for internal review and briefing meetings ), consultations
   and conferences with counsel or court hearings ("fee-eamer " to include trainees);
2. fee-eamers will be charged out at a blended rate of £125.00 plus VAT per hour;
3. a partner should attend all court hearings, conferences and consultations with counsel and
   is to supervise all correspondence relating to the applications;
4. Leading Counsel's fees of and incidental to the applications are to be a brief fee of £12,500
   plus VAT together with a daily refresher of £1,250 plus VAT. Junior Counsel's fees are to
   be a brief fee of £6,250 plus VAT w ith daily refreshers of £625 plus VAT.


Ie-00139.doc
5. counsel are not to charge for daily meetings/consultations immediately before, during or
   after the hearings on the applications;

Further, please note that:

1. Your legal team should comprise of a partner, an assistant solicitor, a legal executive and a
   consultant, Leading Counsel Mr William Clegg QC and Junior counsel, Mr Paul Isaacs
   (unless further legal support is reasonably required);
2. the legal costs m u st be monitored and reported to the Authority regularly;
3. the A uthority's contribution to your legal costs and disbursements (including any costs
   met on an interim basis) may be w ithdraw n a n d /o r clawed back if you have misled the
   Authority about your case, failed to provide adequate evidence of the costs or
   disbursements incurred or otherwise conducted your case unreasonably;
4. the Authority reserves the right to have its contribution to your costs and disbursements
   reviewed by a legal costs draftsman appointed by the Authority and to pay such costs and
   disbursements only to the extent that the Authority is satisfied that they are reasonable and
   have been reasonably incurred;
5. You m ust use reasonable endeavours to recover costs and disbursements you have
   incurred from such other sources as may be available to you at the end of the proceedings
   including central funds and the prosecution and any sums recovered shall be applied first
   in reduction or satisfaction of any contribution you have received from the Authority.
6. the Authority will not be liable for any costs or disbursements that you incur over and
   above the limits imposed by this letter; and
7. nothing in this letter
   i. affects the liability you have to your solicitors in respect of their fees, or creates any
      liability for the Authority to your solicitors;
   ii. shall prevent the Authority from deducting from the contribution sums necessary to
       meet any obligation it may have to deduct PAYE at source or creates on the Authority
       an obligation to make any further payments that would enable you to receive the
       contribution net of all liability to pay tax.


Yours sincerely



Bill Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer
South Yorkshire Police Authority

Enclosures (letter [10 December 1999] from Garretts to Wiuclavorth Slienvood)


Acceptance

I hereby accept the offer from South Yorkshire Police Authority to meet certain legal fees and
disbursements I incur, on the terms of this letter.




D Duckenfield                                          Date




le-00139.doc
                                 [ON SYPA HEADED NOTE PAPER]



 Mr B D M urray




Dear Mr M urray

Criminal prosecutions, Leeds Crown Court ("the Proceedings") - Provision of funding of
vour legal costs by South Yorkshire Police Authority ("the Authority")

I write further to the Authority's meeting on Friday, 26 November 1999 and to my letter of [
                ] in relation to the funding approved by the Authority on 21 May 1999.

As you are aware, the Authority decided to make a contribution towards the costs of the
following applications you have made in the Proceedings ("the applications"):

1       Your application to exclude the testimony you gave to the Taylor Inquiry from being
        adduced at the trial of the proceedings. This application is due to be heard on 20
        December and is estimated to last for 3 days; and

2       Your further application to have the proceedings struck out as an abuse of process. This
        application is due to commence on 4 January 2000 and is estimated to last 4 or 5 days.

I attach a copy of the letter sent by our solicitors to yours on [10 December] 1999 detailing the
Authority's decision.

This letter sets out the terms on a formal basis on w hich the Authority will make their
contribution to your legal costs incurred in relation to the applications. I should point out that
the resolutions do not provide for the costs that have been incurred since the end of the
committal proceedings except to the applications.

Accordingly, the Authority agrees to reimburse your legal costs and solicitors' disbursements
for the applications up to a fixed amount of £76,962.50 (inclusive of all disbursements and
VAT) provided that:

1. no more than two fee-eamers (and only if reasonable and proper for more than one to do
   so) may attend meetings (save for internal review and briefing m eetings), consultations
   and conferences with counsel or court hearings ("fee-eamer " to include trainees);
2. fee-eamers will be charged out at a blended rate of £125.00 plus VAT per hour;
3. a partner should attend all court hearings, conferences and consultations w ith counsel and
   is to supervise all correspondence relating to the applications;
4. Leading Counsel's fees of and incidental to the applications are to be a brief fee of £12,500
   plus VAT together w ith a daily refresher of £1,250 plus VAT. Junior Counsel's fees are to
   be a brief fee of £6,250 plus VAT w ith daily refreshers of £625 plus VAT;
5. counsel are not to charge for daily meetings/consultations immediately before, during or
   after the hearings on the applications.

Ie-00139b.doc
Further, please note that:

1. Your legal team should comprise of a partner, two trainees and a paralegal, Leading
   Counsel, Mr Michael Harrison QC and Junior Counsel, Mr Simon Myerson (unless further
   legal support is reasonably required);
2. the legal costs m ust be monitored and reported to the Authority regularly;
3. the Authority's contribution to your legal costs and disbursements (including any costs
   met on an interim basis) m ay be w ithdraw n a n d /o r clawed back if you have misled the
   Authority about your case, failed to provide adequate evidence of the costs or
   disbursements incurred or otherwise conducted your case unreasonably;
4. the Authority reserves the right to have its contribution to your costs and disbursements
   reviewed by a legal costs draftsman appointed by the Authority and to pay such costs and
   disbursements only to the extent that the Authority is satisfied that they are reasonable and
   have been reasonably incurred;
5. You m ust use reasonable endeavours to recover costs and disbursements you have
   incurred from such other sources as may be available to you at the end of the proceedings
   including central funds and the prosecution and any sums recovered shall be applied first
   in reduction or satisfaction of any contribution you have received from the Authority.
6. the Authority will not be liable foT any costs or disbursements that you incur over and
   above the limits imposed by this letter; and
7. nothing in this letter
   i. affects the liability you have to your solicitors in respect of their fees, or creates any
      liability for the Authority to your solicitors;
   ii. shall prevent the Authority from deducting from the contribution sums necessary to
       meet any obligation it may have to deduct PAYE at source or creates on the Authority
       an obligation to make any further payments that would enable you to receive the
       contribution net of all liability to pay tax.


Yours sincerely



Bill Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer
South Yorkshire Police Authority

Lnclosures (letter [10 December 1999] from Garretts to Walker Morris)


Acceptance

I hereby accept the offer from South Yorkshire Police Authority to m eet certain legal fees and
disbursements I incur, on the terms of this letter.



B D Murray                                            Date




le-O 0139b.doc
 IN THE SOUTH SEFTON MAGISTRATES
        COURT - CASE N O . 2270


          RE: ANN ADLINGTON
                   -v-
         BERNARD DEAN M URRAY
                  and
           DAVID DUCKENFIELD


Costs o f the Defendant Bernard Murray to be
taxed and paid out of Central Funds pursuant to
Defendant’s Costs Order dated 10 July 1998 -
Defendant not legally aided.


Defendant’s Solicitors:
Messrs. Walker Morris
Kings Court
12 King Street
LEEDS
LSI 2HL

REF: RBM /M T

Tel: 0113 283 2500

VAT Reg. No. 481 8022 50




The Defendant was a Senior Police Officer
involved with operational command o f the
Hillsborough Football Ground (along with his co­
accused David Duckenfield) on the day of what
has become known as the Hillsborough Disaster
on the 15 April 1989. Tbe events o f that day and
subsequent Public Enquiry received widespread
news coverage. This and later TV documentaries
and dramatisations were critical o f the Police
handling o f the ground control at the football
stadium on that day and o f the actions o f the two
Defendants in particular.




                     (1)
N




    The Defendant faced three charges brought by
    Ann Adlington on behalf of the Hillsborough
    Family Support Group and alleging two of
    unlawful killing and one of wilful neglect to
    perform a public duty.      This was a private
    prosecution brought as a result o f the DPP
    deciding there was no evidence to prosecute the
    Defendants coming out o f the Inquests and public
    enquiry.

    The charges were strenuously denied and
    representations were made to the Director of
    Public Prosecutions to take over conduct of the
    proceedings pursuant to Section 6(2) of the
    Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 and then to
    discontinue the proceedings pursuant to Section
    23(3) on the grounds o f their being insufficient
    evidence against the Defendant and / or that the
    proceedings would be contrary to the public
    interest. In addition, representations were made
    to the Court to effect that the summonses had been
    invalidly issued and should be quashed as the
    alleged offences took place out o f the jurisdiction
    o f this Court. There was a degree o f cooperation
    between the two Defendants and Solicitors as there
    was no conflict o f interest.

    Considerable legal research and consideration was
    carried out in what was clearly a complex an
    novel case, the outcome being of great importance
    not only to the private Prosecutors and the two
    Defendants but also being of considerable public
    media interest. In addition the numerous reports
    and inquiries and other articles relating were
    considered.     ft should be noted that these
    Solicitors made no reference to Counsel on any of
    the issues.

    Following telephone discussion and exchange of
    lengthy and detailed correspondence it was
    eventually agreed that the summonses should be
    withdrawn and the Defendants were granted an
    Order for their costs to be paid out o f Central
    Funds.




                         (2)
This matter was conducted by a Partner and
Senior Solicitor with Leeds City Centre practice
and who was assisted by and work was delegated
to Senior Litigation Assistants. The charge-out
rates agreed with the Client (ie the hourly expense
rate inclusive o f mark-up for care and conduct)
was £125.00 per hour for the fee earners
involved. Routine letters and telephone calls, all
o f which were dealt with by the Senior solicitor,
charged at l/10th o f the hourly rate ie £12.50
each. Travelling and waiting time by the Senior
Solicitor charged at £82.50 per hour which rate
excludes any mark-up for care and conduct.

All times indicated in the bill have been recorded
either on the file or computer time recording
system.


                PREPARATION.

  * = work carried out by Senior Litigation
                 Assistants


(i) The Defendant Client Mr Bernard Murray.

29.06.98 - Timed telephone attendance     18 mins

02.07.98 - Personal attendance     1 hour 42 mins

Total 2 hours                             £250.00
7 routine letters written                   87.50
1 routine telephone call                    12.50

                                          £350.00


(ii) The Private Prosecutors - Hillsborough
Support Group and Appointed Solicitors
Messrs. W atts Leather.

2 routine letters written                 £ 25.00




                     (3)
 (iii) The Merseyside Police.

 1 routine letter written                £ 12.50
 1 routine telephone call                  12.50

                                         £ 2 5 .0 0


 Civ) The South Yorkshire Police Authority.

2 routine letters written                £ 25.00


fv) The Director of Public Prosecutions.

 1 routine letter written                3 12.50


(vi) Messrs. Winckworth & Pemberton (Mr
Owston).

Solicitors Representing the Co-Defendant Mr
Duckenfield (and having previously represented
the South Yorkshire Police Authority).

Timed telephone attendances:-
29.06.98                                 18   mins
29.06.98                                 12   mins
01.07.98                                 12   mins
03.07.98                                 18   mins
10.07.98                                 12   mins
10.07.98                                 18   mins

Personal attendance and meeting
at their offices in London
on 09.09.93                     2 hours 15 mins

Total 3 hours 45 mins                   £468.75
5 routine letters written                 62.50
4 routine telephone calls                 50.00

                                        £581.25

09.07.98 - Return travel Leeds - London to
their offices for meeting - 6 hours 30 mins at
£82.50 per hour                          £536.25


                      (4)
Paid travelling expenses. ^


(vii) Crown Prosecution Service.

Timed telephone attendance
- 24 mins                                   £ 50.00
1 routine telephone call                      12.50

                                            £ 62.50


(ViiD Assistant C hief Constable          o f South
Yorkshire Police. Mr Davies.

Timed telephone attendance:
29.06.98 - 12 mins                          £ 2 5 .0 0
3 routine letters written                      37.50
2 routine telephone calls                     25.00

                                            £ 87.50


(be) Sefton M agistrates Court and Clerk.

2 routine letters written                   £ 25.00
2 routine telephone calls                     25.00

                                            £ 5 0 .0 0


(x) Consideration o f Documents and Law.
Preparation and Dictation o f NoG-routiiifc
Letters and Consideration o f Non-routine
Letters Received.

(* Work carried     out     by   Senior   Litigation
Assistants)

29.06.98 - Preliminary consideration regarding
the powers and duties which the Director o f
Public Prosecutions has to take over conduct o f
prosecutions which had been commenced as
private prosecutions and preparing memo
concerning this for consideration by Senior
Solicitor                       1 hour 00 mins*


                    (5)
30.06.98 - Further consideration o f the above by
reference to case law           1 hour 00 mins*

30.06.98 - Senior Solicitor considering the
above information assimilated by the Senior
Litigation Assistants and considering relevant
sections o f Archbold, references from Hansard
and reviewing Lord Justice Stewart Smith
Report with regard to the Hansard references
                                3 hours 00 mins

29.06.98 - Preparation o f dictation o f non-routine
letters to Client, Assistant C h ie f Constable o f
South Yorkshire Police and to Mr Duckenfield’s
Solicitors                                  30 mins

30.06.98 - Considering in detail the Lord Justice
Stewart Smith       Report on the scrutiny of
evidence on the enquiry into the Hillsborough
Disaster                         4 hours 30 mins

01.07.98 - Preparing and dictating long letters to
Client and to Mr Duckenfield’s Solicitors
                                          30 mins

01.07.98 - Further consideration o f Lord Justice
Stewart Smith’s       Report on the scrutiny o f
evidence concerning the Hillsborough Disaster
and making relevant notes thereon in preparation
for meeting with Client the following day and in
anticipation o f having write letters to the Court
and Director o f Public Prosecutions
                                   2 hours 00 rntn.-*

02.07.98 - Considering 2 letters received from
Mr Duckenfield’s Solicitors being copies of
letters which they had submitted to the Court
and to the Director o f Public Prosecutions
                                          24 mins

02.07.98 - Preparing and dictating non-routine
letters to the Court, Director o f Public
Prosecutions, Mr Duckenfield’s Solicitors, South
Yorkshire and Merseyside Police and Client
                                        42 mins




                     (6)
02.07.98 - Considering the criteria relating to the
acceptance o f information and for the issue o f a
summons by Justices Clerk or Magistrate and
matters to be borne in mind if summons was
quashed and application made to another Court for
summons to be issued and with regard to the DPP
taking over the proceedings and discontinuing,
considering relevant section o f Justices Manual
and Holsbury Statutes and decided cases
                                  1 hour 30 mins

02.07.98 - Following interview with Client,
preparation and dictation of 2 long and complex
letters to the Clerk to the Justices o f South Sefton
Magistrates Court and to the DPP with regard to
the arguments concerning the summonses being
invalidly issued and request for the DPP to take
over the prosecution o f the cases and to
discontinue                         2 hours 24 mins

03.07.98 - Considering letter from prosecution
Solicitors together with a copy o f their 4 page
letter addressed to Mr Duckenfield’s Solicitors
with counter arguments relating to the validity of
the proceedings and relevant law         30 mins

05.07.98 - Further reconsideration o f letter from
Prosecution Solicitors in order to decide upon
appropriate response to them and to submit
further argument to the Clerk to the Justices and
preparing and dictating letters to the Prosecution
Solicitors, Mr Duckenfield’s Solicitors, the
Clerk to the Justices, Client, Crown Prosecution
Service and DPP                    1 hour 30 mins

02.07.98, 08.07.98 and 09.07.98 - Further
research and consideration o f law and reported
cases and notes thereon to Senior Solicitor
regarding the issue o f the validity o f the
summonses and the ability o f the DPP to take
over the proceedings             1 hour 30 mins*
                                 1 hour 30 mins*
                                        54 mins*




                     (7)
08.07.98 - Considering letter received from Mr
Duckenfield’s Solicitors together with copy of
their letter addressed to the Prosecution Solicitors
and o f a note o f their conversation with the Clerk
to the Justices                             30 mins

10.07.98 - Dictating file note re: attendance on
Mr Duckenfield’s Solicitors to record details of
the major points discussed and arising at the
meeting held on 9 July                  24 mins

Total time by Senior Solicitor
- 18 hours 24 mins                        £2300.00

Total time by Senior Litigation
Assistant - 5 hours 54 mins                £531.00


TOTALS

30   hours 39 mins at £125.00             £3831.25
6    hours 30 mins travel at £82.50         536.25
23   routine letters written at £12.50      287.50
11    routine telephone calls at £12.50     137.50

                                          £4792.50




                       (8)
                                                                               A      ik
                                                                         M     e r s e y s id e

                                                    M    a g is t r a t e s ’ Co u r t s
                                                                    S    outh        Seftom

                                                                    COORT BUILDINGS
                                                                    MERTON ROAD
                                                                    BOOILE
                                                                    LIVERPOOL
                                                                    L20 3BJ

                                                                     TELEPHCNE-Ol51-933-6999

  Oar Ref: SP/JW

  \         Ref: RSM/BQW/fSJHEAY

                                                                     15th December, 1999

  Dear Sirs

  Your Cxj.er.t : Bernard i^urray

  Further to your letter regarding the above I note your observations.
  Ycur assessment of the deduction is correct and thus the anounc payable
  to yourselves is £2475.

  My opinion regarding the jurisdictional point remains unchanged, therefore
  if you vish to accept this sun in s& itlan-ient of your claim please contact me as scon
  as p o s s i b l e .


  Yours Faithfully




  Walker Morris Solicitors
  Kings Court
  12 King Street
  Leeds
  LSI 2HL




S C O ' d
                                                     3 H V n D S   , U   3 0     !
                                                                                              £ £ : 9 I   I ' M l J O Q / N Y P - i
                                                                   W A L K E R
                                                                   M O R R I S
                                                                            S o lie ite rs


                      Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2KL. Telephone 0113 283 2500.
                Focsirr.ilr C<i 13 245 9412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 2A- E-mail RBM@walkermorris.co.uk
                                                 Web: http//www.walkermorris.Ci?.uk


         D Harlock                                                                       Our ref          RBM/BQW/MURR a Y
         Garretts
         Solicitors
         DX 26444                                                                        Your ref         DH.KH
         LEEDS PARK SQUARE

                                                                                             12 January 2000


         Dear David




         I had jeesived a r.ote direct front B ill consequent upon the payment and as a matter of
         courtesy i attach a copy o f the letter that I have sent to him for I am sure that the information
         w:ii also be helpful to you. I attach a copy o f the letter that I have received from South Sefton
         Magistrates’ Court. We now have an impasse and a decision needs to be made by the
         Authority. Either the Authority must authorise me to challenge this decision by way o f an
         applicaton fox Judicial Review or the Authority must make up the difference between that
         which has been approved by the South Seaton Court and the total amount o f the bill.

         I am worried about the costs o f a Judicial Review compared to the amount at issue. M y Law
         Costs Draftsman seems confident o f a successful outcome as does Malcolm Goodwin who is
         the in-house Costs Draftsman at Winckworth Sherwood. I f we were to be successful then we
         would expect an Order for Costs against South Sefton. The Authority may prefer the certainty
         c f knowing that there is a relatively mcdest difference between that authorised and that
         claimed and I would understand this if for purely economic reasons they made that decision.

         Please would you try to obtain a decision for me as quickly as possible because although there
         is this three-month time limit for lodging a Judicial Review Application, there is also the
         secondary rS-x that it has to be as cuickly as possible, and in any event not longer than three
         months.

         Y ours sincerely



         R B M a n n itg
         PARTNER
         Enc




           A h r a/it* [n rrc n ' ikihk.kit cptn Ic ntpeahn at Iht ohrrt aclo'trf R ep d lu l   ihe lu* Stidtiy hi   ennt/vf eflnitnu n i fimlnen
                                                       H:WfCIUM.ys:rJ!BWR£mH2MrruyIV.Joe

tOO 'd                                                                                             3MDS AIIO 1                           i 2 ;9i (nmioo.'KVf
    W IN C K W O R TH SHERW OOD
                                                                                                             35 Grent Peter Street
    SOLICITORS ANO PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS                                                                      Westminster
                                                                                                             London S W lP 3LR

Our ref:             M G /24332/1/SBE                                                                        Telephone: 0207 593 5000
Your ref:            DH/KH
                                                                                                             Fax: 0207 593 5099
                                                                   2 &JAN 2000                               DX: 2312 V IC TO R IA

D Harlock Esq                                                                                                D irect Line:                   0207 593 5142
                                                                                                             D irect Fax:                    0207 593 5199
Garratts
DX 26444 LEEDS PARK SQUARE                                                                                   Email: m good w in @ w in ck w orth s.co.u k

1 City Square
Leeds LSI 2AL                                                                                                25 January 2000


Dear Mr. Harlock

Adlington -v- Duckenfield and Murray

As discussed earlier today, I enclose a copy of the letter from South Sefton Magistrates’
Court finalising the assessed amount o f our client’s costs.

Our client’s claim was for £8,716.63 and after representations the court has assessed the
costs at the figure of £2,320.67. The primary reason for such a large reduction was that
only the costs relating to the jurisdiction issue were allowed.

If we do not accept the assessed amount we will have to seek leave for a Judicial Review. It
is understood that we can seek to review the reasons given by the Clerk for items being
disallowed, but the JR will not review the actual taxed bill. In a letter dated 19 August 1999
the Acting Clerk stated that only costs relating to the 'narrow jurisdiction matter' had been
allowed. For that reason all Counsel fees were disallowed, as Counsel was not required to
deal with the jurisdiction point. We need to prove that this decision was incorrect. If we
are successful the bill will be re-assessed by the Clerk taking into account costs to be
allowed following the Judicial Review.

Before deciding to seek leave for Judicial Review it is important for us to clarify the merits
o f our claim. For this reason we wish to seek Counsel's advice. There are a number o f
barristers specialising in costs, and Mr. Nick Bacon is our preferred choice.

We ask that the above details are presented to the Police Authority so that they made decide
to either challenge the decision o f the Magistrates by Judicial Review, or agree to pay the
difference between the assessed costs and the total amount o f the bill o f costs.

We will be grateful for a speedy decision as an application for Judicial Review will need to
be made as soon as possible and no later than 3 months after the South Sefton Magistrates’
decision.




PA RTN ERS                     S T U P I IE N W IC C S        R O G E R FITTON        T I M W A TT S         The firm is a m em ber o    f          .
NICHOLAS O W S T O N            H U G H M A C D O U CA l.D    PAUL I R V I N G        JO H N HUDSON          an international netw ork
B R IA N H O O D               J O H N RE ES                  RONA LD FARRANTS        R A N J E E V RAI      The firm is regulated by The Law Society
P A UL M O R R I S              PGT KR WILLIAMS               R O U L R T BO TK A I   CONSULTANTS            in the conduct o f investment business.
M IC U A L L T H A T C H L R   ANDREW MURRAY                  SIM ON EASTW OOD        FRANK RO BSO N O M ;
A L IS O N C O R L O V         C H R I S T O P I t L R VINU   NAOM I C O O O l;       C r . O R C E BULL*    •Non-xoliciutr tax comvfia/it fax
                                                                                                             comvltu/it tax consultant tax consultant
!.u*26.U
Continued

Please call me if you have any queries or wish to discuss.




                                              2
L0026.0
                                                                       ^ f   ja   *'

                                                          AA
                                                         AAA
Your Ref:                                            M ERSEYSIDE

0ur P ,f=    SP/ J4                           M AGISTRATES’ c o u r t s
                                                    S o u t h Se f t o n




13th January 2000




Dear Sir,

P.e:   Arlington -v- Duckenfield and Murray

I refer to your recent letter dated the 23rd December, 1999 in respect
of the above nansd case.

I am not prepared to reconsider the position further and therefore in
accordance with ny assessment of zhe V9~h .August, 1999 please find
enclosed a cheque in the sum of £2320.57.

If I can be of further assistance do not hesitate to contact me.




Clerk to the Justices




Messrs Winckworth & Sherwood
35 Westminster Street
Westminster
LONDON
SW1P 3LP.
                                                                                                 G arretts

                                                                                                    /•/.
                                                                                                   /             1 City Square
                                                                                                                 Leeds LSI 2AL
                                                                                                                 0113 207 9000 Telephone
19 January 2000                                                                                              6   0113 207 9001 Facsimile
                                                                                                                 DX 26444 Lec-ds Park Square
                                                                                                      ,0 .
Mr G Falconer
Bradford M idland Tax District Office                                                                            Direct line   0113 399 6154
Selectapost 3
Centenary C ourt                                                                                                 Our ref       100/3N /073/S3P/G F
1 St Blaise Way
BRADFORD BD1 4XY                                                                                                 Your ref      APB/LCW




Dear Mr Falconer

 South Y orkshire Police A uthority

I wrote to your colleague Mr Cockroft at Bradford Valley View tax office on 27 September 1999 on
behalf of the South Yorkshire Police Authority, in connection w ith paym ents to be made to two
retired police officers facing private prosecution. You replied by letter on 19 October 1999
advising that the proposed payments were taxable under either Section 19 ICTA or Section 596A
ICTA.

I am w riting to advise you that on 23 December 1999 the A uthority made a paym ent to Walker
Morris Solicitors, acting for former officer Murray, of £58,125 plus £10,172 in respect of VAT, in
settlem ent of their outstanding fees. The Authority had previously made a paym ent on account to
W alker Morris of £71,875 plus £12,578 in respect of VAT. Consequently, the total of the sums paid
to Walker M orris is currently £130,000 plus £22,750 in respect of VAT.

I am also w riting to confirm that the Authority do not accept that the paym ents which have been
made are taxable and, consequently, do not propose to account for PAYE or National Insurance in
respect of those payments.

Since your letter we have taken advice from Mr William Massey QC. Mr Massey was very firmly
of the view that the paym ents w ere not w ithin the scope of either Section 19 or Section 596A ICTA.
In the interests of trying to convince you of the merits of our case I have taken the unusual step of
enclosing a copy of Mr M assey's opinion.

In the light of this I w ould be grateful if you could confirm that you are now able to accept our
analysis. Alternatively, could you please advise me w hat further inform ation you now require in
order to complete your analysis.



                                                                                                                       Ottico in: i       ‘•
                                                                                                                       AwkuUi*firmin Scutbr.d: .

j : \ g a t T e t t \ s o u t h y o r k s h i r e p o l i c e \ l e - 0 0 1 5 2 .d o c \ a p b
                                                                                 G arretts

Mr G Falconer                                                                       -2 -     19 January 2000




Given its im portant implications, I w ould be grateful if I could receive your determ ination on this
issue as soon as possible.

Yours sincerely




Antony Betts

Enc

cc W Wilkinson, South Yorkshire Police Authority
   M Oades, South Yorkshire Police Authority
   D Harlock, Garretts




j :\ g a r r e tt \s o u t h Y orkshire p o lic e \le -0 0 1 5 2 .d o c \a p b
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                                              17
4 February 2000

Supplemental Joint Report of the Clerk and Treasurer and Chief
Constable


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS


1       Purpose of the Report

        To bring to members attention the following correspondence which
        relates to Agenda Item 17.

        i)     Letter from Garretts to Ms A Adlington dated 31 January 2000.

        ii)    Letter from Mr P Hammond, Vice Chairman/Secretary of
               Hillsborough Family Support Group to Garretts received
               1 February 2000.

        iii)   Affidavit sworn on the 5 March 1999 by Dennis Luty, Clerk to the
               Justices at the South Sefton Magistrates’ Court.

        iv)    Fax from Walker Morris to Garretts, dated 1 February 2000.

       v)      Letter from Garretts to Walker Morris dated 1 February 2000.




W J Wilkinson                             M Hedges
Clerk and Treasurer                       Chief Constable

Officer responsible:          Miss M V Oades, Assistant Clerk and Solicitor
                              South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
                              Tel: 01226 772856

Background papers used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection at the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, Barnsley.

Other sources and references:

Typists/MVOades/Reports/WP041992



      NOT FOR PUBLICATION AS IT CONTAINS EXEMPT INFORMATION
      WITHIN PARAGRAPH 1, 5 & 12 OF SCHEDULE 12A OF THE LOCAL
      GOVERNMENT ACT 1972 AS AMENDED



                                                                               1
                                                            G arretts


                                                                                                                            1 City Square
                                                                                                                            Leeds LSI 2AL
       T       _Anr.                                                                                                        0113 207 90CCTelephone
    31 January 2000                                                                                                         OIJ.3 207 9001 Facsimile
                                                                                                                            DX 26444 Leeds Park Square
    Ms A Adlington
    H illsborough Family Support Group                                                                                  Direct line 0113 3996136
    1st Floor Central Buildings
    41 North John Street                                                                                                Our ref         DH/KH
    Liverpool
    L26RR




                                                                             Bv fax only


    Dear Ann

    Hillsborough - Funding

    You may recaL! that on 21 May 1999, the Authority resolved, among other things to, make no
    decision on the former officers' application for reimbursement of legal costs and disbursements in
    the South Sefton Magistrates Court in the light of the possible award of such costs from central
    funds.

    As it happens, the Chief Clerk at South Sefton Magistrates Court accepted that costs of the aborted
    prosecution should be met out of central funds. These costs have been assessed and paid, but the
    former officers wish to challenge the Chief Clerk's assessment or seek a payment from the
    Authority which would obviate the need for a challenge.

    The Authority proposes to consider this matter at its meeting on 4 February 2000.

    If you would like to make any written representations on this matter, would you kindly let me
    have those representations by close of business on Tuesday, 1 February 2000. It is not intended to
    invite oral representations.

    Kind regards


    Yours sincerely



    David Harlock
P   c.c. K B Manning                                    Walker Morris
    c.c. 5 Eastwood                                     Winckworth Sherwood

     Gsrtctts if i rruinlur cf .he Andersen MJjfUIwUc         A !:'■! of iliu r.ai'.'vs or ifcc partners i-. ia                   Officcs >«>:.Him4j»^ham Csmbri»i{rc
     inio'Mtiona! network i fi-w (inns,                       ir.spccctor. nt lh<; .shove (ifUcc.Thc partner*                     London Mancmjric.' Reading
                                                              cilHtirv)i:dlors er registered fcn-ip- buyers.                      Associate Hrm lit Scodiml: Dundx* to Witem CS

    j:\fiirntil\touft jciri*hlf# pcUcc\k*0£lt2.doc\AA


                                                                                                 3 H V ilD S      . U i O     I              i £ : 9 1   ( M   H   J O   O   . W   M   S
                                          ^   +01512361936                .01/02   '0 0 1 6 . 4 4 5   :0 2 /0 5
H F S S




                            Hillsborough Family Support G roup




   Your Ref: DH/KH


    Garretts
    i City Square
    Leech LSI

    Dear Sir

   HiMPEPagtiEuotiiag

   Your ietter o f 31 *' January addressed to Ann Adlington has been passed to me for
   considerat ion. In view of the ridiculously tight timescale which you have imposed, these
   representations wil! of necessity be brief

   Firstly, would you please confirm that the affidavit sworn by Dennis Luty on 5th March 1999
   will be circulated to members in advance o f the meeting on 4* February. Particular regard
   should be had to his concern expressed at paragraph 8 as to the [surprising high level of costs
   claimed] bearing in mind that the matter was disposed of by way of correspondence No more
   than 6 letters were exchanged on this aspect o f the case.

 - Members’ attention should also be drawn to the role of the Clerk to the Court in determining
   costs to be paid from Central Funds in each particular case It is well established that the
   Clerk will base his decision using the ‘'reasonableness” criteria. That is, what would &
   reasonable man of reasonable means be prepared to pay for legal representation if he had to
   fork out the funds himseif? Obviously, in the present case, the Clerk has exercised the
   Wednesbury principle and decided that no reasonable man of reasonable means would be
   prepared to pay the amounts currently claimed by Walker Morris and Winckworth Sherwood.
   This comes as no surprise to us given that those 2 firms are currently seeking £80,000 from
   Ann Arlington for a judicial review lasting a mere one and a halfdays.

   The Clerk to the Court in exercising his discretion in the present case has quite simply decided
   that to pay the costs claimed by the Defence team in foil, would be an unreasonable use of
   taxpayers money which would be open to legal challenge. For police authority members to
   even consider bridging the gap by using South Yorkshire charge payers funds, is too ludicrous
   for words, H o w much more can South Yorkshire charge payers be expected to cough up?
   Such considerations will not of course bother the defendants or their lawyers as none of them
   live in South Yorkshire



                     Phone 0151 236 1919. Fas C151 236 1936. E Matt info@hfig.org
                    1" Floor Central Buildings 41 North John S tr^ t T iv^rnnA l T 1 < t»B
                                                                 3H¥flOS AiiO I            SO-i! M l 00
  100 d
                                           ^   +01512361956                       0 1/0 2    'CO 1 6 :4 4 0   :0 3 /0 5
H r 5 G




   At least one of the defence teams has recently acknowledged that in having the proceedings
   aborted in South Sefton, they did so with the expectation that proceedings would be instituted
   elsewhere. One therefore has to ask what benefit accrued to South Yorkshire residents by
   employing what can oniy be described as a delaying tactic? This case is littered with examples
   o f such conduct with the only beneficiaries of course being the fat cat lawyers.

   Please acknowledge rcceipt of this letter an confirm that it will be distributed to the Authority
   members.


   Yours faithfully
          i_____________ L




  Phil Hammond
  Vice Chairman/Secretary




                                                 -2-




£00'd                                                            3 H V Q 0 S   A 1 I 0   I         8S-01 (03.4) 0 0 . '83d
                                          © ♦0 1 5 1 2 3 6 1 9 3 6                      0 1/0 2   *00 1 6 : 4 4 9 _ . ; 0 4 / 05„
H f S G




          in the High Court of Justice                                                            Caae   CO/582/1999
          Queens Bench DivUlon




                  IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW



                              Regina -v- South Yorkshire Police Authority


                                               and Ann Ad ling ton


                           Ex p arte Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police




           !, Dennis Luty, m ake calh and say as follows

           1.     I am a Solicitor or Lhe Supreme Court currently employed as the Clerk lo the Justices
                  at the South Seflon Magistrates' Court, Merseyside.

           2.     On the 24'* Ju re, 1998 Informations were laid before this Court by Ann Adlir.glon
                  alleging that David Duekenfield and Bernard Murray had committed offences of'
                   manslaughter, wilful neglect (o perform a public duty and (in relatJon to Duckenileld
                   aione) doing an act tending / Intending to pervert justice.

           3.      Summonses w ere issued against the defendants which were returnable on the ! “’*
                   July, 1998 at 10.00 a.m,

           4.     Following the Issue of the summonses, W inckwcrth and Pemberton (Solicitors) and
                   W alker, Morris (Solicitors) who represented the defendants, contacted me both by
                   letter and by telephone asserting that the Court had no Jurisdiction (o deal with these
                   matters. 1was also contacted by the Informant, Ann Adlington by letter and telephone
                   in relation to this issue.                                                     '

           5       I took the view that the South Seflon Court had jurisdiction to deal with these offences
                   but there was an argumeni that the summonses were ineffective unless the defendants
                   submitted to the jurisdiction of this Court. Accordingly, after further correspondence
                   and telephone discussion with ail parties, it was agreed (hat the proceedings should
                   be brought forward to the 10* July and that the Informant would apply for them to be
                   withdrawn,

           6.      On the 10'*' July in the absence cf all parties, proceedings w are withdrawn and the
                   C o u r made an order for the defendants' costs lo be laxeu and paid from central funds
                   in accordance with Section IS of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985,



                                                        0575

m   'A                                                               3 H Y A 0 S   A 1 I 0   I           90=11 (Q3M)00 , '83d-cO
   H F S G                             5    +01512361936                 ■01/02    '0 0 1 6 : 4 5 , 3 :0 5 /0 5




             ?.        I was aware that proceedings were re-commenced In the Leeds Magistrates’ Court
                       later that montJv

             8.        The defendants' solicitors each submiited their claims for costs in SeD!ember't998, t
                       was extremely surprised at-the levet or cosu which were being claimed, particularly
                       In view of ihe fact that neither of the defendants or their solicitors had actually
                       appeared before the Court in relation tc this .natter, in accordance with my normal
                       p raclke I requested that the solicitors should supply to me their full Hies of papers
                       applying the provisions of Regulation 6(3) of the Costs in Criminal Cases (General)
                        Regulations 1986.

             9.        Beth solicitors submitted their full fiies of papers to m e and w hen i pefussri tnose
                       documents I discovered a clear indication, within them that the South Yorkshire Police
                        Authority had agreed to pay the defendants' costs in relation to this matter. I therefore
                        communicated with both solicitors suggesting that as the defendants themselves had
                        not incurred costs, they were not entitled ic be reimbursed. I drew alten'icr. to Ihe
                        case c.r R. u, Miller (Raymond) and a n o th e r 1933 3 All ER 136.


              10.      Cnee again, there was further correspondence in relation to this matter, me s.oitc!iors
                        arguing that their clients had in fact incurred costs in accordance with the rajc olMHler
                        and that I should therefore undertake an appropriate taxation.

              11.      Early last m onth,! became aware thai an issue nad arisen between the Chief Constable
                        cf the South Yorkshire Police and the South Yorkshire Police Authority In relation to
                        funding in this matter, i also became aware that my decision In relation tc taxation
                        may be subject to judicial review i f ! declined tc pay the defendants' ccsls.


              12.      O r the i r * February I wro;e to both solicitors advising them of mv provisional
                        conclusion that the defendants had r.ot themselves incurred costs, i drew attention tc
                        ‘he fact that 1 was aware of the pending judicial review in relation to the Pcfice
                        Authority decision and advisee that 1 wouic await the outcome of thathesnns before
                        I m ade a final decision.




              Sworn by Dennis Luty




              at Soolie


              this ^    cay of March, 1999



              Before me



              Solicitor / Commissioner for Oaths
                                                0576



0 0 'd
                                                         SWflOS MIQ I                ^o • n   (03M) 00 . 'SHd-cC
01-F E B -2000     11:2.3        FROM         U1PLKSR MORRIS                               TO    2079001                                P. s u e s
                                                       W A L K E R
                                                       M O R R I S
                                                           So 11 e t l o r t


                    Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 283 2500.
                 Facsimile 0113 245 9412. Document Bxchaage 12051 Leeds 24. E-mail rt3in@walkcrmonis.co.uk
                                                  W«b<. hhp//«ww.walk«naoms,eo.uk

                                        FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION

       To:                  David Harlock                              From:               R.B. Manning

       Atj                  Garretts                                   Date:               1 February 2000

       Fax:                 0113 207 9001                              Page 1 of

       Telephone:           0113 207 9000                              Matter IVs.         MUR.313-1

                                                         PrlvHemd Cenfldentui
       This feeslmlle mey cantata tefbrmsilon Out U privileged, coafidealtal or otfwiwt* ptMccmd from <fi*cteiwe. It muti net b« met)
       by. or Is sontems copied or dbelcttd to, petOM other thui the tddreues. If you h*ve received this facsimile Jn error pleas*
       natlfV u* Immediately by telephone it tbc number Itaed tb«ve tM return It to cf by nill. We will relmburae portage.


       Hilla boroagU - Funding

       Dear Sirs

       Thank you for your letter of the 31” January. We have to aebnit great surprise that you have felt it
       appropriate to invite HFSO to make further comments on the funding issue.

      We have always felt that it was inappropriate for them to have any part in this argument, and th?y
      have been judicially criticised in the Divisional Court when Lord Justic Laws effectively asked Alan
      Jones, Q.C, "what are you doing here”.

      It has always, in our view, been unconscionable that the Prosecutor should try interfere with the
      fuadiag of the Defendant being prosecuted.

      Turning to the discreet issue, the short position is as follows.

      This Prosecutor issued proceedings ill-advisedly in So*dth Sefton. They ought to have known that the
      South Sefton Court had no jurisdiction because neither of the Defendants lived in that Division, nor
      had the circumstances of the alleged offence occurred within the Division.

      The Defendants therefore having sought legal advice did not attend to answer the Summons and an
      argument was successful mounted which caused the Summons to be withdrawn with an Order for
      costs out of Central Funds.

      The whole fault lay with the Prosecutor and with the Clerk to the Justices at South Sefton for
      accepting the information without making a proper enquiry.

      The one person who can said to be blameless in all o f this, is our Client (and Mr Duckenfield).

      This Firm carried out work at very short notice of a technical nature, and with considerable expertise
      and we were successful.

      We believe that to protect his own neck the Clerk at South Sefton is trying to reduce the damage to
      himself. He is accountable to the Lord Chancellor for moneys paid out of Central Funds.




         Alist      p v n M nmer is opt,, »         «<*««»»" «*>«* Ktgulmcb «>'         Soa,v '« M? cwducf             butt«u*
                                         WWalka^*wWP\CWM..VA'Ml3M'iRrvEW2taunty$5.dee

                                                                                  3»V-'lOS /JiO I                     81 ’Si (Q3UI00 . 83J-
      01-FES-2& 03    ii'U      FROM    IdALKER MORRIS                       TO 2079001                           P .02/02

                                                                                                      David Hertock
                                                                                                      1 February 2000
                                                                                                               Page 2



            We had our file sent to an independent Law Cost Draftsman. He was the one who prepared the
            dctai) of all of the work that had been done, and the cost of that time spent and work done. The bill
            was submitted to the Clerk at South Sefton. We have no doubt Chat applying the rules of self
            protection, that Clerk firstly tried to find some technical basis upon which be could refuse p a y m e n t
            altogether, and then secondly having had to concede that he was wrong in law, has sought arbitrarily
            to cm down the amount that is payable.

            Our Law Cost Draftsman (and we believe the Draftsman employed by Winckworth Sherwood) is
            convinced that were we to appeal against the South Sefton determination we would succeed.
            Howsyer there is a risk element and there is a substantial further liability for costs.

            Frankly we would like to take this Clerk to appeal and put egg on his face when he loses, On the
            other hand we understand that the Authority may very well feel that notwithstanding the sharing of
            these same thoughts, they are not prepared to risk further moneys and that a pragmatic view has to
            be taken. That view would see the Authority being responsible for the difference between the costs
            that South Sefton are prepared to pay and the actual costs incurred. Ycu have those figures.

            What would be totally unfair is for Mr. Muitay to have to meet costs ia circumstccces where one
            can truly say that this was in no way his fault.

            In relation to the costs claimed by the D.P.P. no bill has been sent to this Office and we believe that
            the bill delivered to Winckworth Sherwood represents the costs of the D.P.P. The Authority has
            already resolved that it would meet those costs, and therefore we believe that it would be in order to
            resolve to do so.

            V &irs faithfully


            iv.». i^annmg
            Partner             ✓




£00   ‘i
                                                                        3m bs w o       i           si - si (gI)'oo'", rm
                                                                               G a r r etts

  i*rivileg«v,Confidertial InformiHon                                                                      1 City Square
  may be contained in this facsimile and is intended only for the use of the addressee. If                 Leeds
  you are not the addressee, or the person responsible for delivering it to the person                     IS12AL
  addressed, you may not copy or deliver this to anyone else. If you receive this facsimile
  by jrdstalcs. please notify us Immediately by telephone. Thank you.
                                                                                                           0113 207 9000 Telephone
                                                                                                           0113 207 9001 Facsimile (Centra!)
                                                                                                           DX 26444 Leeds Park Square

                                                                                                           1 February 2000


  To:                              R B Manning Esq - Walker Morris                                         fa x no:        0113 245 9412
  From:                            David Haxlock
  Subject:                         Hillsborough Funding
  Pages to follows                                     0
  If unreadable please contact Karen Hargreaves on 01133996133___________ ___________________________

  Thank you for your fax of this morning which I will pass on to the Authority.

  So far as concerns the invitation to HFSG, I note your comments, However, they were at the
  meeting on 21 May when this matter was first considered. They might contend a legitimate
  expectation that they would be consulted on any further consideration on the matters and generally
  on the funding issue.

  So far as concerns the DPPs costs, the resolution of 21 May did not provide for these costs to be
  paid. The Authority resolved to make no decision on them.

  Kind regards




  David Harlock




                                                                                UK offices:                  Associated firm to Scotland
A list c/ the names of the partners is open to                                  Birmingham    London         Dtrndas & Wilson C3
inspection at the above office The partners are                                 Cambridge     Manchester     Edinburgh
wither solicitors or registered foreign lawyer*                                 Leedt         Reading        Glasgow
j A j a n c h X x M i t h y e r t u M h ! p s ! t a l \ ( l - 0 0 1 6 0 .d<K




                                                                                                3HV710S .U13 I             00:ZI (3fll)00, ’83d-
F B Alderman

3.2.2000
                                                                                    17
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                  NOT FOR PUBLICATION AS IT CONTAINS EXEMPT INFORMATION
4 February 2000 WITHIN PARAGRAPH 1, 5 & 12 OF SCHEDULE 12A OF THE LOCAL
                  GOVERNMENT ACT 1972 AS AMENDED
Joint Report of the Clerk and Treasurer and Chief Constable


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS - SECOND SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT

1.    Purpose of the Report

a)    To draw members attention to a letter received from Walker Morris,
      dated the 2.2.00, relating to costs incurred in the DPP judicial review
       proceedings.

b)    To inform members of applications made by Winkworth Sherwood on
      behalf of Mr Murray:

      i) for financial assistance; and

      ii) for permission to instruct counsel for advice on the recovery of costs
          from HFSG.



      2.     Recommendations

      Members are recommended to :

      i) note the contents of the letter from Walker Morris ; and

      ii) consider the further applications made on behalf of Mr
      Duckenfield.



3.    Letter from Walker Morris

3.1   The letter attached at appendix 1 was received by Garretts on the
      2.1.00. As the Authority is not being asked today to make a decision
      on the reimbursement of the costs incurred in the judicial review
      proceedings involving the Director of Public Prosecutions, members
      are simply asked to note this letter.

4.    Letter from Winkworth Sherwood

4.1   On the 2 February 2000, Winkworth Sherwood wrote to Garretts, on
      behalf of Mr Duckenfield requesting that the Authority be asked :



                                                                                1
       i)    to consider the reimbursement of certain costs incurred in
             connection with the criminal proceedings in the Leeds District
             Magistrates Court; and

       ii)   for permission authorising Winkworth Sherwood to instruct
              counsel on matters relating to the recovery of costs from HFSG.

4.2   Leeds District Magistrates Court

      The District Magistrates Court has approved for payment from central
      funds, the bill of costs submitted by Winkworth Sherwood for legal
      costs incurred by Mr Duckenfield in respect of the charge of intent to
      pervert the course of justice. Only one small element of the bill was
      disallowed. This related to the costs draftsman’s fee in the sum of
      £2,289.24. Winkworth Sherwood have asked that the Authority
      reimburse this sum. The following letters are attached at Appendix 2.

      i)     Letter from the Leeds District Magistrates Court to Winkworth
             Sherwood, dated 25 .1.00; and

      ii)    Letter from Winkworth Sherwood to Garretts dated 2.2.00.

      HFSG Costs

      Winkworth Sherwood are seeking to recover costs of £40,857.07, from
      HFSG, pursuant to the costs order made in favour of Mr Duckenfield in
      the judicial review proceedings relating to the powers of police
      authorities. A number of points are being disputed by HFSG.
      Winkworth Sherwood’s costs draftsman wants to obtain counsel’s
      advice on these points of dispute. The letter to Garretts referred to
      above, requests the Authority’s permission in this respect.

      Garretts have advised Winkworth Sherwood that it is not for the
      Authority’s role to grant or refuse permission for them to instruct
      counsel. Whilst it may be assumed that what is being asked, is for the
      Authority to meet the costs, this matter should be clarified.
      Accordingly, the Authority is recommended to note the request at this
      stage.

W J Wilkinson                          M Hedges
Clerk and Treasurer                    Chief Constable

Officer responsible: Miss M V Oades

Background papers used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection at the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, Barnsley.

Other sources and references:




                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                         ^ \ \ v->
             2 .r E B '0S 12=49



                                                                                 So !




                              Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, 1-SI 21XL. Telephone 0113 283 2500.
                        >acsi?nilc 0113 245 «>412. Docum ent Exc-huy-e 12031 L e « j! 21. E-mail                                                     rfk & v iii
                                                      W eb; bttp//wwu',wa!lfermofrii.«o.ulc                                      **


                                                       FACSIMILE                          TRANSMISSION

             To:                        Mr.D. Harlock                                         From:                    R B. Maiming

             At:                        Garretts                                              Date:                 2 February 2000

             Fax;                       0113 207 9001                                         Page 1 of
                                                                                                                  i/
             Telephone:                 0113 207 9000                                         Mallor If.            MUR,313*1


                                                                               Privitt «ptf Ccnfid(nti»i
             Tiits riwtimilc mu? ioma'us                  ilsei l« privileged, confidential 01 <nltciwi«« yiuiec.'tO ftum dlj<-!v*ut«:, 11 b h iu h*h b« \» « i
             by, n r itA to m a w c n p le i or dlsclaw i to, persons other chin the tS d w n ca. If you have foscivsd ihla fattlm'ils ir. trro r pteaj*
             notify 61 jwtpcdljttcly by ielcpfcenc i t the num btr H«ted lio v c Kid return il !o us by mull, W« will rtim b u ri; p o ttjjc ,



             Hillsborough - F old in g

             Dear David

             Thank you for the prompt response to m y fax o f the 1“ February.

             I apologise if my memory has failed me. It is not surprising at my old age!

             I thought that the Authority had egtced that the D PP’s costs would be met by them in the event that
             there was a requirement so to do. May I just say in this regard that w c always recognised that if :he
             application was not successful, then it was likely that the coats o f the DPP would nave to be m et. As
             you know w e almost w on rttid indeed David Duckenfleld succeeded in part. If 1 can respectfully
             remind the m em b er o f the Authority that Lord Justics Taw said that whilst lie did not i'lnd it
             W gdnesbury unreasonable that the DPP had not intervened he would also not have fouud it
             unreasonable sf the DPP had intervened. Furthermore you w ill also remember that it w as not until
             the very last m om ent that the Court gave the opportunity to Mr. N ew ell o f the CPS to file i
             supplemental A ffidavit and it WQ5 this which just about clinched it for him.

             I hope in the circumstances (and having                                    regard to what is not a very largo WIJ) that the Authority
             w ill think it appropriate to meet this.



             ^ours sinccrsiy




             Richard B, Manning
             Partner




                X 111: c'me t c f V i r l’ Mmtt ft 09(1*   If, ins„uiun   <HlA* oiuve                  <U.                 .u.         x.„   . r i . . ....       i   ,

; 1 : y 'd                                                                                                   3 H V Q D S    A J. i 0         1                ‘       8 c :   01   ( n H I ) O C   . ‘8
                                                                                                                            )l r c .tv ji- ' vv        o4_
    22-F E B -2803     1 5 550    FROM UI hlCKbJQRTH SHERUQOD                 TO        901132079001                      ~~PM

        .* A G ^
                                                                              Leeds District Magistrates’ Court
                                                                              PO Sox 97

                                                                              * * * '? '*               2 6 JAN 20011
                                                                              LS1 3JP


M n H. Jest CHL, LL.8, DM, MlMgt             ; Martin J Lee, LUB, DMS, Awoe. IPD          Adrian Smith, DML, OMS, MIMpt
Solicitor                                      Barrister                                  Solicitor
Acting Chief Executive and Justices' Cleft     Acting Deputy Justice*' Gerk               Acting Deputy Justices’ Clerk



                                                                                    ■     Ycur RsSfi :'D3^2^332/i/S8E



                                                                                          25th January, 200Q.
        Winekwrtii Sherwood,
        Solicitors,
_       35 Qraat Peter Street,
“       Westminster,
        Lcndn SHIP 3LR.

        Dear Sirs,

        RE: DAVID EXXSNFTEU} - CAS SO. T991569

        W ith reference to the telephone conversation w ith ycur Mr Goodwin o f tfts 30th itavftrber, 1999,
        I aa writing to confirm that cn tine 15th Septariber, 1909 ,    Stxpendary Magistrate, Mr Cadbury,
        grantad the application fcr a Dersnce Costs Order out of Central Funds xa t« taxed. He
        accepted tte 'S»d neascrs1 p jt forward in yajr letter of tt» H.-h SepMnber, 1999 ,

        As regards yojr B ill of Casts, I have taken t're advice of the Rational Ta^jti® Officer of ti>*.
        National Taxatlcn Team based at the G”wr. Gaa?t a t Doncaster, ard acocpt ycur ssjbaliislij'. that
        i t is re t possible to separate each cnargg fttzn toe other and that the cnly pratical way of
        approaching th is tnatter is for the Bill of Costs to be drafted as you have done to recover
        25ft of the coats Incurred.

    ^   I have prcvisicnaliy taxed your claim in the sura of £31,153.65. TYie difference of £2269.24
        is the cost plus m of ihe preparation of the 3 m of Goats by your Lsw Costs and Assistant
        Law Costs Draftsmen. The adviis of the Rfigicnal Taxation Officer 13 tte.t i t is cnly In
        exosptional cincuwtvm s thnt tta casts of preperlfig fcna B ill of Gnste will be allowed.

            prcpe&e, thsrsfore, to issue a chscjje in tte? sun of 0 1 ,1 5 3 .6 5 within 21 days of V>a date
        of   tnis le tte r unless I hear further fran you.
        Yours faithfully,



        (YinoipM A s s ista n t LiaE&airg and Ta>aticn.




Telephone (Switchboard):          0113 245 9653
                                                                                              OK: 706981. (WEEDS PftftK SQIMBF-)
Pat:                              0113 244 4700                                      UEEftS..MACl8T«AT68»COMJ>USEBVfi.COM

*00’d                                                                       3 H V Q 0 S   A 1 ! 0   I          K   W      ( Q 3 . i ) 0 0   . ’8 3 J - i 0
                                                                                                                              TO 901132079001                                         P. 02
22-FEB-2000                      15;50            FRdn              UINCKWORTH SHERWOOD


              W IN C K W O R X H                                                SH ER W O O D                                               35 Great Peter Street
               •O U C IT 6 R C          AHO   r»*t.U M £N T A R v                                                                           Wcjoninjtcr
                                                                                                                                            London SWIP it.B.

             Our ref:                  MOQ4332/1/S8E                                                                                        telephone: 0207 593 5000
             Your ref:                 DH/KH                                                                                                Fa* 0207 5 « 5C99
                                                                                                                                            DX; 2312 VrCTORJA

             D Harlock Esq                                                                                                                  Direct Une:              0207 593 5 1 «
                                                                                                                                            Direct Fax:              0207 593 5199
             Gsrratts
             DX 26444 LEEDS PARK SQUARE                                                                                                     Eraa it irgoodwiri@winckworths.cn,uk
             1 CitySquare;,-. .•
             Leeds LSI 2AL                                                                                                                  2 February 2000


             Dear Mr. Harlock

             Adlington v- Duckeaficld and Murray

             As the Policc Authority is meeting on Friday 4lUFebruary1 have reviewed the current costs
             position and have prepared the following summary.

             i.                Costs Assessed in the South S t ft on M agistrates' Cnurr

             To summarise our letter to ycu dated 25 January 2000 our client’s claim for costs in the
             South Sefton Magistrates" Court was for £8,716.63 and ihe court has assessed these costs at
             £2,320.67.

             i am instructed to seek the Policc Authority’s agreement to either fund an application for a.
             Judicial Review or to pay the difference between the assessed costs and the total amount o f
             the bill o f costs.

              ii.              Costs Assessed by the Leeds- District M agistrates' Court

             1 have attached a copy of a letter received from Court. These costs have been claimed from
             Central Funds following Ihe order dated 26 April 1999 that the charge of intent to pervert
             the course o f justice be dropped. The Court has allowed the criminal costs in full, but has
             disallowed ihe time spent preparing the bill. As you arc aware 1 have spent a considerable
             amount o f time dealing with the varied costs issues in this matter. This includes preparing
             bills to recover costs from Central Funds and the preparation of detailed cost breakdowns so
             that your Costs Draftsman may audit our files. ( believe that the costs issues in this matter
             be exceptional and the costs tor the preparation of this complex bill of costs should have
             been allowed. However I cannot advise making representations to the Court becausc the
             criminal costs were taxed.as drawn.

              I will be grateful for the permission of Hie Police Authority to accept the taxed amount and
              ojree to pay the Law Costs Draftsman costs for Hie preparation of ihe bill nf costs.




              PftfcWHWH". ■ ■ ■ •             — TftitlH •It frSWOU/ hW——
              MK'JiOLA' tWjS'IVf                jiV   in hHI:.|;S
              IUWAN l U K M I
                                                J O I lW   i.i;j
                                                 1‘liTltH W II.lA
                                                 1‘liTll*          Mi
                                                            i l l AMi
                                                                        K o .u n iT                   ;u \ i * a i
                                                                                                   n A tl W(IOI)
                                                                                                                                     >NI.'S “ uu<nuu'ida«inrt»nA
                                                                                                                                              Tki r « a ..
              l-A V i. M O k l l l *             A N It *t U i >j W
                                                                  W MU
                                                                     U RAAA. oa VV   n   A iiim i . . o n i u :
                                     i'.fc
                            yitvivni-.fc         k.tllUs'KiHIKK. w
                                                                 V’N
                                                                  ’niI::             IIN)wvrrs                                                InU« CBMieiurhmiaMm
                                                                                                                     CONHJ! TAVrS
                           pom ov                iior-iik m i t i ' o n              M l IN U l l U V i N                  KOHSOfMmir
                                                 1'AUI. 1V»VIN«;                     K A N J I 'l- . V U * l         UKUKCI' bUll-                           m mmwiit w
                                                                                                                                                      witI**;.*•)utlmmim      ffit*
                                                                                                                                              ctvuW*Mt •rninim *

c O O   ’&
                                                                                                                              a a v n D s   a i i o                        I£ =il (Q3M)00 ,'33J-
                                                                 TO     901132979001                     P .0 3
02-FEB-2008    15=50     FROM   UINCKUIORTH SHERWOOD




     Continued


     Hi       Costs Audited by the Police Authority Law Costs Draftsman

     I believe you will now be in possession of Mr. Whawell’s report following his audit o f our
     files up to 7 January 2000 and look forward to receiving the Police Authority's payment o f
     these costs. As I dm unaware o f Mr. Whawell’s recommendations I ask that a copy o f Mi.
     Wahwell’s report be provided so that I may respond to any recommendations that are
     considered unreasonable.

     »v.      Costs Recoverable from HFSG for the Funding Judicial    flgvfew                            '

     I last wrote about these costs on 1 December 1999. Proceedings to recover costs o f
     £40.857.07 commcnced on 19 July 1999. HFSG served very lengthy and detailed points of
     dispute and our replies were served on 19 October 1999, These were acknowledged but. I
     have had no further response. I now have to lodge the Rill of Costs with the Court, which
     will incur a Court fee o f £160.00. We should also consider making a Part 36 offer. Tht
     benefit of making an offer is that jf the offer is not beaten wu will recover indemnity costs
     or the detailed assessment hearing, plus interest at 18%. Given rhe high profile of this case
     1 consider obtaining Counsel’s advice on the Points of Dispute and on a Purl 36 offer
     advisable. Without Counsel’s advice 1 am of the opinion thai an offer around 134,000 (jusl
     under 85%) is appropriate.

     I will be grateful for the Police Authority's permission to instruct Counsel to advise or. the
     points of dispute and the making of a Part 36 offer,

     v.       Costs Payabh by M r Duckenfield for rhs> DPP Judicial Re view

     Wc have spoken in detail about this matter recently. T have again chased the Treasury
     Solicitor about ihe possible duplication of costs. The Treasury Solicitor has not received a
     copy o f the Order for Mr. Murray to pay costs, but without prejudice it was agreed that the
     most likely outcome was that the DPP costs would be split equally between Mr.
     Duckenfield and-Mr. Murray. Mr. Duckenfield will then be liable to pay 2/3 rds o f those
     costs claimed against him, as he was partly successful. I calculate this to be £2,877.00.

     I am. reminded o f the Police Authority’s resolution dated 21 May 1999 and hope that, the
     Police Authority will consider it appropriate to settle these costs on behalf of our client.

      I wilt be grateful if the Police Authority during the meeting, on Friday 4ih February 2000
      can consider these costs issues. Please call me if there is anything you wish to discuss,




                                                                 3 H ¥ flO S   , U 1 0   I   I 2 ; i l       ( Q 3 M ) 0 0 ,   'H H r f- c O
