SOUTH Y O R K S H I R E POLICE A UT HORITY

19 OCTOB ER 1990
                                                                            18
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CON STABLE



FI NANCIA L A S S I S T A N C E TO POLICE OFFICERS IN L EGAL PROCEEDINGS



1.    Matter for Consideration

1.1   The provi sion of financial assist ance to police officers involved in
      legal pr oceedings  arising from the events at Hillsborough F o o tbal l
      Ground on 15 April 1989.



2.    B a c k g r o u n d Information

2.1   Home O ffi ce Circular No. 77/1987, pu blishe d on 4 December 1987 and
      adopted by this Au tho r i t y on 8 April 1988, provides guidance to Police
      Author ities in consider ing applications, on behalf of police officers,
      for financial assistance in legal proceedings.

2.2   The cent ral principle w h i c h should guide considerati on of individual
      cases is that, whe re a p o lic e authority considers that an officer has
      acted in good faith in pu rsu a n c e of his duties or that the interests
      of the force as a wh ole are       involved, the  officer should have the
      support of the police author ity to ensure that he has the services
      of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket.

2.3   A fte r the pu blication of the Interim R ep ort        of Lord Just ice Taylor
       into the Hills borough Di saster the Chief C onstab le of the West Midlands
       Police    was  appointed  to enquire    into   the possi bility   of criminal
       proceed ings arising from the      disaster.    At that time an application
       for    financial   assistanc e was    received    from   Chief  Superintendent
       Duckenfield, the officer in command at Hills b o r o u g h on the day of the
       disaster.

2.4   At the time of that a p plic ation it was         acknowle dged that similar
      app lications for assistance, under the terms of Home Office Circular
      N o . 77/1987, could be a nt icipat ed from other officers directly involved
      in legal proceedings arising from the Hillsboro ugh Disaster.

2.5    The appli cation from Chief Superintend ent Duckenf ield was considered
       by the Finance and General Purposes Co mmittee on 15 September 1989
       when the matter was defe rred for further considerati on of the roLe
       of the Authori ty's insurers.

2.6    Fol lowing advice from the A u t hority 's insurers and solicitors, Chief
       Su perint enden t Ducke nfield obtaine d independent legal representation
       from solicitors     engaged through his staff ass ociation and financed
       by his personal legal insurance.

2.7    The  funds available to Chief Superi ntende nt Duckenfield under this
       policy amounted to £50,000.     His solicitors have advised him that that
       amount   may  be  exhau sted  by   one  or  both  of  the  on-going Civil
       Contrib utions Hearing and the fo rthcoming Coroner's Inquest.
                                      - 2 -



2.8   A further app lication has now been r eceived from Chief Superintendent
      D u cke nfield for his original a pplication to be re-considered and, as
       anticipated,     similar   applications   have  now   been received  from
       Superi ntende nts  Marshall,   Green wood and Murray;  and an application
       has also been received from Russell Jones and Walker, solicitors, on
       behalf of Police Constables Smith and Illingworth.

2.9   All   officers  making  application  have  been   the  direct  subject of
       enquiries by the Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police arising
       from allegations of criminal conduct receiv ed from third parties.



3     Comment

3.1   Follo wing the disaster   and t hroughout the Public Inquiry conducted
      by Lord Justice Taylor, the interests of the Police Authority, the
      Chief Constable and all officers of the Force were represented by legal
      officers appointed by the Police Authori ty insurers.      In relation to
      the subsequent criminal enquiry and possible proceedings the insurers
       indicated to seven South York shire P olice officers that a possibility
      of conflict could arise between the interests of the Force and each
      of them independently.    The q uestion of separate legal representation
      was considered, one officer con tinued to be r epresented by the insurers
      and the six applicants o btained independent representation.

3.2   Membe rs will be aware that the Director of Public Prosecutions, having
      consid ered the evidence resulting from the enquiry by the West Midlands
      Police,   announced  on  30 August  1990  his  decision that  there was
      ins ufficient evidence to justify criminal proceedings against any South
      Yor kshire Police officer.   There are, however, certain civil actions
      und er-way and the Coroner's Inquest into the deaths at Hillsborough
      will resume on 19 November 1990.

3.3   At the Coroner's Inquest the officers concer ned are likely to be called
       upon to give evidence.    It is a c knowl edged that cross examination by
       Counsel represe nting other parties may be prejudicial to the individual
       officers   in respect of their personal liabilities.       These officers
       consider it ne cessary to continue to be in dependently represented at
       this hear ing where the Chief Constable's legal representa tive cannot
       reason ably be expected to represent the separate interests of each
       of them.

3.4   It will be seen fro m paragraph 13 of the Home Office Circular that
      separate re presentation should be pro vided at a Coroner's Inquest where
      (a)  the  Chief   Officers  legal  represe ntativ e cannot reasonably  be
      expected to represent the interests of such officers and, (b) the Police
      Authority, considers that such interests should be represented.        In
      such cases the authority should, in the terms of the Circular, provide
      financial assistance to the individual officers concerned.

3.5   It will be noted at paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing
      to seek financial assistance from his police authority should have
      the oppor tunity in advance of the proceedings to submit to the Chief
      Constable an ap plication for financial assistance.  The Chief Constable
      is obliged to put such a pplication to the aut hority for decision.
      It will be further seen that the applying officer should normally be
      given the opportunit y by the police authority to make representations
      to them if he wishes to do so.
                                           - 3 -



3.6   The     events   at  H i lls borou gh   were   e x t r a ordina ry in  respect  of  the
      pot ential     individual      liability    of    police      officers  involved.   The
      officers were acting           in good    faith      in a ccordance with e s tabl ished
      practice.      The nature of the various in vestigation into the H i l l sboro ugh
      Disaster also means that the interests of the South Yor kshire Police,
      as a whole, are involved.             For these two reasons (see para 2.2 ante)
      it is recommend ed that these officers should have the support of the
      Police Autho rity to ensure that they each have the services of a lawyer
      r e p res enting their individual interests, at the forthcoming Coroner's
      Inquest.

3.7   It w o u l d be sensible for the officers concerned         to retain the services
      of those lawyers who cur rently represent them              throughout  subsequent
      proceedings.



4     F inancial   Implications

4.1   The cost of independent rep res e n t a t i o n has to date been met by personal
      legal insurance arranged thro ugh The Superintendents' A ssoci ation for
      Chief Superintend ent Duck e n f i e l d and Sup erintendents Marshall, Murray,
      and Greenwood.         Constables Smith and Illingworth, meanwhile, have been
      rep re s e n t e d by Messrs Russ ell Jones and Walker, the Police    Federation
      solicitor, paid for by central Po lice Federa tion funds.

4.2   The ex tent of future    costs will be deter mined by the time taken to
       conclude the Inquest.     There is no specific provision in the Revenue
       Budget for these costs.



5     R e c o m men dation

5.1   The   A u t h ority   is  r ecomm ended  to   approve      a  commitment to  provide
      financial        assistance    for   legal  r e p r esent ation  at  the forthcoming
       Inquest, to the officers concerned, in accordance with the principles
      of Home Office Circular N o . 77/1987.




                                                      N O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as it
R I C H A R D WELLS                                   contains     exempt information
C H I E F CO NSTABL E
                                                      within para. • »••••••••• of
                                                      Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                                                      Act 1972 as amended.
APPENDICES:   A.   App lic a t i o n from Chief Superint endent Duckenfiel d

              B.   A p plicat ion from Superint enden t Marshall

              C.   A ppli cation from Sup erint endent Murray

              D.   A p pli cation from Superintend ent G reenwood

              E.   Letter from Messrs Russe ll Jones and Walker,
                   solicitors r e pres entin g Constables Smith and Illingworth

              F.   Home Office Circular N o . 77/1987
                                                             APPEND/* 'A'
                                   SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                              Ref:        DGD/CJD

    From:    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield                 Station/Dept:
    To:      The Chief Constable                              Date:         21 September 1990



            SUBJECT:   Hillsborough Disaster - Funding for Legal Representation

            On 2H August 1989 I made application under Home Office Circular
            No 77/87 for yourself and the Police Authority to give due
            consideration for funds to be made available for my legal
            representation in connection with any proceedings which may arise
            from the Hillsborough Disaster.

            These proceedings are currently the Civil Hearings due to begin in
            Manchester on 2 October to be followed by the Coroner's Inquest on
            19 November 1990. There is also the possibility that Discipline
            Proceedings may follow at a later stage.

            Whilst the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
            of Criminal Matters has been favourable it is not unreasonable to
            assume that if further evidence came to light he would reconsider
            the position with regard to myself and other officers.

            There is also the stated intention, admittedly via the media, by
            families of the deceased that they intend to launch a private
            prosecution for manslaughter against officers of South Yorkshire
            Police.

            It is therefore of paramount importance that the best independent
            legal advice possible is available for myself and other officers.

            My previous application for financial assistance was, as I understand
            it, 'left on the table' in the knowledge that I had insurance cover
            for my legal defence up to the sum of £50,000.

            If I require legal representation at the Civil Hearings and Coroner's
            Inquest it is likely that my defence costs will exceed the sum assured
            and I will require additional funding (bearing in mind Discipline
            and Private Prosecution).

            I ask for urgent reconsideration of my request in the hope that a
            contribution could be made towards my legal defence costs or an
            agreement to meet all reasonable expenditure over and above the sum
            assured.

            I have attached a letter from my solicitor and copies of previous
            papers.




            Chief Superintendent




Gen/2
                                                                  APPfeMiXK 8
                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                  Ref:               F/RM/GP
    From :   Superintendent Marshall,   'F' Division              Staton I Dept:      F mo

    To   :   Deputy Chief Constable, Mr P Hayes, H3s              Date:    24 September 1990



             SUBJECT:                  HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER -
                                  RESUMED INQUESTS 1 9 NCMM3ER 1 9 9 0


             Sir

             Through my solicitor, Mr Vincent Hale, of Nash House, 140 Upperthorpe,
             Sheffield, I have received intimation of the resumed inquests into the
             deaths at Hillsborough.    I shall be required to give evidence at this
             inquest which resumes on 19 November 1990.

             You will perhaps be aware that I have been represented throughout the West
             Midlands Police enquiry into the disaster by Mr Hale and that his costs to
             date are subject of a claim upon private insurance effected by myself
             through my membership of the Superintendents Association.       Mr Hale has
             submitted an interim account upon the insurers, which has not yet been met.
             I wish, ^therefore, to make formal application under the terms of the Home
             Office Circular 77/87 to the South Yorkshire Police Authority for financial
             assistance   towards M r A yiHcent Hale's costs     in connection with his
             representa :ion of my intfojests at the forthcoming inquest.




GEN/2
                                                                 R P P tZ n O iK   C

                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POUCE
                                                                 Ref:

    From :    Superintendent Murray                              Station / Dept:Rawmarsh

    To   :    Deputy Chief Constable                             D ate :   1 October 1990



             SUBJECT:           application f or financial assistance




               In connection with the Hillsborough tragedy of 1989 and allegations
               made against me, I have been taking legal advice from Walker, Morris,
               Scott and Turnbull, Solicitors of Leeds, and in particular Mr Richard
               Manning of that company.      The finance for this advice has been
               available through my own private insurance.    Although the Director of
               Public Prosecutions has stated that proceedings will not be taken
               against any Police officer, there are still many matters unsettled and
               I may still require significant legal advice and assistance.

               I have been informed that the Coroners Inquest is to start on 19
               November 1990, and that this will be a lengthy enquiry and it is
               probable that my legal costs will exceed the limit of my Insurance,
               particularly if other matters follow the Inquest, e.g. criminal or
               disciplinary proceedings.

               Accordingly under Home Office circular No. 77 of 1987, I ask that an
               approach be made to the Police Authority to give consideration to
               making funds available for my Legal Representation in connection with
               the forthcoming Inquest, civil hearing and any criminal proceedings
               which may arise, which would allow me to maintain the services of Mr.
               Manning,   who  with   his  existing   knowledge  of  my   particular
               r.irnlmstannps. T fpp] is thp best person to represent myself.




               buperinrenaenr




GEN/2
                                                           APPeroPDC >
                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                         Ref:
From:   Superintendent Greenwood                        Station/Dept: A1 Doncaster

To:     Chief Constable                                 Date.            October 1990



        SUBJECT:   FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IN RESPECT of legal support


        Emanating from the 'Hillsborough Disaster' certain proceedings require to
        be finalised, in particular the inquest proceedings which I understand
        will commence on the 19th November.

        I hereby make formal application, through you,to the Police Authority for
        funding in respect of such legal advice and representation as is deemed
        necessary by my legal advisors.

        I am represented in this matter by Messrs Barlow, Hyde and Gilbert,
        Beaufort House, 15 Batolph Street, London, EC3A 7NJ.




        Super
                      R U S S E L L JONES & WALKER
                                ______ ____________________________________________________ _____________ S O L I C I T O R S                                                                                  _________________


                            4 t h F l o o r B r a z e n n o s e H o u s e B r j z e n n o s . e S t r e e t M a n c h e s t e r M 2 5 A Z T e l e p h o n e : O bi 8 3 2 8 8 7 7
                                                                                           F ax: 061 8 3 2 70()h                       DX        14340




                                                                                                                                                                                Your Ref :           DCC/OEL
The Deputy Chief Constable                                                                                                                                                      O urRef:             NH/LP/HILLSBR0/387044
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters                                                                                                                                                                    D ate:
                                                                                                                                                                                                      19 September 1990
Snig Hill
SHEFFIELD
S3 8LY

Dear Sir,
Hillsborough Disaster - Inquest
We have been notified by Her Majesty's Coroner of his intention to resume the
Inquests in the deaths of the 95 people on the 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough
Stadium, which Inquests are to resume on the 19 November 1990.
We would refer to previous correspondence and, in particular, to our letter of
the 6 April 1990, addressed to the Chief Constable, and to your response of the
11 April 1990. We would take this opportunity to repeat our request for financial
assistance for separate legal representation out of Police Authority Funds,
pursuant to the provisions of the Home Office Circular No 77/87.
It is our intention to provide representation by Counsel on behalf of two
police constables in particular, Police Constable David Alfred Illingworth and
Police Constable Peter Edward Smith. It is our firm view that these officers
remain open to substantial criticism, despite the decision of the Director of
Public Prosecutions not to bring criminal proceedings. As you will fully
appreciate, there is still a threat of private prosecutions by individual
complainants. We are satisfied that if called to give evidence before the
Inquests, these officers are reasonably likely to face examination by solicitors
or Counsel on behalf of relatives of the deceased, which may be prejudicial to
the officers. There also remains the threat of disciplinary proceedings,
arising out of the investigation by West Midlands Police. Again, as long as
that threat remains, we feel that representation can be justified.
You will no doubt appreciate that the allegations made against these particular
officers, are of a serious nature and include abuse to members of the public, a
failure to act with speed, which individual complainants will say, had a direct
bearing upon the deaths of individuals and further, allegations of assault. In
the case of Constable Illingworth, there are a number of allegations, but in
particular there is a complaint by Edward Spearritt, father of the deceased
Adam Edward Spearritt, who alleges that the officer failed to open Gate 4 in
the perimeter fencing, despite loud appeals directed to him, his position being
in such close proximity to the complainant which, it is alleged, had a direct
bearing on the death of his son and the cause of injuries to himself. In the
case of Peter Edward Smith, he faces allegations by a David Anthony Lackley to
the effect that the officer failed to open Gate 3 when asked, which had he done
so, would have saved the life of some supporters and when the gate was opened,
Police Constable Smith pushed one person back into the crowd.   This presents a
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cont/d. . . . . .
  J.M . W ebber T .D .B    Ta>lor I J W a l ke r A . F W h i t e h e a d R J. T u r n e r R . M . A bb e v l . R . F l e . c h e r G C . Sol lv W .D . O ' B r i e n R. A. P l a n e RJ. D a v i i J . M . R C o l m a n R . C . L . n j . o n D R                L ou *
       j L   R a s k in S R a s k in E J O . C o o p e r S G . In g r a m N . B    H o l / o s d J . C . C l a ; k e - W ,l l ,a m > S . L . W e b b D .A . B . T » i g * P R   A i h u r . t J . M . Pi r r i e S . J . N . A l l e n   Ctnuhnt: J C . W a l k e r


                                                                R eg u lated b\ T h e Law S o ciety in the c o n d u c t o f In v e s tm e n t B usiness
                                                                LO N D O N            L E E D S          BIR M IN G H A M                   BRISTOL                 M A N C H E S T E R
The Deputy Chief Constable                                19 September 1990

This presents a general allegation that the officer's behaviour on the day in
question, had a direct bearing upon the deaths of a number of unnamed supporters.
Additionally, he faces an allegation by Stephen Paul Hendry to like effect, in
that it is said he failed to open Gate 3, despite protestations and ordered
people to push back. It is also alleged against this officer that he assaulted
an unknown person by pushing him back over the fence, into Pen 3.
We anticipate that you will see from these allegations, that these officers are
at risk and the interests of justice require them to be represented.
We would maintain that in this instance, the officers were acting at all times
in good faith and in pursuance of their duties. We would also maintain that
the particular interests of these officers are such that they could not properly
be represented by those representing the interests of the Police Authority/Chief
Constable. We are sure that you will give our above comments full consideration
and we would ask that appropriate recommendations be made to the Police Authority.
We thank you in anticipation.




        JONES & WALKER




cc:   Constables' Central Committee
                                                     HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen A n n e ’s Gate L o x d o n SW’ l H 9 A T
                                                         D '. u :i !iKi 0 i - 2 13
   \ ^ v                                             S'.ii:htc<j’s c ;       3 3000                ix       p


   (A. * y v w . v
                     POL/87   1027/1/2
   V,'..* r.V'VC.Y




  The Clerk to the Police Authority
  The Chief Officer of Police
                                                                                      4 December 1987




  Dear Sir

  HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 77/87                                                                        '^
  FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS r                                                !"
                                                                                          ..   f   .

   There is statutory authority in section 48 of the Police Act 1964 for
   payments to be made from the police fund to meet expenditure incurred
   by police officers in defending proceedings in tort. Also, acting in
   pursuance of its general statutory duty to aaintain an adequate and
   efficient police force for its area, the police authority Jus
   discretion to Beet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds 'of
   legal proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in
   pursuance of their duties, or the interests of the force as a whole
   are involved.   The purpose of this circular is to give guidance to
/^police authorities to help then in considering requests on behalf of
'•"'officers for financial assistance. This guidance has been discussed
   and agreed with the local authority and with the police staff
   associations.
  2.    The central principle which should guide consideration of
  individual cases is that, where a police authority considers that an
  officer has acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties or that
  the interests of a force as a whole are involved, the officer should
  have the support of the police authority to snsure that he has the
  services of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket. The
  following paragraphs provide general guidance to the diffsrsnt
  classes of proceedings, paynents Bade to officers in accordance with
  this guidance will be eligible for police grant.



                                                                                                                     1
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Prosecution by the Crown Prosecution Service

2. An officer who is the subject of a public prosecution for an
alleged offence committed while carrying out his duties as a police
officer is in the same position as any other defendant and must be
expected to bear the costs of his defence. If he is acquitted, he
should, like any other defendant, look to the court for
reimbursement of his expenses. If the costs are not paid, or not
paid in full from central funds, the police authority are in a
position to decide, on the full facts, whether or not to make a
payment to the officer or to the Police Federation if they have
provided the funding.   There may be cases where it is proper to
provide legal advice and/or legal representation even where the
officer is found guilty. This may arise for example in test cases
where the officer has been carrying out a practice hitherto
approved of but is found guilty as a result of that practice being
found uni awful by the court in the light of the circumstances of
that particular case.

P r i m e   f r w c u t i o i tf

4. A police officer should be able to carry out his duties IhJbke
confidence that, if he acts in good faith and exercises
judgement reasonably, his police authorit/viriil support him. If,
in a case where a member of the public brings a prosecution against
an officer, the authority is satisfied that the officer has acted
in this way, the authority should provide or fund legal advice
and/or representation.
5.   Where a court decides that a prosecution brought against an
officer was not brought in good faith, it may order the prosecutor
to pay the whole or any part of the costs incurred by the defence;
again, if the officer is acquitted on indictment, his costs may be
met from central funds. In either of these cases, the question of
the police authority providing financial support to the officer may
not arise.   However, where the costs of an acquitted officer are
not awarded by the court or awarded only in part, the police
authority should consider whether to reimburse any costs not
covered, taking into account the reasons, if any, given by the
court for failing to award all costs claimed.

CIVIL PROCEEDINGS
civil Actions            Against   tl.e Chief Officer for Wrongful Acts   of
Constables
6. Under section 48(1) of the Police Act 1964, the chief officer
of a force is liable in respect of torts committed by constables
under his direction and control (which includes special constables
and officers of other forces serving in the police area under
mutual aid arrangements)       in the performance or purported
performance of their functions. Under section 48(2) any damages or
costs awarded against the chief officer in such proceedings, any
costs he incurs himself, and any sum paid in connection with the
settlement of a claim, provided the settlement is approved by the
police authority, must be paid out of the police fund.      In such
cases, therefore, the police authority's discretion extends only to
whether or not to approve a proposed settlement of the claim.


Civil Actions Against Individual Police Officers

7. Alternatively, the plaintiff say be awarded damages against an
individual police officer, though he cannot recover the damages
twice over against the chief officer ms veil. Section 48(4) of the
Police Act 1964 specifically empowers a police authority "to such
extent as they think fit" to pay out of the police fund any damages
or costs awarded against an officer, any costs he incurs himself,
and any sums paid in connection with the settlement of s claim.
This provision applies to actions against officers of the
authority's own force, officers of another force serving the police
area under mutual aid arrangements, and special constables for the
police area.   Zn considering whether to.give financial assistance
the authority will wish to consider in particular whether the
officer concerned acted in good faith and exercised his judgement
reasonably. Where the court finds for the officer, he may seek his
costs     from the plaintiff; should thecosts not be awarded or
awarded only in part, the police authority should consider whether
to reimburse any costs not covered, taking ‘ into account the
reasons, if any, given by the court for failing to award all costs
claimed.
8 . Joint actions naming both the chief officer and an individual
police officer may be brought in some cases. In such cases it is
important that any discussion of the merits and quantum of the
proposed settlement should involve all the parties named in the
claim    together with advisers even if they are represented hy
different advisers.

civil Actions Under the Data PrPtttCfclPn ht t -1S&4
9.   Under sections 22 and 23 of the Data Protection Act 1984 an
individual who suffers damage as a result of the inaccuracy, loss
or unauthorised disclosure of personal data is entitled to
compensation from the data user. In the absence of any case law on
these provisions, it is unclear whether the acts covered by
sections 22 and. 23 amount to torts, to vhich the guidance in
paragraphs 6 and 7 above applies. If not, section 48 of the Police
Act 1964 does not apply.     However, the position is broadly the
same.     Under section 3 8 (3 ) (a) of the 1984 Act constables are
treated as servants of the chief officer forthe purposes of the
Act.   A chief constable is therefore liable for the acts of his
officers falling within sections 22 and 23 in the same way as he is
liable for their torts under section 48(1). The position of non­
police officers is less clear but it is possible that in some cases
the chief constable might be regarded as h a v i n g liability for their
acts. It follows that it would be proper for the police authority
                                                                           \

to aset all costs, including any award of compensation, arising
fr©» this liability. It should be noted that the liability of the
"data user" under the Act is not vicarious but his personal
liability. Therefore his own care in having instituted a systea of
obtaining, checking and racording data whieh would reasonably guard
against error and loss under section 23(3} of the Act should meet
his responsibility under section 22(3) and ha should not be held
liable if one of his officers disregards the syatea astablished.
10 , Sphere coapensation is sought from an individual officer, the
poliu* authority will wish, in considering vhathar to meet the
eastd yhieh would otherwise fall ©a the officer, to taka account of
ths saas aattars as in exercising thair power under section 48(4)
of th® Police Act 1964 (ssa paragraph 7).        Foliea authorities
should apply tho same broad prineiplas and in particular, meet the
costs of any compensation awarded against a ©hiaf constable vhare a
non-palice officer is at fault and tha chiaf constabla is found to
have liability for the actions parformed.

Police.Officers Bringing Civil Aetiens for Pefaaa_tlen
il.   There may be occasions when financial assistance is sought
froa n police authority to anabla an officer to bring or consider
bringing a civil action for dafaaation.          An authority ,has
discretion to give such assistant?* but it will be eligible Cor
polica grant only if the following criteria are all met:-
           the defamation is serious;
     (h)   it relates to tha actions of an officer acting or
     said to be acting in the discharge of his duty;
     (e)   it has attracted public attention;
     (d)   to bring the action is considered to be in the
     interests of the force or ©f the polic* service as a
     yho.le; and
       ) the action stands s seasonable ehan&a ©f sueeasa.
Crits^ion (d) is central. I f only tha imputation of tha individual
©ffisar is in quastion, he is in tha same position as any other
citii:*ft and must be axpeetad to seek his own remedy.            But an
a l l ^ a i i o n against a particular offiear may vail reflect on the
reputation of tha whole fore® or ba an axampla ©f ?#i£er allegations
against tha forca or a significant section ©f it.         In such eases
ths police authority, provided tha other criteria ar® satisfied,
       if'SASonably ba axpected to help to defend the sraputation of the




                                                                      4
    INQUESTS, PUBLIC ENQUIRIES AND TRIBUNAJ.fi

    Legal Representation ..for. Chief Officers

    12. Any interested arty nay be legally represented at an inquest
    but at his own expense since expenses are payable only to witnesses
    and jurors.   An interested party will normally be entitled to be
    legally represented at a public enquiry or other public tribunal.
    Where the interest of the force is affected, it will be appropriate
    for the police authority to provide at its expense for the chief
    officer to be legally represented on behalf of the force.

    Legal Representation for Individual Officers
    13. Separate representation for individual officers whose interest
    is involved may be necessary. For exanple, there will be occasions
    when (a) the chief officer's legal representative cannot reasonably
    be expected to represent the separate interests of such officers
    and (b) the police authority considers that such interests should
    be represented. In such cases the authority should give financial
j   issistance to the officers.        In considering (b) above, the
    authority will wish in particular to assess whether the officers
    are at risk of being held to blane for actions in connection with
    the death to which the inquest relates and whether any such finding
    night give rise to legal proceedings for the costs of which the
    police authority would be liable under section 48(1) of the Police
    Act 1964 or for which financial assistance night be appropriate
    within the terns of this circular.                               '

    APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
    14.   An officer wishing to seek financial assistance fro*'his
    police authority should have the opportunity in advance of as well
    as on the conclusion of the proceedings to subnit to the chief
    officer tn application for financial assistance. The chief officer
    should put this, together with his own reconnendation to the police
    authority for decision.   The officer should normally be given the
    opportunity by the police authority to make representations to them
    if he wishes to do so.
    15.   If it decide* to give financial assistance, the authority
    should inform the officer concerned that, if the information on
    which they based their decision to grant the assistance is ahovn_ in
    subsequent legal proceedings to be inaccurate or incomplete, the
    authority will normally expect to recover the money unless;it is
    satisfied that no culpable misrepresentation was involved and that
    to recover the money would involve the applicant in substantial
    hardship.   On the other hand, if an authority refuses financial
    assistance and then discovers in the light of subsequent events
    that such assistance would have been warranted, then financial
    assistance should be granted in order to meet the
    incurred by the officer in seeking legal advice or assistance.


                                                                      5
-Assistance froff Police Federation Fuids

16, Under Regulation 19 of the Police Federation Regulations 1969,
as inended, Federation funds say be used to defray legal charges
incurred by a member in       onneetion with criminal proceedings
brought against him for an offence under the road traffic
enactments (other than offences involving driving when impaired by
drink or drugs or taking a vehicle without authority), or for
offerees of causing the death or injury of any person, or for any
assault* or in connection with his action for libel or slander. An
officer seeking financial assistance in circumstances covarad by
Regulation 19 should seek such assistance from the police authority
in the first instance. If the police authority does not consider
the araqusst to fall within the terms of this circular, the
Federation may then consider the application within the terms of
Kagulation 19. If the officer receives lagal assistance from the
Fada^sfciea the terms of Hema Office Circular No 36/1967 will
continue to apply.
17.   G^ittral anquiries about the content of this circular may be
addressed to Hr Waghern, Home Office, FI Division on (01) 213 4208.
                                             Yours faithfully




                                             K J ADDISON




                                                                  6
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY



15 SEPTEMBER 1989
                                     HOT FOR PUBLICATION as 1t
FINANCE & GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE contains   exempt  information
                                     within para. ...S.............. of
                                       Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                                                                           lb
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE          Act 1972 as amended.            i


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

1.    Matter for Consideration

      The provision of financial assistance to police officers Involved In
      legal proceedings arising from the event at Hillsborough Football Ground
      on 15 April 1989.


2.    Background Information

2.1   Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987, provides
      guidance to Police Authorities on the exercise of their discretion In
      considering applications, on behalf of police officers, for financial
      assistance towards the cost of legal advice and representation arising
      from Involvement In legal proceedings which result from the pursuance, In
      good faith, of their duties or where the Interests of the Force as 4|


2.2   Arising from the publication of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor
      into the Hillsborough Disaster, the subsequent appointment of the Chief
      Constable of the Vest Midlands Police to enquire Into the justification
      for criminal proceedings arising from the disaster and the forthcoming
      Coroner's Inquest Into the deaths, an application for assistance has been
      received from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who vas involved in
      command of the policing arrangements for the football Semi-Final and
      similar applications from other officers similarly involved might be
      anticipated.


3.    Comment

3.1   Following the disaster and throughout the Public Inquiry the interests of
      the Police Authority, the Chief Constable and all officers of the Force
      have been represented by legal officers appointed by the Police Authority
      insurers. The legal officers appointed by the insurers have indicated
      that in relation to criminal proceedings they would be unable to provide
      representation for Individual officers who should seek independent legal
      advice and representation.

3.2   It will be seen from the Home Office Circular Ho. 77/1987, that the
      central principle which should guide consideration of individual cases is
      that, where a Police Authority considers that an officer has acted in
      good faith in pursuance of his duties or that where the Interests of the
      Force as a whole are involved, the officer should have the support of the
      Police Authority to ensure that he has the services of a lawyer and that
      he should not be out of pocket.


3.3   It will be further seen that in respect of criminal proceedings pursued
      by the Crown Prosecution Service against an individual officer he should
      be expected to bear the costs of his own defence and the Police
                                     - 2 -

      Authority, at the conclusion of the proceedings, are able to consider, on
      the full facts, whether or not to reimburse any expenses incurred by the
      officer and not awarded by the trial court, even where proceedings have
      resulted in conviction In certain circumstances. It will be noted from
      paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing to seek financial
      assistance should have the opportunity to submit to the Chief Officer an
      application for financial assistance, upon receipt of which the Chief
      Officer should refer the application to the Police Authority together
      with his own recommendation. It will be further seen that the applying
      officer should normally be given the opportunity by the Police Authority
      to make representations to them If he wishes to do so. At this stage
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield wishes to reserve the right to so appear
      at a future date if necessary.

3.4   The events at Hillsborough were unique in respect of the potential
      criminal liability of police officers involved. The officers were acting
      in good faith in accordance with well established practices and any
      criminal proceedings will largely constitute a test case similar to the
      example provided in paragraph three of the Home Office Circular. The
      unique nature of the circumstances of this particular criminal enquiry
      with Its wide Implications for the Interests of tfee Force as a whole Is
      such that the Police Authority may wish to consld|j£* at this stage, a
      commitment to the funding of Independent legal«dw£c« for the offlcer(s)
      concerned. The financial commitment of the officer's Is likely
      commence with advice and representation prior to and during Interviews
      undertaken by West Midlands Police officers In the course of their
      enquiry. It would be prudent for that representation to continue
      throughout the enquiry and any subsequent criminal proceedings and to
      extend to representation at the Coroner's Inquest which will ultimately
      be held.

3.5   At this stage It is anticipated that representation in any civil actions
      subsequently pursued will be provided by the Police Authority Insurers.

3.6   It should be noted that there is available, to all officers of
      superintendent and chief superintendent rank who liaye chosen to
      contribute, a measure of personal liability Insurance arranged by the
      Superintendents' Association of England and Vales. The individual
      liability limit of this insurance cover is £50,000.


4.    Financial Implications

      It is not possible at this stage to assess the financial implications of
      this matter which will depend entirely on the course and extent of the
      criminal enquiry and the ultimate outcome, and the duration of the
      Inquest proceedings. There is no specific provision in the Revenue
      Budget for this expenditure.


5.    Recommendation

      The Committee Is recommended to approve a commitment to provide financial
      assistance for legal representation to the offlcer(s) concerned in
      accordance with the central principle of Home Office Circular No.
      77/1987.


P WRIGHT
CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                          SOUTH Y O RKSHIRE POLICE
    Staff in confidence                                              Ref:            TWS/MR
            From:   Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield             Station/Dept:   Headquarters

            To:     The Chief Constable                              Date:           2 k August 1989



                    SUBJECT:      APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE


                     The interim report of the Inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor into
                     the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster that occurred on the 15 April 1989 was
                     published at 1100 hours on Friday 4 August 1989. The report was very
                     critical of the South Yorkshire Police in general and, in particular, myself
                     and a number of other police officers.

                     National media interest   and comments followed publication and, in view of
                     the extensive criticism   in the report regarding my handling of events on
                     the day of the disaster   and the possibility of actions of criminal
                     negligence/disciplinary   proceedings, I was suspended from duty on the 4
                     August 1989.

                     The Director of Public Prosecutions was, I understand, requested      to examine
                     Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and subsequently instructed      the West
                     Midlands Police to carry out a full criminal investigation, 'not      limited
                     to the criminal culpability of the police alone1 into the events      that
                     occurred at Hillsborough on the 15 April 1989.

                     Whilst no criminal charges have been brought to date against me, the
                     possibility of charges being brought exists and I will, no doubt, be
                     interviewed by the West Midlands Police during the course of their crininal
                     investigations.  There is also a possibility of interviews in respect cf
                     disciplinary allegations made against me for which a Regulation 7 Notice
                     has been served.

                     I was authorised to obtain independent legal advice from Hammond Suddards
                     resulting in being advised by them to obtain further private independent
                     legal advice as Hammond Suddards could not assist me personally as no
                     criminal charges had been made.  I am now obtaining independent legal advice
                     through a personal Legal Protection Insurance Policy.

                     The policy gives a maximum cover of £50,000.  If I need legal representation
                     at interviews with the West Midlands Inquiry Team regarding possible
                     criminal or disciplinary matters and at protracted inquest hearings, wliich
                     are unlikely to take place until early 1990, then there is little doubt
                     my legal costs will be very much in excess of this figure.

                     If any criminal proceedings are brought against members of the South
                     Yorkshire Police (and manslaughter charges are possible), it is imperative,
                     in the interests of the force, the Police Authority and any individual
l   U                officer, that those concerned have had the benefit of the best possible
                     legal advice and representation at any forthcoming judicial hearings.

            TP       Whilst the force has been, and continues to be, legally represented matters
                     are very complex and conflict of interest can arise in areas concerning
                     different individuals.




    Gen/2
Attached is a copy of Home Office Circular No.77/1987 - 'Financial
Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings'. I draw your attention
to paragraphs 1, 2, 12 - 15 inclusive.  In accordance with paragraph 13.
I therefore respectfully request that application be made to the Police
Authority for financial assistance in order that   I am properly advised and
represented at any future criminal or disciplinary hearings.
As indicated at paragraph 2 of the circular, any   payments made toofficers
in accordance with the guidance are eligible for police grant.
                                                                       7/tyvU   '417-




147.   FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN! LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
       A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
       Constable was submitted on the guidelines contained in Home Office
       Circular No. 77/87 on the responsibilities of Police Authorities in
       respect of legal costs arising from the involvement of police officers
       and non-police employees of Police Authority in'legal proceedings.
       The Circular both confirmed and expanded current policies within the
       South Yorkshire Police and recommended criteria to assist Police
       Authorities in considering whether financial assistance should be
       approved in any particular proceedings. If followed, the criteria
       would ensure that any payments authorised in consequence to be met
       from the Police Fund would qualify for Home Office grant.
       RESOLVED - That the Police Authority adopt the procedures in Home
       Office Circular No. 77/87 and enclose the current policies detailed
       in the report now submitted relating to legal costs arising from the
       involvement of police officers and non-police employees of the Police
       Authority in legal proceedings, subject to any applications continuing
       to be submitted to the Police Authority for consideration should the
       Authority's Insurers decline to undertake any particular defence.
148.   HIGH VELOCITY CATAPULTS
        The Authority considered a letter dated 8th February, 1988 from the
        Management Co-ordinator of the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council
        requesting the Police Authority to consider Minute 1171 of the
        Council's Consumer and Enviornmental Services Committee of 8th
        January, 1988 relating to the Council's concern over the availability
        of high velocity catapults. The letter included a report considered
        by the Committee detailing the tests and test results on four^
*      catapults purchased locally and tested at the Department of Civil and
        Structural Engineering of the University of Sheffield. The results
        were considered to be disturb! ng;-
       The Chief Constable displayed to the Authority the type of catapult
       referred to and reported that he had already responded to the AMA that
       such catapults should be regarded as designated weapons. The Clerk
       and Financial Officer also pointed out that the Criminal Justice Bill
       would prohibit their manufacture and sale.
       RESOLVED:-
       1.    That the representations already made by the Chief Constable and
             the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council to the Association of
             Metropolitan Authorities be supported.
       2.    That the Clerk and Financial Officer be requested to write to
             the Chambers of Trade to seek their support of a voluntary ban
             on the sale of high velocity catapults, pending the
             implementation of the provisions of the Criminal Justice Bill.
Solicitors             T elephone


C loth Hall C o u rt
                       0 5 3 2 430391
                       Telex
                                                                                  HEPV’ORTH
Infirm ary Street
Leeds
                       55 79 1 7
                       F a c s im il e
                                                                                  & CH AD W ICK
LSI 2JB                05 3 2 4 5 6 1 8 8                                         A M E M B E R OF EVERSHEDS
                       D X 12027 L e e d s




                                                                                                       17 S e p t e m b e r 1990

                                                                                  Your Reference



                                                                                  O ur Rcfcrcncc       L /CC C/3/mc i
                                                                                                         DUCKENFIELD

C hie f S uperi n t e n d e n t D G Duck enfiel d




 Dear David

 Hillsborough

 As y o u are aware, w e a re obtaini ng Couns el's A d v i c e as to your p ersonal
 p o s i t i o n in r e l a t i o n to the f o r t h c o m i n g c i v i l h e a r i n g in M a n c h e s t e r
 c o m m e n c i n g o n 2nd O c t o b e r a n d the C o r o n e r ' s I n q u e s t s w h i c h a r e d u e to
 r e s u m e on 19th N o v em ber 1990.

 In a d d i t i o n to r e p r e s e n t i n g y o u r i n t e r e s t s at the above, y o u r p o s i t i o n
 wil l als o n eed c o n s i d e r a t i o n and y ourself p o s s i b l e r e p r e s e n t a t i o n at the
 d i s c i p l i n a r y hearing, as and w h e n this commences.

 Finally,             t h e r e is, of course,   the spectre                              of       a      possible            private
 p r o s e c u t i o n which m a y arise at some stage.

 It s e e m s l i k e l y t h a t t h e p r e s e n t f u n d s a v a i l a b l e u n d e r the A l l i a n z
 Pe r s o n a l Law Plan m a y well be e x h a u s t e d b y one or b o t h of the Civil and
 C o r o n e r ' s hearings. Can we impress upon you, therefore, that y o u make the
 s t r o n g e s t r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s b o t h to t h e H o m e O f f i c e a n d to the Chief
 S u p e r i n t e n d e n t ' s A s s o c i a t i o n to a s c e r t a i n the a v a i l a b i l i t y of f u n d s to
 a s s i s t y o u w i t h lega l r e p r e s e n t a t i o n .          This m u s t b e c a r r i e d ou t as a
 m a t t e r of p r i o r i t y for you, b a s s d o n t h e t i m e s c a l e for the v a r i o u s
 hearin g s .




 Yours _aincereiy.-

 C C COUGHLI»""




                            C. 1 C firamkv    D J Gray        A N. Brown               Other Pnnopiil           Regulated b> The La*
    15 F L Sykes            R M. Poflenon       J R Heaps     I A Richardson           E*ershed» off*cr*at     Socwtv m the conduri
    J P Maraenson           P E A Winter        J M. Foster   D M Strachan             Birmingham.Cardiff.     of invenmem taw nr*
    J H Brvan               R. Chapman         J. R Guest     Alison J Slamfonh        Dert*>. London
    J H Finmgan             A * Uitdimore     R M. Ainacoe                             Manchrsier.SewcaMlc.
    P J S Thompson          P. R P Chadwick   P A Smith                                Norwich Nottingham.
                            R. C Davr,        B i Horrocks                             Warrington
SOUTH Y O R K S H I R E PO LICE AUT HO RIT Y

19 october 1990       AND 2 NOVEMBER 1990
R EPO RT BY THE CH IEF CON STABLE



F I N A NCI AL A S S I S T A N C E TO POLICE OFFIC ERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS



1.    M a t t e r for Considerat ion

1.1   The prov ision of financial              assist ance to police officers involved in
      legal pro ceedings  arising              from the events at Hillsbo rough Football
      Ground on 15 April 1989.



2.    Backg r o u n d Information

2.1   Home Office C ircular No. 77/1987, publ ished on 4 December        1987 and
      adopted by this A u t h ority on 8 April 1988, provides g uidance to Police
      Authorit ies in consideri ng applications, on behalf of polic e officers,
       for financial assistance in legal proceedings.

2.2   The central pri ncipl e w hich should guide considera tion of individual
       cases is that, where a police auth ority considers that an officer has
       acted in good faith in pu rsuance of his duties or that the interests
       of the force as a whole are     involved,  the officer should have the
       support of the police a uthority to ensure that he has the services
       of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket.

2.3   After the publ icati on of the Inte rim Report      of Lord Justice Taylor
       into the Hil lsbor ough Disaster the Chief Constable of the West Midlands
       Police was    appointed  to enquire   into   the possibility   of criminal
       p roceedings arising from the disaster. At that time an application
       for   financial   assistance   was  received   from  Chief   Superintendent
       Duckenfield, the officer in command at Hills boroug h on the day of the
       disaster.

2.4    At th e time of that appli cation       it was a cknowledged that similar
       a ppl ications for assistance, under the terms of Home Office Circular
       N o . 77/1987, could be anticipat ed from other officers d irectly involved
       in legal proceedings arising from the Hillsboro ugh Disaster.

2.5    The application from Chief Su perint endent Duckenfield was considered
       by the Finance and General Purposes Committee on 15 September 1989
       when the matter was deferred for further consider ation of the roL'e
       of the Aut hority's insurers.

2.6    F o l l o w i n g advice from the A uth ority' s insurers and solicitors, Chief
       Superi ntende nt Duckenfie ld o btained         independent legal representation
       from solicitors          engaged through his staff association and financed
       by his personal legal insurance.

2.7    The funds ava ilable to Chief S u p e rinten dent Duckenfield under this
       policy amounted to £50,000.      His solicitors have advised him that that
       amount  may   be  exhaus ted   by   one   or   both  of  the  on-going Civil
       Contributio ns Hearin g and the f ort hcomi ng Coroner's Inquest.
                                        - 2 -



2.8   A further appl icatio n has now been received from Chief Super intend ent
      D u cke nfiel d for his original application to be re-considered and, as
      anticipated,      similar  applications  have  now   been received    from
      S upe rinten dents Marshall,   Greenwood and Murray;  and an a p plicat ion
      has also been received from Russell Jones and Walker, solicitors, on
      behalf of Police Constables Smith and Illingworth.

2.9   A ll  officers  m akin g applica tion have been  the  direct  subject of
      enquiries by the Chief Constable of the W e s t Midlands Police arising
      fr om allegations of criminal conduct received from third parties.



3     C o mm ent
                        9
3.1   F o l l o w i n g the disaster  and througho ut the Public Inquiry co nducted
      by Lord Justice Taylor, the interests of the Police Authority, the
      Chief Constable and all officers of the Force were r epresented by legal
      officers appointed by          the Polic e Autho rity insurers. In relation  to
      the subsequent criminal enquiry and po ssible pr oceedings the insurers
      i ndi cated to seven South Y orkshire Police officers that a p o ssibil ity
      of conflict could arise between the interests of the Force and each
      of the m independently.         The question of separate legal rep resent ation
      was considered, one officer continued to be represent ed by the insurers
      and the six applicants obtained independent representation.

3.2   M e m b e r s will be aware that the Director of Public Prosecutions, having
      conside red the e vidence re sulting from the enquiry by the W e s t Midlan ds
      Police,        announced on  30 A u gust 1990 his   de cision that there was
      insuffic ient evidence to justify criminal proce edings against any South
      Y o r k sh ire Police officer.     There are, however, certain civil actions
      und er - w a y and the Coroner's Inquest into the deaths at H i llsb oroug h
      wil l resume on 19 November 1990.

3.3   A t the Coroner's Inquest the officers con cerned are likely to be called
      upon to give evidence.     It is acknowled ged that cross examinati on by
      Counsel represe nting other parties may be preju dicial to the individual
      o fficers   in respect of their personal liabilities.      These officers
      consider it nec essary   to continue to be independen tly represen ted at
      this heari ng where the Chief Constable's legal repr esentative cannot
      rea sonabl y be e xpected to r epresent the s eparate interests of each
      of them.

3.4   It will be seen from para graph 13 of the Home Office Circular that
      separate represe ntatio n should be prov ided at a Coroner's Inquest where
      (a)       the     Chief Officers  legal repres entati ve cannot   reasonably be
      e x p ec ted to represent the interests of such officers and, (b) the Police
      A u t h o r i t y considers  that such interests should be      represented. In
      such cases the authority should, in the terms of the Circular, provide
      financial assistance to the individual officers concerned.

3.5   It will be note d at para graph 14 of the C ircular that an officer wish ing
      to seek financial assistance from his police authority should have
      the o p po rtunit y in advance of the proceedings to submit to the Chief
      Con stabl e an app lication for financial assistance.   The Chief Constable
      is obliged to put such application to the authority for decision.
      It will be further seen that the applying officer should normally be
      giv en the op portunity by the police authority to mak e representations
      to them if he wishes to do so.
                                           - 3 -



3.6   The     events    at  H i llsbo rough   were   e x t r aordin ary in  respect   of the
      potential       individual     liability    of    police     officers  involved.   The
      officers were acting           in good    faith     in accordance with establish ed
      practice.       The nature of the various investi gation into the Hil ls b o r o u g h
      Disaster also means that the interests of the South Yor kshire Police,
      as a whole, are involved.             For these two reasons (see para 2.2 ante)
      it is recommended that these of ficers should have the support of t h e
      Police A u t h ority to ensure that they each have the services of a l awye r
      r e p re sentin g their individual interests, at the forthcoming C o r o n e r ' s
      Inquest.

3.7    It w ould be sensible for the officers concerned to retain the s e r vices
       of those lawyers w h o currently repres ent them th rougho ut s u b s e q u e n t
       proceedings.



4     Financ ial Implications

4.1    The cost of independent r e p r e sentat ion has to date been m e t by personal
       legal insurance arranged through The Superintendents' A ssoc i a t i o n for
       Chief Sup erint endent Duckenfi eld and S uperintendents Marshall, Murray,
       and Greenwood.    Constables Smith and Illingworth, meanwhile, have beer
       repres ented by Messrs Russell Jones       and Walker, the Police F edera tion
       solicitor, paid for by central Police Fed eratio n funds.

4.2   The extent of future costs will be           determ ined by the        time taken to
       conclude the Inquest.   There is no         specific provision       in the Revenue
       Budget for these costs.



5      R e c o m m endat ion

5.1    The  A u t h orit y  is  recomm ended  to  approve        a     commitment to  provide
       financial       assistance   for   legal  re pres e n t a t i o n  at  the forthcoming
       Inquest, to the officers concerned, in accordance wit h the principles
       of Home Office Circular N o . 77/1987.




                                                      N O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as it
R I C H A R D WELLS                                   contains     exempt information
C H I E F C O N S TABLE
                                                      within para. •            ••••••••• of
                                                      Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                                                      Act 1972 as amended.
APPENDICES:   A.    A p p l i c a t i o n from   Chief Super i n t e n d e n t Du ckenfield

              B.    App lic a t i o n from       Super intend ent       Marshall

              C.    Appli c a t i o n from       Supe rinte ndent        Murra y

              D.    A p plicat ion from          Supe rinten dent        Greenwood

              E.   Letter from Messrs Russell Jones and Walker,
                   solicitors repres entin g Consta bles Smith and Illingworth

              F.   Home Office Circular N o . 77/1987
                                                             flPfteNV>fX 'A'
                                   SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                              Ref;            DGD/CJD

    From:    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield                 Station/Dept:

    To:      The Chief Constable                              Date:           21 September 1990



            SUBJECT:   Hillsborough Disaster - Funding for Legal Representation

            On 24 August 1989 I made application under Home Office Circular
            No 77/87 for yourself and the Police Authority to give due
            consideration for funds to be made available for my legal
            representation in connection with any proceedings which may arise
            from the Hillsborough Disaster.

            These proceedings are currently the Civil Hearings due to begin in
            Manchester on 2 October to be followed by the Coroner's Inquest on
            19 November 1990. There is also the possibility that Discipline
            Proceedings may follow at a later stage.

            Whilst the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
            of Criminal Matters has been favourable it is not unreasonable to
            assume that if further evidence came to light he would reconsider
            the position with regard to myself and other officers.

            There is also the stated intention, admittedly via the media, by
            families of the deceased that they intend to launch a private
            prosecution for manslaughter against officers of South Yorkshire
            Police.

            It is therefore of paramount importance that the best independent
            legal advice possible is available for myself and other officers.

            My previous application for financial assistance was, as I understand
            it, 'left on the table' in the knowledge that I had insurance cover
            for my legal defence up to the sum of £50,000.

            If I require legal representation at the Civil Hearings and Coroner's
            Inquest it is likely that my defence costs will exceed the sum assured
            and I will require additional funding (bearing in mind Discipline
            and Private Prosecution).

            I ask for urgent reconsideration of my request in the hope that a
            contribution could be made towards my legal defence costs or an
            agreement to meet all reasonable expenditure over and above the sum
            assured.

            I have attached a letter from my solicitor and copies of previous
            papers.




Gen/2
Solicitors             T elephone


C loth Hall C o u rt
                       0 5 3 : -430391
                       T elex
                                                                                 HEPV'ORTH
Infirm ary Street
Leeds
                       557917
                       Facsimile
                                                                                 & CHADWICK
LSI 2JB                0532-456188
                                                                                 A M E M B E R O F EVERSHEDS
                        D X 12027 L e e d s




                                                                                                       17 September 1990

                                                                                 Your Rcfcrcncc



                                                                                 Our Rcfcrcncc        L/CCC/3/mci
                                                                                                        DUCKENFIELD

Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield




 De a r D a vid

 Hillsborough

 As you are aware, we are obtaining Counsel's Advice as to your personal
 position in relation to the forthcoming civil hearing in Manchester
 commencing on 2nd October and the Coroner's Inquests which are due to
 resume on 19th November 1990.

 In addition to representing your interests at the above, your position
 will also need consideration and yourself possible representation at the
 disciplinary hearing, as and when this commences.

 Finally,   there is,   of course,   the spectre                                         of       a      possible            private
 prosecution which may arise at some stage.

 It seems likely that the present funds available under the Allianz
 Personal Law Plan may well be exhausted by one or both of the Civil and
 Coroner's hearings. Can we impress upon you, therefore, that you make the
 strongest representations both to the Home Office and to the Chief
 Superintendent's Association to ascertain the availability of funds to
 assist you with legal representation. This must be carried out as a
 matter of priority for you, bassd on the time scale for the various
 hearin




 Yoyrs ^aincerexy..
   ✓    >,
        v.


 C C COUGHLIN""^




                           C    I C Bramtev    D J C ny        A N Brown              Other Pnnnpal           Rtfulaied by The Lr»
                           R    M. Pofirnoo    J R Heap*.      I A Rxrhard'OC         E versheds o fte n al   Sonetv *n the conduct
   D F L. Sykes
   J P Margemon            P    E. A NMnier    J. M Foster     D M Stmch*r>           Bjrmwigham. Cardiff.    a t mvtsimenf buwnev-
   J .H . Bryan            R    Chapman        J R Curst       Ahson J Sumfonh        O e rtv London.
   J H Fmnipan             A    W Laiehmore    R M Airtttxx                           Manchester. Ncwc»4k.
   P J. S Thompson         P    R P Chadwtck   P A Sm»ih                              Norwich. Nottingham.
                           R    C. D»v»s       R. J HotTOcks                          Wtimnpon
                                      SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
Staff in confidence                                              Ref:            TWS/MR
        From:   Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield             Station/Dept:   Headquarters

    To:         The Chief Constable                              Date:           24 August 1989



                SUBJECT:      APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE


                 The interim report of the Inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor into
                 the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster that occurred on the 15 April 1989 was
                 published at 1100 hours on Friday 4 August 1989* The report was very
                 critical of the South Yorkshire Police in general and, in particular, myself
                 and a number of other
                                  O    police officers.

                 National media interest   and comments followed publication and, in view of
                 the extensive criticism   in the report regarding my handling of events on
                 the day of the disaster   and the possibility of actions of criminal
                 negligence/disciplinary   proceedings, I was suspended from duty on the 4
                 August 1989.

                 The Director of Public Prosecutions was, I understand, requested         to examine
                 Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report and subsequently instructed         the West
                 Midlands Police to carry out a full criminal investigation, 'not         limited
                 to the criminal culpability of the police alone' into the events         that
                 occurred at Hillsborough on the 15 April 1989-

                 Whilst no criminal charges have been brought to date against me, the
                 possibility of charges being brought exists and I will, no doubt, be
                 interviewed by the West Midlands Police during the course of their criminal
                 investigations. There is also a possibility of interviews in respect of
                 disciplinary allegations made against me for whidh' a Regulation 7 Notice
                 has been served.

                 I was authorised to obtain independent legal advice from Hammond Suddards
                 resulting in being advised by them to obtain further private independent
                 legal advice as Hammond Suddards could not assist me personally as no
                 criminal charges had been made.  I am now obtaining independent legal advice
                 through a personal Legal Protection Insurance Policy.

                 The policy gives a maximum cover of £50,000.  If I need legal representation
                 at interviews with the West Midlands Inquiry Team regarding possible
                 criminal or disciplinary matters and at protracted inquest hearings, which
                 are unlikely to take place until early 1990, then there is little doubt
                 my legal costs will be very much in excess of this figure.

                 If any criminal proceedings are brought against members of the South
                 Yorkshire Police (and manslaughter charges are possible), it is imperative,
                 in the interests of the force, the Police Authority and any individual
                 officer, that those concerned have had the benefit of the best possible
                 legal advice and representation at any forthcoming judicial hearings.
         L
                 Whilst the force has been, and continues to be, legally represented matters
                 are very complex and conflict of interest can arise in areas concerning
                 different individuals.




Gen/2
Attached is a copy of Home Office Circular No.7 7 / 1 9 8 7 - 'Financial
Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings'.        I draw your attention
to paragraphs 1, 2, 12 - 15 inclusive.  In accordance with paragraph 13,
I therefore respectfully request that application be made to the Police
Authority for financial assistance in order that       I am properly advised and
represented at any future criminal or disciplinary hearings.
As indicated at paragraph 2 of the circular, any       payments made toofficers
in accordance with the guidance are eligible for police grant.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY     NOT FOR PUBLICATION as 1t
FINANCE & GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE contains   exempt     Information
                                     within para. . . . £ ............. of
15 SEPTEMBER 1989
                                        Sch.l2A to the Local Government
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE           Act 1972 as' amended.           I


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

1.    Matter for Consideration

      The provision of financial assistance to police officers Involved In
      legal proceedings arising from the event at Hillsborough Football Ground
      on 15 April 1989.


2.    Background Information

2.1   Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987, provides
      guidance to Police Authorities on the exercise of their discretion in
      considering applications, on behalf of police officers* for financial
      assistance towards the cost of legal advice and representation arising
      from involvement in legal proceedings which result from the pursuance, in
      good faith, of their duties or where the Interests of the Force as
      whole are Involved. A copy of the Circular is attached.            ‘Pv. •
                                                                              .

2.2   Arising from the publication of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor
      into the Hillsborough Disaster, the subsequent appointment of the Chief
      Constable of the Vest Midlands Police to enquire into the justification
      for criminal proceedings arising from the disaster and the forthcoming
      Coroner's Inquest into the deaths, an application for assistance has been
      received from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who was involved in
      command of the policing arrangements for the football Semi-Final and
      similar applications from other officers similarly involved might be
      anticipated.


3.    Comment

3.1   Following the disaster and throughout the Public Inquiry the Interests of
      the Police Authority, the Chief Constable and all officers of the Force
      have been represented by legal officers appointed by the Police Authority
      insurers. The legal officers appointed by the insurers have indicated
      that in relation to criminal proceedings they would be unable to provide
      representation for individual officers who should seek independent legal
      advice and representation.

3.2   It will be seen from the Home Office Circular Ho. 77/1987, that the
      central principle which should guide consideration of individual cases is-
      that, where a Police Authority considers that an officer has acted in
      good faith in pursuance of his duties or that where the interests of the
      Force as a whole are involved, the officer should have the support of the
      Police Authority to ensure that he has the services of a lawyer and that
      he should not be out of pocket.


3.3   It will be further seen that in respect of criminal proceedings pursued
      by the Crown Prosecution Service against an individual officer he should
      be expected to bear the costs of his own defence and the Police
                                     - 2 -

      Authority, at the conclusion of the proceedings, are able to consider, on
      the full facts, whether or not to reimburse any expenses Incurred by the
      officer and not awarded by the trial court, even where proceedings have
      resulted In conviction In certain circumstances. It will be noted from
      paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing to seek financial
      assistance should have the opportunity to submit to the Chief Officer an
      application for financial assistance, upon receipt of which the Chief
      Officer should refer the application to the Police Authority together
      with his own recommendation. It will be further seen that the applying
      officer should normally be given the opportunity by the Police Authority
      to make representations to them If he wishes to do so. At this stage
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield wishes to reserve the right to so appear
      at a future date If necessary.

3.4   The events at Hillsborough were unique In respect of the potential
      criminal liability of.police officers involved. The officers were acting
      in good faith In accordance with well established practices and any
      criminal proceedings will largely constitute a test case similar to the
      example provided In paragraph three of the Hone Office Circular. The
      unique nature of the circumstances of this particular criminal enquiry
      with Its wide implications for the interests of        Force as a whole is
      such that the Police Authority nay wish to considfljjii at this stage, a
      commitment to the funding of independent legal advice for the officer(s)
      concerned. The financial commitment of the officers is likely to#-^.:
      commence with advice and representation prior to and during Interviews .
      undertaken by West Midlands Police officers in the course of t h e i r ■   .
      enquiry. It would be prudent for that representation to continue           ^
      throughout the enquiry and any subsequent criminal proceedings and to
      extend to representation at the Coroner's Inquest which will ultimately
      be held.

3.5   At this stage it is anticipated that representation in any civil actions
      subsequently pursued will be provided by the Police Authority insurers.

3.6   It should be noted that there is available, to all,officers of
      superintendent and chief superintendent rank who liaye chosen to
      contribute, a measure of personal liability insurance arranged by the
      Superintendents' Association of England and Vales. The individual
      liability limit of this insurance cover is £50,000.


4.    Financial Implications

      It is not possible at this stage to assess the financial Implications of
      this matter which will depend entirely on the course and extent of the
      criminal enquiry and the ultimate outcome, and the duration of the
      Inquest proceedings. There is no specific provision in the Revenue
      Budget for this expenditure.


5.    Recommendation

      The Committee is recommended to approve a commitment to provide financial
      assistance for legal representation to the officer(s) concerned in
      accordance with the central principle of Home Office Circular No.
      77/1987.


P VRIGHT
CHIEF CONSTABLE
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN1 LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
Constable was submitted on the guidelines contained in Home Office
Circular No. 77/87 on the responsibilities of Police Authorities in
respect of legal costs arising from the involvement of police officers
and non-police employees of Police Authority in legal proceedings.
The Circular both confirmed and expanded current policies within the
South Yorkshire Police and recommended criteria to assist Police
Authorities in considering whether financial assistance should be
approved in any particular proceedings. If followed, the criteria
would ensure that any payments authorised in consequence to be met
from the Police Fund would qualify for Home Office grant.
RESOLVED - That the Police Authority adopt the procedures in Home
Office Circular No. 77/87 and enclose the current policies detailed
in the report now submitted relating to legal costs arising from the
involvement of police officers and non-police employees of the Police
Authority in legal proceedings, subject to any applications continuing
to be submitted to the Police Authority for consideration should the
Authority's Insurers decline to undertake any particular defence.
HIGH VELOCITY CATAPULTS
The Authority considered a letter dated 8th February, 1988 from the
Management Co-ordinator of the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council
requesting the Police Authority to consider Minute 1171 of the
Council's Consumer and Enviornmental Services Committee of 8th
January, 1988 relating to the Council's concern over the availability
of high velocity catapults. The letter included a report considered
by the Committee detailing the tests and test results on four
catapults purchased locally and tested at the Department of Civil and
Structural Engineering of the University of Sheffield. The results
were considered to be disturbing;-
The Chief Constable displayed to the Authority the type of catapult
referred to and reported that he had already responded to the AMA that
such catapults should be regarded as designated weapons. The Clerk
and Financial Officer also pointed out that the Criminal Justice Bill
would prohibit their manufacture and sale.
RESOLVED:-
1.    That the representations already made by the Chief Constable and
      the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council to the Association of
      Metropolitan Authorities be supported.
2.    That the Clerk and Financial Officer be requested to write to
      the Chambers of Trade to seek their support of a voluntary ban
      on the sale of high velocity catapults, pending the
      implementation of the provisions of the Criminal Justice Bill.
                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                               R e f:             F/RM/GP

    From   Superintendent Marshall, *F* Division               Station I Dept:      F DHQ

   To                                                          D ata :   24 September 1990
           Deputy Chief Constable, Mr P Hayes, HQs


           SUBJECT:                  HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER -
                                RESIMED INQUESTS 19 NCJVHvBH* 1990


           Sir

           Through my solicitor, Mr Vincent Hale, of Nash House, 140 Upperthorpe,
           Sheffield, I have received intimation of the resumed inquests into the
           deaths at Hillsborough.    I shall be required to give evidence at this
           inquest which resumes on 19 November 1990.

           You will perhaps be aware that I have been represented throughout the West
           Midlands Police enquiry into the disaster by Mr Hale and that his costs to
           date are subject of a claim upon private insurance effected by myself
           through my membership of the Superintendents Association.       Mr Hale has
           submitted an interim account upon the insurers, which has not yet been met.
           I wish, 7therefore, to make formal application under the terms of the Home
           Office Circular 77/87 to tfte South Yorkshire Police Authority for financial
           assistance towards Mr AViHcent Hale's costs in connection wi th hi s
           representa ion of ny int&jests at the forthcoming inquest.




                 intendent




GEN/2
                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                              Ref:
    From :     Superintendent Murray                          Station / Dept:Rawrrersh

    To         Deputy Chief Constable                         D ate :   1 October 1990


             SUBJECT:         APPLICATION FDR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE




               In connection with the Hillsborough tragedy of 1989 and allegations
               made against me, I have been taking legal advice from Walker, Morris,
               Scott and Turnbull, Solicitors of Leeds, and in particular Mr Richard
               Manning of that company.      The finance for this advice has been
               available through my own private insurance.    Although the Director of
               Public Prosecutions has stated that proceedings will not be taken
               against any Police officer, there are still many matters unsettled and
               I may still require significant legal advice and assistance.

               I have been informed that the Coroners Inquest is to start on 19
               November 1990, and that this will be a lengthy enquiry and it is
               probable that my legal costs will exceed the limit of my Insurance,
               particularly if other matters follow the Inquest, e.g. criminal or
               disciplinary proceedings.

               Accordingly under Home Office circular No. 77 of 1987, I ask that an
               approach be made to the Police Authority to give consideration to
               making funds available for my Legal Representation in connection vdth
               the forthcoming Inquest, civil hearing and any criminal proceedings
               which may arise, which would allow me to maintain the services of Mr.
               Manning,   who with his existing knowledge of my particular
               circumstances, I feel is the best person to represent myself.




GEN/2
                            SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                         Ref:

From:   Superintendent Greenwood                        Station/Dept: A1 Doncaster

To:     Chief Constable                                 Date.            October 1990



        SUBJECT:   FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IN RESPECT of legal support


        Emanating from the 1Hillsborough Disaster' certain proceedings require to
        be finalised, in particular the inquest proceedings which I understand
        will commence on the 19th November.

        I hereby make formal application, through you, to the Police Authority for
        funding in respect of such legal advice and representation as is deemed
        necessary by my legal advisors.

        I am represented in this matter by Messrs Barlow, Hyde and Gilbert,
        Beaufort House, 15 Batolph Street, London, EC3A 7NJ.




        Supei
                   R U S S E L L JONES & WALKER
                                                                                                                                          S O L IC IT O R S


                       4 t h F l o o r B r a z e n n o s e H o u s e B r a z e n n o s e S t r e e t M a n c h e s t e r M 2 5 A Z T e l e p h o n e : 061 8 3 2 8 8 7 7
                                                                            Fax: 061 8 3 2 7 0 0 h              D X 143 40                                            _____




                                                                                                                                                Your R ef :        DCC/JEL
The Deputy Chief Constable                                                                                                                       O urR ef:         NH/LP/HILLSBR0/387044
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters                                                                                                                                   D ate:
                                                                                                                                                                   19 September 1990
Snig Hill
SHEFFIELD
S3 8LY

Dear Sir,
Hillsborough Disaster - Inquest
We have been notified by Her Majesty's Coroner of his intention to resume the
Inquests in the deaths of the 95 people on the 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough
Stadium, which Inquests are to resume on the 19 November 1990.
We would refer to previous correspondence and, in particular, to our letter of
the 6 April 1990, addressed to the Chief Constable, and to your response of the
11 April 1990. We would take this opportunity to repeat our request for financial
assistance for separate legal representation out of Police Authority Funds,
pursuant to the provisions of the Home Office Circular No 77/87.
It is our intention to provide representation by Counsel .on behalf of two
police constables in particular, Police Constable David Alfred Illingworth and
Police Constable Peter Edward Smith. It is our firm view that these officers
remain open to substantial criticism, despite the decision of the Director of
Public Prosecutions not to bring criminal proceedings. As you will fully
appreciate, there is still a threat of private prosecutions by individual
complainants. We are satisfied that if called to give evidence before the
Inquests, these officers are reasonably likely to face examination by solicitors
or Counsel on behalf of relatives of the deceased, which may be prejudicial to
the officers. There also remains the threat of disciplinary proceedings,
arising out of the investigation by West Midlands Police. Again, as long as
that threat remains, we feel that representation can be justified.
You will no doubt appreciate that the allegations made against these particular
officers, are of a serious nature and include abuse to members of the public, a
failure to act with speed, which individual complainants will say, had a direct
bearing upon the deaths of individuals and further, allegations of assault. .In
the case of Constable Illingworth, there are a number of allegations, but in
particular there is a complaint by Edward Spearritt, father of the deceased
Adam Edward Spearritt, who alleges that the officer failed to open Gate 4 in
the perimeter fencing, despite loud appeals directed to him, his position being
in such close proximity to the complainant which, it is alleged, had a direct
bearing on the death of his son and the cause of injuries to himself. In the
case of Peter Edward Smith, he faces allegations by a David Anthony Lackley to
the effect that the officer failed to open Gate 3 when asked, which had he done
so, would have saved the life of some supporters and when the gate was opened,
Police Constable Smith pushed one person back into the crowd.   This presents a
                                                                                                                                                                   Cont/d. . . . . .
  J.M. Webber T.D .B . Taylor l.J. Walker A.F Whitehead R.J. Turner R M . Abbe> I.R. FJctcher G.C. Solly W D O 'B rien R.A Plane PJ. Dans J.M.P. Colman R.C. Langton D.R. Louw
      J I   Raskin S Raskin E J O Cooper S C Ingram S B Holroyd J.C. Clarke W illu m s S L Webb D.A.B. Twig* PR. Ashurst J.M. Pune S.J.N Allen C c m n h a n i J.C. Walker


                                                  R e g u l a t e d by T h e L a w S o c i e t y t n t h e c o n d u c t o f I n v e s t m e n t B u s i n e s s
                                                  L O N D O N        L E E D S       BIRM IN G HA M               BRISTOL             M A N C H E S T E R
The Deputy Chief Constable                                19 September 1990

This presents a general allegation that the officer's behaviour on the day in
question, had a direct bearing upon the deaths of a number of unnamed supporters.
Additionally, he faces an allegation by Stephen Paul Hendry to like effect, in
that it is said he failed to open Gate 3, despite protestations and ordered
people to push back. It is also alleged against this officer that he assaulted
an unknown person by pushing him back over the fence, into Pen 3.
We anticipate that you will see from these allegations, that these officers are
at risk arid the interests of justice require them to be represented.
We would maintain that in this instance, the officers were acting at all times
in good faith and in pursuance of their duties. We would also maintain that
the particular interests of these officers are such that they could not properly
be represented by those representing the interests of the Police Authority/Chief
Constable. We are sure that you will give our above comments full consideration
and we would ask that appropriate recommendations be made to the Police Authority.
We thank you in anticipation.
Yolk' s f a i t h f u l l y ,



              JONES & WALKER




cc:      Constables' Central Committee
                                                            HOME OFFICE
                                                  Queen A nne’s Gate      L o n d o n      S W lH   9AT
                                                              D - n : i Uk { 0 i - 2 1 5
                                                                                       30?-:              F

  O:.
        • v ,:*v   P O L /8 7   1 0 2 7 / 1 / 2
   ifi'V'i'W




  The Clerk to the Police Authority
  The Chief Officer of Police
                                                                                               4 December 1987




   jear Sir


  HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 77/87
  FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS >

  There is statutory authority in section 48 of the Police Act 1964 for
  payments to be Bade from the police fund to Beet expenditure incurred
  by police officers in defending proceedings in tort*' Also, acting in
  pursuance of its general statutory duty to aaintain an adequate and
  efficient police force for its area, the police authority has
  discretion to Beet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds iof
  legal proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith In
  pursuance of their duties, or the interests of the force as a vhole
  are involved.   The purpose of this circular is to give guidanca to
/^police authorities to help then in considering requests on behalf of
wofficers for financial assistance. This guidance has been discussad
   ind agreed with the local authority and with the police staff
  associations.
  2.    The central principle which should guide consideration of
  individual cases is that, where a police authority considers that an
  officer has acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties or that
  the interests of a force as a whole are involved, the officer ahould
  have the support of the police authority to ensure that he has the
  services of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket. The
  following paragraphs provide general guidance to the different
  classes of proceedings. Paynents Bade to officers in accordance with
  this guidance will be eligible for police grant.



                                                                                                                 1
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Prosecution bv the Crovn Prosecution Service

3.   An officer who is the subject of a public prosecution for an
alleged offence committed while carrying out his duties as a police
officer is in the same position as any other defendant and must be
expected to bear the costs of his defence. If he is acquitted, he
should, like any other defendant, look to the court for
reimbursement of his expenses. If the costs are not paid, or not
paid in full from central funds, the police authority are in a
position to decide, on the full facts, whether or not to sake a
payment to the officer or to the Police Federation if they have
provided the funding.   There may be cases where it is proper to
provide legal advice and/or legal representation even where the
officer is found guilty. This may arise for example in test cases
where the officer *has been carrying out a practice hitherto
approved of but is found guilty as a result of that practice being
found unlawful by the court in the light of the circumstances of
that particular case.

Private Prosecutions
4. A police officer should be able to carry out his duties
confidence that, if he acts in good fsith end exercises /Bi*
judgement reasonably, his police authority frill support him. If, •
in a case where a member of the public brings a prosecution against
an officer, the authority is satisfied that the officer has acted
in this way, the authority should provide or fund legal advice
and/or representation.
5.   Where a court decides that • prosecution brought against an
officer was not brought in good faith, it may order the prosecutor
to pay the whole or any part of the costs incurred by the defence?
again, if the officer is acquitted on indictment, his costs may be
met from central funds. In either of these cases, the question of
the police authority providing financial support to the officer may
not arise.   However, where the costs of an acquitted officer are
not awarded by the court or awarded only in part, the police
authority should consider whether to reimburse any costs not
covered, taking into account the reasons, if any, given by the
court for failing to award all costs claimed.

CIVIL PROCEEDINGS
Civil Actions   Against   tl.e Chief_ Of flC«r t9I         Acts   91
Constables
6.   Under section 48(1) of the Police Act 1964, the chief officer
of a force is liable in respect of torts committed by constables
under his direction and control (which includes special constables
and officers of other forces serving in the police area under
mutual aid arrangements)       in the performance or purported
performance of their functions. Under section 48(2) any damages or
                                                                  2
costs awarded against the chief officer in such proceedings, any
costs he incurs himself, and any sum paid in connection with the
settlement of a claim, provided the settlement is approved by the
police authority, must be paid out of the police fund.      In such
cases, therefore, the police authority's discretion extends only to
whether or not to approve a proposed settlement of the claim.


civil Actions Against Individual Police Officers

7. Alternatively, the plaintiff nay be awarded damages against an
individual police officer, though he cannot recover the damages
twice over against the chief officer as well. Section 48(4) of the
Police Act 1964 specifically empowers a police authority "to such
extent as they think fit" to pay out of the police fund any damages
or costs awarded against an officer^ any costs he incurs himself,
and any sums paid in connection with the settlement of a claim.
This provision applies to actions against officers of the
authority's own force, officers of another force serving the police
area under mutual aid arrangements, and special constables for the
police area.   In considering whether to.give financial assistance
the authority will wish to consider in particular whether the
officer concerned acted in good faith and exercised his judgement
reasonably. Where the court finds for the officer, he may seek his
costs from the plaintiff; should the costs not be awarded or
awarded only in part, the police authority should consider whether
to reimburse any costs not covered, taking ’ into account the
reasons, if any, given by the court for failing to award all costs
claimed.
8 .  Joint actions naming both the chief officer and an individu&l
police officer may be brought in some cases. In such cases it is
important that any discussion of the merits and quantum of the
proposed settlement should involve all the parties named in the
claim together with advisers even if they are represented by
different advisers.

civil Actions Under the Data Protection Act .188.4,
9.   Under sections 22 and 23 of the Data Protection Act 1984 an
individual who suffers damage as a result of the inaccuracy, loss
or unauthorised disclosure of personal data is entitled to
compensation from the data user. In the absence of any ease law on
these provisions, it is unclear whether the act* covered by
sections 22 and 23 amount to torts, to which the guidance in
paragraphs 6 and 7 above applies. If not, section 48 of the Police
Act 1964 does not apply.     However, the position is broadly the
same.    Under section 38(3) (a) of the 1984 Act constables are
treated as servants of the chief officer for the purposes of the
Act.   A chief constable is therefore liable for the acts of his
officers falling within sections 22 and 23 in the same vay as he is
liable for their torts under section 48(1) •          f JL11
police officers is less clear but it is possU>le that in some cases
the chief constable might be regarded as having liability
acts. It follows that it would be proper for the police authority
to meet all costs, including any award of compensation, arising
from this liability. It should be noted that the liability of the
"data user" under the Act is not vicarious but his personal
liability. Therefore his own care in having instituted a system of
obtaining, checking and recording data which would reasonably guard
against error and loss under section 23(3) of the Act should neet
his responsibility under section 22(3) and ha should not be held
liable if one of his officers disregards the systen astablishad.
10.   Where compensation is sought from an individual officer, the
police authority will wish, in considering vhathar to neet the
costs which would otherwise fall on tha officar, to taka account of
the same natters as in axercising their power under section 48(4)
of the Police Act 1964 (sae paragraph 7).        Police authorities
should apply tha same broad principles and in particular, seat the
costs of any compensation awarded against a chief constable where a
non-police officer is at fault and the chief constable is found to
have liability for the actions performed.

Police Officers Bringing Civil Actions for Defamation

11.   There nay be occasions when financial assistance is sought
from a police authority to enable an officer to bring or consider
bringing a civil action for defamation.          An authority .has
discretion to give such assistance but it will be eligibla Cor
police grant only if the following criteria are all net:-
     (a)   the defamation is serious;
     (b)   it relates to tha actions of an officar acting      or
     said to be acting in tha discharge of his duty;
     (c)   it has attracted public attention?
     (d)   to bring the action is considered to be in tha
     interests of the force or of tha police service as a
     whole; and
     (e)   the action stands a reasonable chance of success.
Criterion (d) is central. If only the reputation of the individual
officer is in question, he is in the sane position as any other
citizen and must be axpected to seek his own raaedy.         But an
allegation against a particular officer nay well reflect on the
reputation of the whole force or b« an axanple of wider allegations
against the force or a significant section of it.     In such cases
the police authority, provided the other criteria are satisfied,
nay reasonably be axpected to help to defend the reputation of the
force.




                                                                    4
INQUESTS, PUBLIC ENQUIRIES AND T RIBUNAL

legal.Representation for Chief Officers

12.  Any interested   arty nay be legally represented at an inquest
but at his own expense since expenses are payable only to witnesses
and jurors.   An interested party will normally be entitled to be
legally represented at a public enquiry or other public tribunal.
Where the interest of the force is affected, it will be appropriate
for the police authority to provide at its expense for the chief
officer to be legally represented on behalf of the force.

Legal Representation for Individual Officers

13. Separate representation for individual officers whose interest
is involved may be necessary. For example, there will be occasions
when (a) the chief officer's legal representative cannot reasonably
be expected to represent the separate interests of such officers
and (b) the police authority considers that such interests should
be represented. In such cases the authority should give financial
assistance to the officers.        In considering (b) above, the
authority will wish in particular to assess whether the officers
are at risk of being held to blame for actions in connection with
the death to which the inquest relates and whether any such finding
might give rise to legal proceedings for the costs of which the
police authority would be liable under section 46(1) of the Police
Act 1964 or for which financial assistance might be appropriate
within the terns of this circular.

APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
14.    An officer wishing to seek financial assistance from his
police authority should have the opportunity in advance of as well
as on the conclusion of the proceedings to submit to the chief
officer tn application for financial assistance. The chief officar
should put this, together with his own recommendation to the police
authority for decision.   The officer should normally be given the
opportunity by the police authority to make representations to tham
if he wishes to do so.
15.    If it decider to give financial assistance, the authority
should inform the officer concerned that, if the information on
which they based their decision to grant the assistance is ahown in
subsequent legal proceedings to be inaccurate or incomplete, the
authority will normally expect to recover the money unless it is
satisfied that no cilpable misrepresentation was involved and that
to recover the money would involve the applicant in substantial
hardship.   On the other hand, if an authority refuses financial
assistance and then discovers in the light of subsequent avents
that auch assistance would have been warranted, then financial
assistance should be granted in order to meet the reasonable costs
incurred by the officer in seeking legal advice or assistance.
• Assistance front Police Federation Funds

16. Under Regulation 19 of the Police Federation Regulations 1969,
as amended, Federation funds may be used to defray legal charges
incurred by a member in connection with criminal proceedings
brought against him for an offence under the road traffic
enactments (other than offences involving driving when impaired by
drink or drugs or taking a vehicle without authority), or for
offences of causing the death or injury of any person, or for any
assault, or in connection with his action for libel or slander. An
officer seeking financial assistance in circumstances covered by
Regulation 19 should seek such assistance from the police authority
in the first instance. If the police authority does not consider
the request to fall within the terms of this circular, the
Federation nay then consider the application within the terms of
Regulation 19. Zf the officer receives legal assistance from the
Federation the terms of Home Office Circular Mo 26/1967 will
continue to apply.
17.   General enquiries about the content of this circular say be
addressed to Mr Waghorn, Home Office, FI Division on (01) 213 4208.
                                             Yours faithfully




                                             M J ADDISON
                 S P E CIAL POLICE AUTHORITY M E E T I N G - 2 NOVEMBER 1990



I ntroduction

This m e eting is considering an a p p l i c a t i o n        from six officers     (a chief
superintendent,        three    superintendents and       two constables)     for financial
s u pport to prov ide them with legal r e p r e s e n t a t i o n at the forthcoming Inquest
H e a r i n g into the H i llsborough tragedy.

T h e y have all been investigated by the W e s t Midlands Police, acting for
the Director of Public Prosecutions, in r e l a t i o n to the question of criminal
liability.         The     Director    has  announced       that    at   this  time there is
insuff i c i e n t evid e n c e on which to bring c r i m i n a l proceedings.

Al l the officers continue to see themselve s to be at considerable risk and
consider  independ ent legal representati on  absolutely essential for each
of them.

T h e risks arise from the following f a c t o r s :-

    1.    The possib i l i t y   at   the   Inquest   of   a   verdict   of   unlawful
          killing.

    2.    Of additi o n a l evidence being g i ven at the Inquest which
          may cause the Director of P u b l i c Prosecutions to further
          consider the question of criminal liability.

    3.    Recently in a similar case w h e r e the Director of Public
          Prosecutions     decided    against       criminal        proceedings,
          r epresentatives of the deceased i n s t i g a t e d a Judicial Review
          of   the  Director's  decision.    The     officers      see  this  as
          possible in this case.

    4.    Private criminal prosecutions m a y be brought.

    5.    The of ficers face possible d i s c i p l i n a r y proceedings where
          dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction in rank are
          all possibilities.



R e l e v a n t Considerations

A l l the officers thus far have p r o vi ded for their own legal                   advice and
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n and the application toda y is concerned solely          with costs
l i k e l y to be incurred at the Inquest Hearings.

T o h e l p you with your decision clear advice is                 provided    in   Home   Office
C i r c u l a r 77/1987 which is included in y o u r papers.

T h i s Cir cular refers to a central principle:    this is "that where the Police
A u t h o r i t y considers that an officer has acted in good faith in pursuance
o f his duties or that the interests of the Force as a whole are involved
(and both of these considerations are fully satisfied in this case) the
o f f i c e r should have the support of the Police Au thority to ensure that he
h a s the services of a lawyer and that he should not be out-of-pocket".
                                          - 2 -



I wish to emphasise that all thes e officers were "acting in good               faith in
pursuance of their duties" and undoubtedly "the interests of the                Force as
a whole are involved".   Also, the further risks these officers                 fear are
very real.

Paragraph 13 refers specifically to "Legal Re presentation for Individual
Officers"  particularly  to  o ccasions  when  "the Chief  O f f i cer's   legal
representative  cannot reasonably   be expected to  represent     the   separate
interests of officers".

This issue has been considered on your behalf by the lawyers representing
the Authority and the Chief Const a b l e in this matter.    Their a dvice is that
independent  legal  representation     is   appropriate  for   all   the  officers
concerned.

In    the Circular reference is specifically made to the Autho r i t y "wishing
in   particular to assess whether officers are at risk of being held to blame
for actions in connection with the deaths to which an Inquest r e l ates and
where any such finding m ight give rise to legal proceedings for w h i c h the
Police Authority    would be liable or for which financial a s s i s t a n c e might
be   appropriate".   It will be seen therefore the ad vice in this          Circular
relates very precisely to our situation.



Finance

The Circular makes it clear        that   expenditure   incurred   in   this   r egard   is
eligible for police grant.

W h e n this Committee last cons idered these applications questions were raised
about the private insurance available to the chief s u p e rintendent and three
superintendents.     I can now i n f o r m you that:-

   a.     Through  the insurance   provided by Allianz Cornhill    each            -
          officer has a financial limitation of £50,000 which after
          VAT is taken into account amounts in fact to £42,500 each.

   b.     The policy does   not  specifically cover Inquest Hearings
          but my understanding is that the insurers are p r e p a r e d to
          provide cover in this instance.

   c.     In relation to future risks the officers may need further
           legal advice and representation after the Inquest Hearings
          have been concluded, for example, in relation to criminal,
          private or discipline proceedings.       If the Director of Public
           Prosecutions were   to b ring     criminal proceedings,     in the
           first instance the Police Authority could not - even if
           they so wished - fund the officers' legal costs.        Also there
           is   no   provision   for     the   Authority    to   fund    legal
           representation at discip l i n e hearings.   Therefore, in terms
           of the insurance provision, such possible future requirements
          must be borne in mind.
J
                                            - 3 -



    Some information is now available as to the extent these officers have
    already incurred legal costs and their estimate of costs likely to be
    incurred through representation at the Inquest Hearings. I can provide
    you with the details as y o u wish.

    In relation to the two constables, they do not have private insurance but
    to date have been supported from Police Federation funds.         Their application,
    as with the chief superintendent and three superintendents, is for Police
    A u t h o r i t y funding in relation to legal costs incurred by them at the Inquest
    Hearings.



    Separate Representations

    The Circular, at paragraph 14, makes clear that officers should normally
    be given the opportunity by the Police A u t h ority to make representations
    to them if they so wish.

    W i t h the exception of Con st a b l e Smith, all the       officers and some legal
    advisors are in close attendance.           Some of them     have intimated they may
    wish to exercise their right to a ppear before you           today and make their own
    r epresentation as to their applic a t i o n for financial    assistance.



    Recommend ation

    S outh Yorkshire Police officers m u s t be able to go about their normal duties
    secure in the knowledge that p r o vided they act in good faith and to the
    best of their ability they will always be d e s e rving of and receive the
    support of this Police Authority, including financial provision for legal
    representation when that is appropriate.

    I have no hesitation whatsoever in recommending to you that the proper course
    of action is for these applications to be fully supported.




    D e puty Chief Constable
    2 N o v e mber 1990
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston, BA., I.P J'A .                                                                          Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222
Clerk and Financial Officer                                  Please reply to:                                Fax Barnsley (0226) 730442

                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                              P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ

O ucR »i      SW/MR                              Your Rtf.                                                         12 N o v e m b e r 1990
Th*m iterdB**w *hby                    Mr S Walker                                                 TtJmphont mxt       g20




      To: Members of the Authority




    • Dear Member
       A P P L I C A T I O N BY P O L I C E O F F I C E R S FO R F I N A N C I A L S U P P O R T IN C O N N E C T I O N
       W I T H T H E I N Q U E S T S I N TO T H E D E A T H S OF P E O P L E A T T H E H I L L S B O R O U G H D I S A S T E R
       F u r t h e r to th e m e e t i n g of the P o li c e A u t h o r i t y on 2 N o v e m b e r, w h e n it was
       r e s o l v e d to r e j e c t the a p p l i c a t i o n s at t h at stage. I e n c l o s e a c o py of a
       l e t t e r 1 have since r e c e i v e d f r om the S o l i c i t o r s ac ti n g for C h i e f
       S u p e r i n t e n d e n t D u c k e n f i e l d and in the li gh t of the i n f o r m a t i o n in that
       letter, I have d e c i d e d to r e c o n v e n e the P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y to r e c o n s i d e r the
       applications.
       You will no d o u b t see and he ar t h r o u g h the m e d i a in the next fe w da ys if
       this has not a l r e a d y been b r o u g h t to y o u r atte n t i on , t h at both the Police
       F e d e r a t i o n and the S u p e r i n t e n d e n t s A s s o c i a t i o n are to ma ke a p p l i c a t i o n to
       the c o u r t for a j udicial r e v i e w o f the A u t h o r i t y ’s d e c i s i o n on the 2
       N o v e m b e r . C o pi e s of the c o r r e s p o n d e n c e I have so far r e c e i v e d in this
       c o n n e c t i o n are also e n c l o s e d and it will be m y i n t e n t i o n to u p da t e m e m b e r s
       on this at the m e e t i n g on Friday.
       F o r m e m b e r s ’ a s si s t a n c e , also e n cl o s e d is the original r e po r t of the C h i e f
       C o n s t a b l e in s u p p o r t o f the a p p l i c a t i o n s .
       Yours sincerely



       R C Jtffinston —
       C l e r k and F i n a n c i al O f f i c e r
       Encs
So licitor s                Telephone
                            0 5 3 : 430391
C lo t h H al l C o u r t   Te le x                                                   HEPWORTH
l n f i r m a r s Stre et   557917
L e ed s                    Facsimile                                                 & CHADWICK
lsi     :   jb              0 5 3 : 456188                                            A M E M B E R OF EVERSHEDS
                            D X 12027 Le ed s




                                                                                      d.i.                   7 November 1990

                                                                                      Yowf Reference



                                                                                      O ut R d r r c r c    L/CCC/3/iDCi /
                                                                                                                   DUCKENFIELD

Hr R C Johnston
Clerk to the South Yorkshire Joint
Secretariat
PO 37
Regent Street
                                                                                      SYJS
Barnsley
S YORKSHIRE S7 0 2DX

SENT BY FAX 0226 730442 AND POST

Dear Sir

Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield -
Hillsborough Inquests

As you are aware,   we represent Chief Superintendent Duckenfield in
respect of his position in connection with his personal legal position
arising out of the Hillsborough disaster.  You know that the Sheffield
Coroner is due to resume the Inquests on the 19th November 1990. It is
our view,  and one shared by our Counsel,    that’’ Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield is at risk if not properly legally represented at the
Inquests.

We have received a note of the reasons for the decision not to provide
funding from Mr S Walker.

As you will know, both the South Yorkshire Chief Constable, Richard
Wells, and the Deputy Chief Constable, Peter Hayes, wholly supported
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's application. You are aware of the
submissions in support. There is no question that our Client was acting
other than in good faith in the performance of his public duty on the day


So far as we are aware, all the other main interested parties are likely
to be legally represented throughout the hearing.      We know that the
Hillsborough Family Support Group are funding junior Counsel, Solicitor
and, in their own words "when the need arises", leading Counsel. The
Chief Constable will be represented by Counsel and Solicitor as will the
Club.

The Police Authority should be in no doubt as to this risk which Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield faces in the absence of adequate legal
representation.    The following are the most significant factors when
assessing the risk:-




                               C I C            D J Cr»\        A K Bro**                   Octet Ptmc9«'              JUfwiMed TV
    n    r i sue'              R M Fonrnnr      J R H up-       I A AcKartiO"                         officr* •<       Seam » 9k amfer>
    J   P M*rfrrtw             9 E A Wmir>      J M Fear>       D M Sir«rtvi«
    J   M Brw"                 R Oapm«P         j R Cmn         Abton J hftftilofl*         Dr«fe> London
    J   H f                    A U LMftimort    R M Afnot*                                  MMdVMrr fcrwcAito
    P   J S Th0 "ip*cr         P R P            P A Sffmfi                                  Nw m t Koanfham
                               R C              B J HofTac *1                               W«rrmfto»
C'ONTINl'ATlUN




      1.         THE DPP AND PUBLIC PROSECUTION

                 It has been made clear to us,       in writing, that  notwithstanding
                 that the DPP has decided that at present there is "insufficient"
                 evidence to support a prosecution,the door remains open such that
                 any new or additional evidence          which comes to light in      the
                 Coroner's   I n q u e s t s will be sent to the DPP      for  f u r ther
                 consideration of the criminal matters.

     2.          PRIVATE PROSECUTION

                 We attach extracts from the press relating to the possibility of a
                 private prosecution following in the wake of the DPP's decision.
                 It seems to us that there is every likelihood that such a private
                 prosecution may be attempted if fresh evidence comes to light
                 during the course of the forthcoming Inquest.

      3.         POLICE   (DISCIPLINE) REGULATION 1985   REGULATION 7NOTICES

                 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield is subject to five such Notices
                 and the question of disciplinary proceedings will follow     the
                 conclusion of the Inquests.

     It seems to us that one thing is certain which may affect the above,
     that nobody can foresee what evidence mav arise out of the Inquests.   We
     have today received from the Coroner a provisional list of the witnesses
     who the Coroner may decide to call. The list' exceeds 200 in number.   We
     are told that the great majority of those witnesses did not give evidence
     at the Public Inquiry. They mav not have given evidence in the DPP
     investigations. There is, therefore, quite likely to be new evidence
     which emerges and which is likely to come to the attention of the DPP.

      The risks are very real.       Your assessment of the risk to Chief
      Superintendent Duckenfield is "small", whereas, our view is that the risk
      is considerable. Without the appropriate legal representation, any risk
      cannot be adequately guarded against. You are aware that the legal
      representatives of the Chief Constable have confirmed that there exists a
      potential conflict of interest between the Chief Constable and Chief
      Superintendent Duckenfield, and that accordingly, he requires separate
      representation.

      The effect of the decision to reject the application, is that Chief
      Superintendent Duckenfield will not have the representation which hs
      requires in order that his interests are protected. Our Client has been
      at risk since the tragedy and hence his private funds have been seriously
      depleted.  The funds left available to him under the terms of his private
      Insurance policy with Allianz/Cornhill may provide representation on 5 or
      6 days of what is anticipated to be an Inquest which may run to 8 or 9
      weeks.

      From a practical point of view, we would have anticipated legal costs to
      represent Chief Superintendent Duckenfield at the Inquests to amount to
      something in the region of (£35,OOO^Further, it is our understanding that
      the Home Office would provide the Police Authority with a rebate of the
      order of 50% of the financial backing provided to our Client.
( O N T I N l ATlON




     In all the circumstances, therefore, we would ask you to take immediate
     steps to reconvene a meeting of the Authority to reconsider their
     decision and exercise their discretion in his favour for the reasons set
     out above. As time is of the essence, may we please hear from you within
     the next 48 hours.

      Would you please not hesitate to contact the Writer, Mr Coughlin, should
      you require    any   f u r t h e r i n f o r m a t i o n and s h o u l d any p e r s o n a l
      representation be considered appropriate or suitable, then the Writer, or
      indeed our Counsel, would be happy to attend before the Authority.
    Anger over Hillsborough
    'no charges’ decision                                                                                                                                                                " T h e D PP 's c o n c lu s io n Is v e ry surprising.
 ly MIKE WOODCOCK                                                                                                                                                                        If 96 S h effie ld e r s had been k illed and a
  B ER E A V E D rela tiv e s m e t e d w ith a n g e r                                                                                                                                  la rg e n u m b e r Injured 1 th in k th ere w o uld
  a n d a s to n is h m e n t la s t n ig h t after It w a s                                                                                                                             b e d e e p critic ism In S h effield o f th e DPP's
  a n n o u n c e d th at p o lice o fficers o n d u ty at                                                                                                                               c o n c lu s io n ."
  th e tim e o f th e H illsborough d isa ster w ill                                                                                                                                        T h e D e p u ty C h ie f C o n s ta b le o f S o u lh
  not be p r o secuted for m a n slau g h te r or                                                                                                                                        Y orksh ire. Mr Peter H ayes, sa id th e n e w s
: a n y o th e r c rim in a l offence.                                                                                                                                                   b ro ug h t relief to h is force.
I T h e D lr e c to r o fP u b lic P r o s e c u tio n s .M r                                                                                                                                In a sta te m e n t h e said: "T he u n c e r ­
I A lla n Green, s a id In a sta te m e n t that                                                                                                                                         ta in ty u n til n o w h a s ca u sed s o m e officers
■ th ere w a s Insufficient e v id e n c e upon                                                                                                                                          a n d th eir fa m ilie s a great deal of distress.
  w h ic h c o u r t ch a r g es c o uld be brought.                                                                                                                                     T h e director's d e c isio n is not a m a tte r for
      Ills decisio n w a s im m ed ia tely c o n ­                                                                                                                                       s elf-co n g ra tu la tio n o n th e part of S o u lh
  d e m n ed a s u n a cc e p ta b le a n d a w h itew a sh                                                                                                                              Y o rksh ire Police, a lth o u g h It b ring s
  b y M erseyside MPs an d fam ilies o f th e 95                                                                                                                                         w ith It a m e a s u r e o f relief.
  football fan s cru sh ed to death nt th e                                                                                                                                                  "Grief tr a v e ls In m a n y g u is e s a n d
  disaster.                                                                                                                                                                              S o u th Y o r k sh ir e P o lice h a s k n o w n
      Mr B arry D ev o n std e. secretary of                                                                                                                                             — s in c e H illsborough — its o w n p a r tic u ­
  th e H illsb o r o u g h F a m ilie s Su pport                       MR HICKS                            MR DIJCKENFIELD                            MR FLANNERY                        la r form o f suffering "
  G roup, w h o lost a te e n a g e son in th e                 •T ho roug h ly d is g u s te d '           'V ery reliev e d '                   'C onclusion surprising*                   P o lice refused to c o m m e n t fu rth e r
   tragedy, said: "I a m devastated —                                                                                                                                                    p e n d in g c iv il a c tio n th ey a re ta k in g
   g u tte d w o u ld be th e appropriate word.                     Labour's MP for W alton , Mr Eric                       g r ea t u p se t a t th is d ecisio n, a lth o u g h
                                                                                                                            th ere a re a few fa m ilies w h o w a n te d to let         a g a in st Sh effield W ednesda y and E a s t­
      “ I find It u n a cc e p ta b le that In th e             Hefler, said: "This, In a s e n s e , Is a                                                                               w o o d a n d Pa rtn ers to seek a con trib u tion
   w orst s p o r tin g d isa ster this country                 w h itew a sh .                                             th e m atter lie."
                                                                                                                               T he n e w s w ill n ot affect c ivil c o m p e n s a ­   tow ards co m p e n sa tio n )vhlch ha s b een
   h a s e v er s ee n , w a tc h e d b y 54.000 people             "The police did n ot d o th eir Job                                                                                  v o lu n ta r ily agreed to be paid by th e S o u th
   a n d v ie w e d by m illio n s ac ro ss th e world          properly. W heth er or n o t It w a s crim ina l,           tion c a se s at present b e in g draw n u p bu t It
                                                                                                                            m e a n s that Inquests c a n reopen a n d be                Y orkshire force to th e b ereaved an d
   o n te le v isio n , th e DPP ca n s u g g e st there        th ere w a s a failure o n th e part o f the                                                                             Injured.
   Is lnsulT ld en t evidence."                                 p o lice to dea l w ith It. S o m e M erseyside             c o m p le te d In to th e d e a th s o f th e
                                                                                                                                                                                             T h e secreta ry o f th e S o u th Y o r k ­
      T h e H illsb o r o u g h F a m ily S u p p o rt          police o fficers w h o a tten d ed the m a tch a s          supporters.
                                                                                                                                Last n ig h t th e police c h ie f In c h a r g e at     sh ir e branch o f th e P o lice F e d e r a ­
   Group c h a ir m a n . Mr Trevor Hicks,                      Liverpool supporters w e re am a z e d at th e                                                                           tio n , PC P au l Mlddup, said: "I h a v e
   ple dged n o t to let th e Issue o f pro secu­               w a y th e m a tcn w a s han dled."                         th e fateful g a m e rem ained su sp en d e d
                                                                                                                            p end ing Internal disciplin ary m ea su re*                 n o d o u b t th a t there Is a fe e lin g of
   tio n s drop.                                                    In a brief sta te m e n t, th e D PP said
                                                                                                                            bu t h e w e lco m ed n e w s th a t h e w o u ld n o t      relief In p o lice s ta tio n s, a lth o u g h w e
       Mr HIcks . w h o lo s t h is tw o te e n a g e           th a t after le n g th y and d e ta iled in v e s ti­
                                                                                                                            face crim inal charges.                                      n e v e r ex p e cted a n y oth er ou tco m e."
   d a u g h te r s in th e disa ster, said h e w a s           g a tion h e found to o little e v id e n c e upon
   t h o r o u g h ly d is g u s t e d b y th e D P P 's        w h ich to b a s e a p r o sec u tio n a g a in st              C hief Supt David D uckenfleld . relaxed                    T h e leader o f Sh effield C ity C o u n ­
   decision.                                                    in d iv id u a ls or Sh effield W e d n e sd a y F o o t­   and s m ilin g a t h is lio m e in T o O er,                 c il, C o u n C liv e B e t ts , ad d ed : "W e
       "Once a g a in w e h a v e had to suffer w h a t         ball Club. Sh effield C ity C o u n c il, a s               Sheffield, said. 'T m v e r y relieved. Thla                 h a v e a lw a y s believed th a t th e c o u n c il, as
   c a n o n ly B e described a s a tr a v e sty o f            lic e n s in g a u th o r ity , an d E a stw o o d and      h a s lifted a great w e ig h t o ff m y m ln n . I          lic e n s in g auth o rity , w a s In n o w s y
   ju stice. It Is no good h a v in g th e police               Partners, e n g in e e r in g c o n s u lta n ts to         ca n n o t sa y a n y th in g e ls e b e c a m e th ere      r esp o n sib le for th e disaster, a lth o u g h w e
   in v e s tig a tin g the po lice, or trying to h a v e       Sheffield W ednesday.                                       are still disciplinary proceedings p e n d in g              r ec o g n ise th a t th e c o u n c il, a lo n g w ith
   th e C row n P rosecution S e r v ic e p r o sec u t­            T h e tragedy hap pened In April, 1989.                 a g a in s t me.'       ,                       . ,          o th er local authorities, h a v e had to look
   in g th e e s ta b lis h m e n t — both o f th em            w h e n p o lice op en ed a n e x it g a te t o relieve         Mr Duckenflera h a s b e e n s u s p e n d e d o n       carefu lly a t a n y Inadequacies In their
   prefer to c op o ut.                                         c ru sh in g o u tsid e th e g round , s en d in g          full p ay sin c e th e pu blicatio n la s t s u m m e r      proced ures in lin e w ith th e r e c o m ­
       "We find It a b s o lu tely u n b eliev a b le           hundreds o f Liverpool fan s o n to already                 o f Lord J u stic e Taylor's report Into th e                m e n d a t i o n s m a d e by L ord J u s t i c e
   th a t th e DPP c an s a y th ere Is no e v id e n c e       overcrow ded terraces.                                      d is a s te r a c c u s e d h im o f " f r e e z in g "
    w h e n th e w h o le w orld s a w w h a t hap­                 So licito rs r ep resen tin g th e bereaved             at Its height. T h e report a ls o aald th a t                  E astw oo d and Partners, th e S h ef
    pened before Its o w n e y e s .                            fam ilies said m o s t rela tiv e s w o uld be              poor policin g w a s largely t o b la m e fo r th e          field-based e n g in e e r in g c o n s u lta n ts to
       "The first sta g e n o w Is to ta k e legal              a ngry, u p se t a n d disapp ointed a t th e               tragedy.                                                     th e c lu b , declined to c o m m e n t.
    a dvice, bu t o n e In ln g I c an s a y for certain        DPP's decision.                                                 Other sen ior officers cleared by th e DPP                  T h e M e r s e y s id e c h a ir m a n o f th e
    _ w e w on't let it drop."                                      Mr B la ise S m ith , o f th e H illsborough            i n d u d c Supt Itoger M arshall, th e m a n                Football Supporters' A sso cia tion , Mr
       T h e Labour MP for Liverpool Broad-                     s te er in g co m m itte r, said; "This will                whoopenea the exit gate. Assistant Chief                     Peter J a c k so n , a solicitor, said; "We th ink
   p r e e n , Mr T e r r y F ie l d s , s a id : “ My          a l w a y s b e o n t h e c o n s c ie n c e o f the        C onstable Walter J a c k so n , th e m ost
                                                                                                                                                                                         Justice o u g h t to h a v e b een s e e n to be done
   reaction is o n e o f sh o c k and d isgust.                 in d ivid u als respon sib le and people w h o              sen ior officer at th e g round , an d Supt                  and w e w o uld h a v e liked to see the
      "I a m sure that m e e tin g s w ill be                   are to '-'im e will h a v e to liv e w ith the              B er n a r d M u rray. I- c h a r g e o f th e
                                                                                                                                                                                         crim ina l liability of s o m e of the yery
   s peed ily conv ened a m o n g th e bereaved                 d lsa s                                                     police control root             H illsb o rou g h
                                                                                                                                                                                          sen io r officers tested In th e c o u r ts '
   and others to en a b le ste p s to be ta k en to                 "Thv . ority o f fa m ilie s w e re hop ing             d u rin g th e FA C up s t .. . lal.
       -oal In a h i c l i e r authority. T h is                that p r o sec u tio n s w ould be m a d e and                 T h e la b o u r MP for H illsborough ,
                                                                                                                            qHrfflrM Mr MnHIn F1«nm»rv «nnV                              B a ck g ro u n d      P bct 3
       Private prosecutions                                                                                                                                     -l a ..,,

      likely as DPP rules out
       Hillsborough charges
P R IV A T E p r o s e c u t io n s are                        By Colin Wright                           9 .5 0 0 q u e s t i o n a i r e s . 5 .341
e x p e c t e d to b e b r o u g h t by                                                                  s t a t e m e n t s . 2 .392 d o c u m e n ts
m a n y o f th e r e la tiv e s o f th e 95          g ro u n d e n g in e e r s ] or Sheffield          — an d 71 hou rs o f v id e o ta p e
fo o t b a ll s u p p o r te r s k ille d in         C ity C o u n c il [t h e g r o u n d               w e r e c o n s id e r e d .
la s t y e a r 's H illsb o r o u g h S t a ­        lic e n s in g autho rity] in c o n n e c ­             M r H a y e s s a id last night:
d iu m d is a s t e r a fter th e D ir e c ­         tio n w ith th e d is a s te r ."                   “ T h e d ir e c to r ’s d e c is i o n is not
to r o f P u b lic P r o s e c u t io n ruled            Officers o f W est M id la n d s                a m a t te r for s e l f c o n g r a tu la tio n
y e s t e r d a y th a t n o c rim in a l            P o lic e w e r e c a lle d in by Mr                o n th e part o f S o u th Y o rksh ire
c h a r g e s s h o u ld be b rou gh t               P e te r W right, th e th e n c h ie f              P o l ic e , a lth o u g h it b ring s w ith
a g a in st p o lice or o ffic ia ls                 C o n s ta b le o f S o u th Y orksh ire,           it a m e a s u r e o f relief.
in v o lv e d in th e tr agedy.                      t o c o n d u c t a n in d e p e n d e n t              "I a m all to o a c u te ly a w a r e o f
    M r A la n G r e e n , Q C . w h o               in q u ir y th e day a fter th e trag­              t h e 95 s o u ls w h o lo s t th eir liv e s
stu d ied th ou san d s of s ta te ­                 e d y o n A pril 15.                                a n d o f th e d is tr e s s a n d g r ie f o f
m e n t s an d in t e r v ie w s r e s u ltin g          N i n e t y - f i v e L iv e r p o o l fa n s   t h e ir fa m ilie s an d fr ie n d s .
fr o m th e £4 S m illio n , 1 6 -m onth             w e r e c r u sh e d to d e a th o n th e               " G r ie f tr a v e ls in m a n y g u is e s
in q u ir y by m o r e th an 4 0 0 offi­             o v e r c r o w d e d L e p p in g s L a n e        a n d S o u t h Y o r k s h ir e P o l i c e
c e r s fro m W e st M id la n d s                   te r r a c e s o f Sh effield W e d n e s ­         h as k n o w n , s in c e H illsb o r ­
P o l ic e , s a id t h e r e w a s " in s u f fi­   d a y 's H illsb o r o u g h ground at              o u g h , its o w n p articular fo rm
c ie n t e v id e n c e " to m e r it c r im i­      t h e start o f th e FA C up s e m i ­              o f s u f f e r in g . It is n o w fo r o th e r
nal p r o c e e d in g s .                           final m a tc h w ith N o ttin g h a m               p r o c e e d i n g s to d e te r m in e w hat
    T h e d e c is i o n h a s c a u s e d an        F o r e st .                                        w e r e th e m is t a k e s a n d fa ilin g s
o u tc r y o n M e r s e y s id e w h e r e              L o r d J u s t i c e T a y lo r , w h o        th a t g a v e rise to th e d is a s te r ."
m a n y o f th e b e r e a v e d had b e e n         h e a d e d th e p u b lic inquiry into                 S h e ffie ld C ity C ou n cil and
p r e s s in g fo r c h a r g e s o f m a n ­        th e d is a s te r , w a s h igh ly critical        S h e ffie ld W e d n e s d a y F o o tb a ll
s la u g h t e r a n d c o r p o r a te m a n ­      o f th e a c tio n s o f m a n y South              C lub , b o th c r itic ise d by th e
s la u g h t e r to be bro u gh t a g a in s t       Y o r k s h ir e p o l i c e o f f ic e r s in      in q u ir y c h a ir m a n , a ls o is s u e d
  iolice o fficers, and clu b and                    p la n n in g for and d e a lin g w ith             s h o r t s t a t e m e n t s sa y in g th e y
f ic e n sin g officials.
    M r E d d ie S p e a r itt , from
                                                     e v e n t s at th e ga m e.
                                                         In his in te r im report fo llo w ,
                                                                                                         w e r e s a tis fie d and u n su r p r ise d
                                                                                                         a t th e D P P ’s d e c isio n .
R u n c o r n , w h o s e 1 4 -y e a r -o ld         ing th e s e v e n - w e e k h e a r in g he            D e sp ite               y e ste r d a y 's
so n . A d a m , d ie d at H ills b o r ­            laid th e b u lk o f th e b la m e for              a n n o u n c e m e n t t h e H ill s b o r ­
o u g h . sa id he s p o k e for m a n y             t h e tr a g e d y o n th e p o lic e , c riti­     o u g h affair is still far fro m c o n ­
a fter h e a r in g o f th e D P P 's                c is i n g in particular C h ie f Supt              c lu d e d . I n q u e s ts into th e 95
d e c isio n .                                       D a vid D u c k e n field . th e ground             d e a th s w ere o p en ed and
    " M y r ea c tio n is o n e o f s h e e r        c o n tr o lle r o n th e day. w h o . h e          a d jo u r n e d in Sh effield e a rlier
                                                     s a id " fr o z e " w h e n fa c e d w ith
                                                     th e situ a tio n .
    ‘Shock and disgust’                                  M r D u c k e n fie ld . 45. ha s b e e n          Decision a ‘measure
                                                     s u s p e n d e d fro m th e fo rce on
      on Merseyside at                               fu ll pay for m o r e th a n a y ear                      of relief’for
    inquiry ‘whitewash’                              f o llo w in g th e p u b lic a tio n of the           South Yorks Police
                                                     in t e r im fin dings.
                                                         S e v e r a l o th e r officers who
d is g u s t. B ritisb ju s t i c e is o b v i­      h e ld s e n io r p o s itio n s on the             th is y e a r p e n d in g th e d e c isio n .
o u sly s o m e th in g th at has                    day o f th e m a tc h h a v e since                 T h e y w ill n o w be r e-o p e n e d !
c e a s e d to e x ist .                             b e e n t r a n s f e r r e d to o th e r           an d v e r d ic ts r etu r n e d .                 |
    " H o w c a n 95 p e o p l e b e                 d u tie s o u t s id e Sh effield p o lice              S o u th Y o r k sh ir e P o lic e w ill j
sq u a s h e d to d e a th and no o n e              h e a d q u a r te r s .                            c la sh in th e c o u r ts w ith th re e
h e ld r e s p o n s ib le ? I w ill c e r ­             M r D u c k e n fie ld . w h o w ith            o th e r p a r tie s im p lic a te d in th e
ta in ly b e p u r s u in g a p r iv a te            o th e r s m a y still face internal                d is a s te r . T h e fo r c e h a s a g r ee d
p r o s e c u t io n ."                              d is c ip lin a r y a c tio n , sa id last          to p ay c o m p e n s a t io n to m o r e
    M r T erry F ie ld s , L a b o u r M P           n ig h t that th e a n n o u n c e m e n t          th a n 1,000 v ic t im s o f th e tr a g ­
for L iv e r p o o l B r o a d g r e e n ,           w a s " a g r ea t w e ig h t off my                e d y w ith o u t a c c e p t in g liability.
d e s c r ib e d th e a n n o u n c e m e n t        m in d ."                                               I t is t a k i n g l e g a l a c t i o n
as "an a b s o lu t e s c a n d a l" .                   M r P e te r H a y e s, d ep u ty               a g a in s t S h effie ld W e d n e sd a y ,
    " M y initial r ea c tio n is o n e o f          d i i e f c o n s t a b le o f S o u th Y ork­      E a stw o o d and P a rtn ers and
s h o c k and d is g u s t. I a m s u r e             s h ir e . s a id h e w a s e x tr e m e ly        S h effield C ity C o u n c il, in an
that m e e t in g s w ill be h a s tily               g lad th at th e D P P h a d r ea ched             a tt e m p t t o r e c o u p a proportion
c o n v e n e d a m o n g th e b e r ea v e d         h is d e c is io n s o qu ick ly after             o f th e c a sh .
an d o th e r s to e n a b le s t e p s to           b e in g p r e s e n t e d w ith e v id e n c e         T h e L iv e r p o o l s o lic ito r s c o n ­
b e ta k e n to a p p e a l to a h ig h er           t w o w e e k s a g o . M o r e th a n              s o r t iu m r e p r e s e n tin g th e c o m ­
a u t h o r it y "                                                                                       p e n s a tio n c la im a n ts sa id la st
    M r E ric H e ffe r , L abour M P                                                                    n ig h t th at th e D P P 's ruling
fo r W alton , s a id th e inq uiry                                                                      w o u ld h a v e n o e ffe c t o n th e
w a s * w h it e w a s h .                                                                               s e t t le m e n t s .
    " T h e p o lic e did n ot do their                                                                      A s p o k e s w o m a n said: " T h e
job properly.                                                                                            d e c is i o n n o t to p r o s e c u t e is not
    “ T h e re w as n e g le c t and                                                                     g o in g to h a v e a n y practical
 th er e w e r e m is t a k e s m a d e and                                                              e ffe c t on th e co m p e n sa tio n
d e c i s i o n s t a k e n th a t s h o u ld                                                            c l a i m s b e c a u s e w e a lr e a d y
 n e v e r h a v e b e e n ta k en ."                                                                    h a v e a n a g r e e m e n t w ith th e
    In e x p la in in g th e D P P ’s d e c i ­                                                          in s u r e r s o f S o u t h Y o r k sh ir e
 s io n a C row n P r o s e c u tio n S e r ­                                                            P o lic e
 v ic e s t a t e m e n t sa id : " M r                                                                      "It h a s an e m o tio n a l effect
 G reen has c o n c lu d e d th a t th er e                                                               th o u g h and 1 am su r e that our
 is insufficient e v id e n c e up o n                                                                    c la im a n ts w ill be b o th d is a p ­
 w h ic h p r o s e c u t io n fo r m a n ­                                                               p o in te d and s u r p r ise d ."
 sla u g h ter or a ny o th e r crim inal                                                                     A lth o u g h c rim in a l p r o c e e d ­
 o ffe n c e m a y be b ro u g h t                                                                        ings h a v e n o w b e e n ruled out
 a g a in st th e S o u th Y orkshire                                                                     s e v e r a l p o lice officers still face
 P o lic e . S h e f fie ld W e d n e s d a y                                                             in t e r n a l d i s c i p l i n a r y a c t io n
 F o o tb jll          C lu b .      M essrs                                                              w h ic h c o uld in c lu d e d is m is s a l
 E a ^ t u n m l j n ' l P j r l n i T ' . |th o              L o rd J u s f i c c T a y lo r             from Ihe s e n iro
           RUSSELL JONES & WALKER
                                                                                                                S O L I C I T O R S


          Swinion H ou se 324 G r a \ ‘s I nn Road Lo nd on W C l X 8 D H Telephone                          071 837 281)6 (24 hour 071 837 ObOO'
                                                    Fax. 071 837 2*41 Telex. 23616 D X 202




T he S o l i c i t o r to the S o u t h
Yorkshire Police Authority
Joint Secretariat                                                                                                                     IV/NEC/
P.O. B o x 37
Regent Street                                                                                                            Due:         7 N o v e m b e r 1990
Barnsley
SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                                                                                                       BY FAX AND POST
S7 0 2 D X                                                                                                                                 URGENT
                                                                                                                                      "No. 0 2 2 6 7 3 0 4 4 2




D e a r Sir,
RE : H I L L S B O R O U G H I N Q U E S T
As w e b e l i e v e y o u are aware, we act f o r th e P o li c e F e d e r a t i o n of England
& Wa le s . W e h a v e been c o n s u l t e d by t h e m on b e h a l f of t h o s e of t h e i r
m e m b e r s w h o s e c o n d u c t will be in issue at th e f o r t h c o m i n g i nquest into the
d e a t h s w h i c h w e r e o c c a s i o n e d by t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h tragedy.
O u r c l i e n t s m a d e an a p p l i c a t i o n to th e P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y f o r f i nancial
a s s i s t a n c e to p r o v i d e t h e m w i t h legal r e p r e s e n t a t i o n at th e f o r t h c o m i n g
inquest. T h e i r a p p l i c a t i o n wa s m a d e in th e light of H o m e O f f i c e circular,
7 7 / 1 9 8 7 . W e u n d e r s t a n d that t h e i r r e q u e s t was denied, at a special meet i n g
of t h e P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y held on th e 2nd N o vember.
We b e l i e v e t h at t h e d e c i s i o n of th e P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y w a s u n r e a s o n a b l e , and
we h a ve i n s t r u c t i o n s to c h a l l e n g e it by m e a n s of an a p p l i c a t i o n fo r
j u di c i a l review. We i n t e n d t o m a k e t h a t a p p l i c a t i o n e a r l y ne xt week. It
seems to us that th e H o me Secretary, as the a u t h o r of th e c i r c u l a r in
q u e s t i o n is an i n t e r e s t e d p a r t y and we shall seek a d i r e c t i o n that no ti c e
of ou r a p p l i c a t i o n is se rv e d upon him.
In o r d e r to s u p p l y t he C o u r t w i t h th e r e a s o n s w h i c h lie b e h i n d the d e c i s i o n
w h i c h was m a d e on th e 2 nd N o vember, w e shall be grat e f u l if y o u will su pp l y
us w i t h copies, of t h e repo r t s and o t h e r d o c u m e n t s w h i c h w e r e laid b e fo r e
t h e c o m m i t t e e w h i c h met, and if y o u will s u pp l y us w i t h th e r e a s o n s wh ic h
the c o m m i t t e e g a v e f o r r e a c h i n g th ei r d e c i s i o n . W e shall be h a p p y to m e e t
y o u r r e a s o n a b l e c o p y i n g , and d e li v e r y c h a r g e s in this c o n n e c t i o n .
                                                                                                                         c o n t / d . ...




                                  R e j u l a i e d t " T h e L a * £oc»e i v t r, t h e i o r d m : t o f             B u v me ^ v
                                  LONDON            1.1LP*         BIRMINGHAM                 BR l^lnl        MA N < H l s T l R
                                                                                  Psge Sc




                                               -   2-


Y o u will be a w a r e t h a t t he inquest is due to st ar t on the 19th N o v e m b e r and
so w e s h o u l d be grat e f u l if yo u w o u l d tr ea t this r e q u e s t as m o s t urgent.
Y o u r s f a it h f u l l y ,




RUSSELL JONES h WALKER
SOUTH Y O R K S H I R E P O L I C E A U T H ORIT Y

19 o c t o b e r 1990    AND 2 NOVEMBER 1990
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


1.     Matter for Consideration

1.1    The provision of financial assistance to police officers involved in
       legal proceedings arising from the events at Hillsborough Pootball
       Ground on 15 April 1989.


2.     Background Information

2.1    Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987 and
       adopted by this Authority on 8 April 1988, provides guidance to Police
       Authorities in considering applicatiohs, on behalf of police officers,
       for financial assistance in legal proceedings.

2.2     The central principle which should guide consideration of individual
        cases is that, where a police authority considers that an officer has
        acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties or that the interests
        of the force as a whole are involved, the officer should have the
        support of the police authority to ensure that he has the services
        of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket.

2.3 After the publication of theInterim Report of Lord Justice Taylor
     into the Hillsborough Disaster the Chief Constable of the West Midlands
     Police was appointed to enquire into      the possibility of criminal
     proceedings arising from the disaster.     At that time an application
     for financial assistance was received from Chief Superintendent
     Duckenfield, the officer in command at Hillsborough on the day of the
     disaster.

2.4    At the time of that application it was acknowledged that similar
       applications for assistance, under the terms of Home Office Circular
       No.77/1987, could be anticipated from other officers directly involved
       in legal proceedings arising from the Hillsborough Disaster.

2.5     The application from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was considered
        by the Finance and General Purposes Committee on 15 September 1989
        when the matter was deferred for further consideration of the role
        of the Authority's insurers.

2.6    Following advice from the Authority's insurers and solicitors, Chief
       Superintendent Duckenfield obtained independent legal representation
       from solicitors engaged through his staff association and financed
       by his personal legal insurance.

2.7     The funds available to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield under this
        policy amounted to £50,000. Bis solicitors have advised him that that
        amount may be exhausted by one or both of the on-going Civil
        Contributions Hearing and the forthcoming Coroner's Inquest.
                                    - 2 -


2.8   A further application has now been received from Chief Superintendent
      Duckenfield for his original application to be re-considered and, as
      anticipated,   similar  applications   have now been received from
      Superintendents Marshall, Greenwood and Murray; and an application
      has also been received from Russell Jones and Walker, solicitors, on
      behalf of Police Constables Smith and Illingworth.

2.9   All officers making application have been the direct subject of
      enquiries by the Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police arising
      from allegations of criminal conduct received from third parties.


3     Comment
                      •
3.1   Following the disaster and throughout the Public Inquiry conducted
      by Lord Justice Taylor, the interests of the Police Authority, the
      Chief Constable and all officers of the Force were represented by legal
      officers appointed by the Police Authority insurers. In relation to
      the subsequent criminal enquiry and possible proceedings the insurers
      indicated to seven South Yorkshire Police officers that a possibility
      of conflict could arise between the interests of the Force and each
      of them independently.   The question of separate legal representation
      was considered, one officer continued to be represented by the insurers
      and the six applicants obtained independent representation.

3.2   Members will be aware that the Director of Public Prosecutions, having
      considered the evidence resulting from the enquiry by the West Midlands
      Police, announced on 30 August 1990 his decision that there was
      insufficient evidence to justify criminal proceedings against any South
      Yorkshire Police officer.    There are, however, certain civil actions
      under-way and the Coroner's Inquest into the deaths at Hillsborough
      will resume on 19 November 1990.

3.3   At the Coroner's Inquest the officers concerned are likely to be called
      upon to give evidence.   It is acknowledged that cross examination by
      Counsel representing other parties may be prejudicial to the individual
      officers in respect of their personal liabilities.       These officers
      consider it necessary to continue to be independently represented at
      this hearing where the Chief Constable's legal representative cannot
      reasonably be expected to represent the separate interests of each
      of them.

3.4   It will be seen from paragraph 13 of the Home Office Circular that
      separate representation should be provided at a Coroner's Inquest where
      (a) the Chief Officers legal representative cannot reasonably be
      expected to represent the interests of such officers and, (b) the Police
      Authority considers that such interests should be represented.        In
      such cases the authority should, in the terms of the Circular, provide
      financial assistance to the individual officers concerned.

3.5   It will be noted at paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing
      to seekfinancial    assistance from his police authority should have
      the opportunity in advance of the proceedings to submit to the Chief
      Constable an application for financial assistance. The Chief Constable
      is obliged to put such application to the authority for decision.
      It will be further seen that the applying officer should normally be
      given the opportunity by the police -authority to make representations
      to them if he wishes to do so.
                                    - 3 -


3.6   The events at Hillsborough were extraordinary in respect of the
      potential individual liability of police officers involved.         The
      officers were acting in good faith in accordance with established
      practice. The nature of the various investigation into the Hillsborough
      Disaster also means that the interests of the South Yorkshire Police,
      as a whole, are involved. For these two reasons (see para 2.2 ante)
      it is recommended that these officers should have the support of the
      Police Authority to ensure that they each have the services of a lawyer
      representing their individual interests, at the forthcoming Coroner's
      Inguest.

3.7   It would be sensible for the officers concerned to retain the aervices
      of those lawyers who currently represent them throughout subsequent
      proceedings.


4     Financial Implications

4.1   The cost of independent representation has to date been net by personal
      legal insurance arranged through The Superintendents' Association for
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendents Marshall, Murray,
      and Greenwood. Constables Smith and Illingworth, meanwhile, have been
      represented by Messrs Russell Jones and Walker, the Police Federation
      solicitor, paid for by central Police Federation funds.

4.2 The extent of future costs will     be determined by the time taken to
     conclude the Inquest.   There is no specific provision in the Revenue
     Budget for these costs.


5     Recommendation

5.1   The Authority is recommended to approve a commitment to provide
      financial assistance for legal representation at the forthcoming
      Inquest, to the officers concerned, in accordance with the principles
      of Home Office Circular No.77/1987.




                                             NOT FOR PUBLICATION as i t
RICHARD WELLS                                contains    exempt information
CHIEF CONSTABLE                              w ithin para.                of
                                             Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                                             Act 1972 as amended.
APPENDICES:   A.   Application from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

              B.   Application from Superintendent Marshall

              C.   Application from Superintendent Murray

              D.   Application from Superintendent Greenwood

              E.   Letter from Messrs Russell Jones and Walker,
                   solicitors representing Constables Smith and Illingworth

              F.   Bome Office Circular No.77/1987
                                                            append/* 'a '
                                  SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                             Ref:        DGD/CJD
    From:    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield                Station/Dept’
    To:     The Chief Constable                              Date:           21 September 1990



            SUBJECT:   Hillsborough Disaster - Funding for Legal Representation

            On    August 1989 I made application under Home Office Circular
            No 77/87 for yourself and the Police Authority to give due
            consideration for funds to be made available for my legal
            representation in connection with any proceedings which may arise
            from the Hillsborough Disaster.

            These proceedings are currently the Civil Hearings due to begin in
            Manchester on 2 October to be followed by the Coroner's Inquest on
            19 November 1990. There is also the possibility that Discipline
            Proceedings may follow at a later stage.

            Whilst the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
            of Criminal Matters has been favourable it is not unreasonable to
            assume that if further evidence came to light he would reconsider
            the position with regard to myself and other officers.

            There is also the stated intention, admittedly via the media, by
            families of the deceased that they intend to launch a private
            prosecution for manslaughter against officers of South Yorkshire
            Police.

            It is therefore of paramount importance that the best independent
            legal advice possible is available for myself and other officers.

            My previous application for financial assistance was, as I understand
            it, 'left on the table' in the knowledge that I had insurance cover
            for my legal defence up to the sum of £50,000.

            If I require legal representation at the Civil Hearings and Coroner's
            Inquest it is likely that my defence costs will exceed the sum assured
            and I will require additional funding (bearing in mind Discipline
            and Private Prosecution).

            I ask for urgent reconsideration of my request in the hope that a
            contribution could be made towards my legal defence costs or an
            agreement to meet all reasonable expenditure over and above the sum
            assured.

            I have attached a letter from my solicitor and copies of previous
            papers.




Gen/2
Solicitors          T ele p h o n e
                    0 5 3 : 430391
Cloth Hall Court    T ele*                                                        HEPV'ORTH
Infirm ary Street   557917
Leeds               Facsim ile                                                    & CHADWICK
LSI : j b           0532 45M8K                                                    A MEMBER OF EVERSHEDS
                    DX     1: 0:7 Leeds.




                                                                                  D,lc                    17 September 1990
                                                                                  Y our l U J u tn a




                                                                                  C to lK k m a           L/CCC/3/BCi
                                                                                                           DUCKENFIELD

Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield




Dear David

Hillsborough

As you are aware, we are obtaining Counsel's Advice as to your personal
position in relation to the forthcoming civil hearing in Manchester
commencing on 2nd October and the Coroner's Inquests which are due to
resume on 19th November 1990.

In addition to representing your interests at the above, your position
will also need consideration and yourself possible representation at the
disciplinary hearing, as and when this commences.

Finally,   there is, of course,      the spectre                                            of         a possible private
prosecution which may arise at some? stage.

It seems likely that the present funds available under the Allianz
Personal Law Plan may well be exhausted by one or both of the Civil and
Coroner's hearings. Can we impress upon you, therefore, that you make the
strongest representations both to the Home Office and to the Chief
Superintendent's Association to ascertain the availability t>f funds to
assist you with legal representation. This must be carried out as a
matter of priority for you, based on the time scale for the various
hear]




Your

C C 1




                       c 1c                D J Gr»«        A fc Ik m n                  C M r P w rfw l
  B f I Mrs            R M Ponm ar         J R Hctp-       I A iK iu r^ v               E««iW* offimii
  J f M vfrrM W        f   t   A W m rf    J M Kwr         D M Scrv-ti**
  J H Brv»*            R O w yw            j R             AJnort J SttMrfcvnt-         fiffK LOMdan
  J H fmm+M*           A *                 R M A wwxk
  n   r                f R f C W k tt      f A Smiti
                       R C                 R J H orrcr»'
                                    SOUTH Y O RKSHIRE POLICE
Staff in confidence                                             R*f:        TWS/MR
        From: Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield              Station/Dept: Headquarters
        To:   The Chief Constable                               Data:       24 August 1989



              SUBJECT:      APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE


               The interim report of the Inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor into
               the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster that occurred on the 15 April 1989 was
               published at 1100 hours on Friday 4 August 1989. The report was very
               critical of the South Yorkshire Police in general and, in particular, myself
               and a number of other police officers.

               National media interest   and comments followed publication and, in view of
               the extensive criticism   in the report regarding my handling of events on
               the day of the disaster   and the possibility of actions of criminal
               negligence/disciplinary   proceedings, I was suspended from duty on the U
               August 1989-

               The Director of Public Prosecutions was, I understand, requested    to examine
               Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and subsequently instructed    the West
               Midlands Police to carry out a full criminal investigation, 'not    limited
               to the criminal culpability of the police alone' into the events    that
               occurred at Hillsborough on the 15 April 1989.

               Whilst no criminal charges have been brought to date against me, the
               possibility of charges being brought exists and I will, no doubt, be
               interviewed by the West Midlands Police during the course of their criminal
               investigations. There is also a possibility of interviews in respect of
               disciplinary allegations made against me for whidh a Regulation 7 Notice
               has been served.

               I was authorised to obtain independent legal advice from Hammond Suddards
               resulting in being advised by them to obtain further private independent
               legal advice as Hammond Suddards could not assist me personally as no
               criminal charges had been made. I am now obtaining independent legal advice
               through a personal Legal Protection Insurance Policy.

               The policy gives a maximum cover of £50,000. If I need legal representation
               at interviews with the West Midlands Inquiry Team regarding possible
               criminal or disciplinary matters and at protracted inquest hearings, which
               are unlikely to take place until early 1990, then there is little doubt
               my legal costs will be very much in excess of this figure.

               If any criminal proceedings are brought against members of the South
               Yorkshire Police (and manslaughter charges are possible), it is imperative,
               in the interests of the force, the Police Authority and any individual
               officer, that those concerned have had the benefit of the best poaaible
               legal advice and representation at any forthcoming judicial hearings.

               Whilst the force has been, and continues to be, legally represented matters
               are very complex and conflict of interest can arise in areas concerning
               different individuals.




Gan/2
Attached is a copy of Home Office Circular No.77/1987 - 'Financial
Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings’. I draw your attention
to paragraphs 1, 2, 1 2 - 1 5 inclusive. In accordance with paragraph 13*
I therefore respectfully request that application be made to the Police
Authority for financial assistance in order that I an properly adviaed and
represented at any future criminal or disciplinary hearings.
As indicated at paragraph 2 of the circular, any payments made toofficers
in accordance with the guidance are eligible for police grant.




Chier Superintendent
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY           NOT FOR PUBLICATION «s 1t
FINANCE & GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE contains   txcapt    Infomatlon
                                     within p art.       ....................
15 SEPTEMBER 1989
                                     Sch.l2A to the Local Government
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE        Act 1972 as —ended.                      I


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

1.    Matter for Consideration

      The provision of financial assistance to police officers involved In
      legal proceeding arising fron the event at Billsboroufh Football Ground
      on 15 April 1989.


2.    Background Information
                                                                                  ✓

2.1   Rose Office Circular Ho. 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987, provides
      guidance to Police Authorities on the exercise of their discretion in
      considering applications, on behalf of police officers, for financial
      assistance towards the cost of legal advice and representation arising
      froa involvement in legal proceedings which result from the pursuance, in
      good faith, of their duties or where the interests of the Force as
      whole are involved. A copy of the Circular is attached.

2.2   Arising fron the publication of the Interin fteport of Lord Justice Taylor
      into the Hillsborough Disaster, the subsequent appointnent of the Chief
      Constable of the Vest Midlands Police to enquire into the justification
      for crininal proceedings arising fron the disaster and the forthconing
      Coroner's Inquest into the deaths, an application for assistance has been
      received fron Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who was involved in
      conaand of the policing arrangenents for the football Seal-Final and
      similar spplications froa other officers similarly involved might be
      anticipated.


3.    Comment

^.1   Following the disaster and throughout the Public Inquiry the interests of
      the Police Authority, the Chief Constable and all officera of the Force
      have been represented by legal officera appointed by the Police Authority
      inaurera. The legal officera appointed by the inaurera have indicated
      that in relation to crininal proceedinga they would be unable to provide
      representation for individual officera who ahould aeek independent legal
      advice and representation.

3.2   It will be aeen fron the Hone Office Circular Ho. 77/1987, that the
      central principle which ahould guide conaideration of individual caaes ia
      that, where a Police Authority conaiders that an officer has actod in
      good faith in pursuance of his duties or that where the interests of the
      Force as a whole are involved, the officer ahould have the aupport of the
      Police Authority to ensure that he has the aervices of a lawyer and that
      he should not be out of pocket.


3.3   It will be further seen that in respect of crininal proceedings pursued
      by the Crown Prosecution Service against an individual officer he should
      be expected to bear the costs of his own defence and the Police
      Authority, at the conclusion of the proceeding*, art able to consider, on
      the full fact*, whether or not to reiaburse any expenses incurred by the
      officer and not awarded by the trial court, oven where proceedings have
      resulted in conviction in certain circuastances. It will be noted froa
      paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing to aeek financial
      assistance should have the opportunity to submit to the Chief Officer an
      application for financial assistance, upon receipt of which the Chief
      Officer should refer the application to the Police Authority together
      with his own recoaaendation. It will be further aeen that the applying
      officer should noraally be given the opportunity by the Police Authority
      to Bake representations to thea if he wishes to do ao. At this atage
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield wishes to reserve the right to ao appear
      at a future date if necessary.

3.4   The events at Hillsborough were unique in respect of the potential
      crialnal liability of.police officers involved. The officers ware acting
      in good faith in accordance with well established practices and any
      criainal proceedings will largely constitute a test case aiailar to the
      exaaple provided in paragraph three of the Hoae Office Circular. Ska
      unique nature of the circuastances of this particular criminal •aquiry
      with its wide implications for the interests of t^a Force aa a whole la
      such that the Police Authority may wish to coaaiMp* at this stage, a
      commitment to the funding of independent legal advice for the offlcar(a)
      concerned. The financial commitment of the officara la likely to^~'
      commence with advice and representation prior to and during interviews ^
      undertaken by Vest Midlands Police officers in the courae of their
      enquiry. It would be prudent for that representation to continue        '
      throughout the enquiry and any subsequent criminal proceedings and to
      extend to representation at the Coroner's Inquest Which will ultimately
      be held.

3.5   At this atage it is anticipated that representation in any civil actions
      subsequently pursued will be provided by the Police Authority Insurers.

3.6   It should be noted that there la available, to all officers of
      superintendent and chief superintendent rank who have chosen to
      contribute, a measure of personal liability insurance arranged by the
      Superintendents' Association of England and Vales. The individual
      liability limit of this insurance cover is £50,000.


4.    Financial Implications

      It is not possible at this stage to assess the financial Implications of
      this matter which will depend entirely on the courae and extent of the
      criminal enquiry and the ultimate outcome, and the duration of the
      Inquest proceedings. There is no specific provision in the fcevenue
      Budget for this expenditure.


5.    Eecoaaendstlon

      The Committee is recommended to approve a commitment to provide fiaancial
      assistance for legal representation to the officar(s) concerned la
      accordance with the central principle of Hoae Office Circular Vo.
      77/1987.


P WIGHT
CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                               ? | ^     'AU




FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IK LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
Constable Mas submitted on the guidelines contained in Home Office
Circular No. 77/87 on the responsibilities of Police Authorities In
respect of legal costs arising from the involvement of police officers
and non-police employees of Police Authority 1n legal proceedings.
The Circular both confirmed and expanded current policies within the
South Yorkshire Police and recommended criteria to assist Police
Authorities 1n considering whether financial assistance should be
approved in any particular proceedings. If followed, the criteria
would ensure that any payments authorised in consequence to be met
from the Police Fund would qualify for Home Office grant.
RESOLYED - That the Police Authority adopt the procedures in Home
Office Circular No. 77/87 and enclose the current policies detailed
in the report now submitted relating to legal costs arising from the
involvement of police officers and non-police employees of the Police
Authority in legal proceedings, subject to any applications continuing
to be submitted to the Police Authority for consideration should the
Authority's Insurers decline to undertake any particular defence.
HIGH VELOCITY CATAPULTS
The Authority considered a letter dated 8th February, 1988 from the
Management Co-ordinator of the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council
requesting the Police Authority to consider Minute 1171 of the
Council's Consumer and Enviornmental Services Committee of 8th
January, 1988 relating to the Council's concern over the availability
of high velocity catapults. The letter included a report considered
by the Committee detailing the tests and test results on four
catapults purchased locally and tested at the Department of Civil and
Structural Engineering of the University of Sheffield. The results
were considered to be disturbing;-
The Chief Constable displayed to the Authority the type of catapult
referred to and reported that he had already responded to the AMA that
such catapults should be regarded as designated weapons. The Clerk
and Financial Officer also pointed out that the Criminal Justice Bill
would prohibit their manufacture and sale.
RESOLVED:-
1.    That the representations already made by the Chief Constable and
      the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council to the Association of
      Metropolitan Authorities be supported.
2.    That the Clerk and Financial Officer be requested to write to
      the Chambers of Trade to seek their support of a voluntary ban
      on the sale of high velocity catapults, pending the
      implementation of the provisions of the Criminal Justice Bill.
                                                                           APPfiMjIK S
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                          H*1:                  F/RM/GP
    From :   Superintendent Marshall, 'F' Division                        8 W to n /D e p t:      F EHQ

    T0   :   Deputy Chief Constable, Mr P Hayes, HQs                      O tto :      24 September 1990



             SUBJECT:                              hillsborough disasthi -
                                              RESUMED INQUESTS 19 NDVBGER 1990


             Sir

             Through my solicitor, Mr Vincent Hale, of Nash House, 140 Upperthorpe,
             Sheffield, I have received intimation of the resumed inquests into the
             deaths at Hillsborough.    I shall be required to give evidence at this
             inquest which resumes on 19 November 1990.

             You will perhaps be aware that I have been represented throughout the West
             Midlands Police enquiry into the disaster by Mr Hale and that his costs to
             date are subject of a claim upon private insurance effected by myself
             through mv membership of the Superintendents Association.      Mr Hale has
             submitted an interim account upon the insurers, which has not yet been met.
             I wish, Ttherefore, to make formal application under the terms of the Home
             Office Circular 77/87 to the South Yorkshire Police Authority for financial
             assistance towards        yihcent Hale's costs in connection with his
             rr                                     orthccming inquest.




                   it I I I I C i U C l l I




GEN/2
                                                              P P P i£ n D j? c   C
                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                              Ref:
    From :     Superintendent Murray                          SWton/Dapt :Rawnarsh
    To         Deputy Chief Constable                         Oats:      1 October 1990


             SUBJECT:         APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE



               In connection with the Hillsborough tragedy of 1989 and allegations
               made against me, I have been talcing legal advice from Walker, Morris,
               Scott and Turnbull, Solicitors of Leeds, and in particular Mr Richard
               Manning of that ccrpany.      The finance for this advice has been
               available through my own private insurance.    Although the Director of
               Public Prosecutions has stated that proceedings will not be taken
               against any Police officer, there are still many matters unsettled and
               I may still require significant legal advice and assistance.
               I have been informed that the Coroners Inquest is to start on 19
               November 1990, and that this will be a lengthy enquiry and it is
               probable that my legal costs will exceed the limit of ny Insurance,
               particularly if other natters follow the Inquest, e.g. criminal or
               disciplinary proceedings.

               Accordingly under Heme Office circular No. 77 of 1987, I ask that an
               approach be nede to the Police Authority to give consideration to
               making funds available for my Legal Representation in connection with
               the forthcoming Inquest, civil hearing and any criminal proceedings
               which may arise, which would allcw me to maintain the services of Nr.
               Manning, who with his existing knowledge of ny particular
               circumstances, I feel is the best person to represent myself.




GEN/2
                                SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                             Ref:
    From:   Superintendent Greenwood                        8t«tion/D«pt: A1 Doncaster
            Chief Constable                                 D*te.             October 1990



            SUBJECT:   FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IN RESPECT of legal support


            Emanating from the 'Hillsborough Disaster' certain proceedings require to
            be finalised, in particular the inquest proceedings which I understand
            will commence on the 19th November.

            I hereby make formal application,through you,to the Police Authority for
            funding in respect of such legal advice and representation as is deemed
            necessary by my legal advisors.

            I am represented in this matter by Messrs Barlow, Hyde and Gilbert,
            Beaufort House, 15 Batolph Street, London, EC3A 7N J .




G *n/2
                      R U S S E L L JONES & WALKER
                     ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------- S O L I C I T O R S _______________


                          4 th Floor Brazennuse H o m e Brazennote S tre ei M a n c h e ite r M2 5AZ Telephone: 061 832 8877
                                                           Fax 061 8 3 ’ 700h DX W340




                                                                                                                                  Your R ef:     DCC/JEL
The Deputy Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police                                                                                                            °“rRef; NH/LP/HILLSBR0/387044
Police Headquarters                                                                                                                   D a te :

Snig Hill                                                                                                                                        19 September 1990
SHEFFIELD
S3 8LY

Dear Sir,
Hillsborough Disaster - Inquest
We have been notified by Her Majesty's Coroner of his intention to resume the
Inquests in the deaths of the 95 people on the 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough
Stadium, which Inquests are to resume on the 19 November 1990.
We would refer to previous correspondence and, in particular, to our letter of
the 6 April 1990, addressed to the Chief Constable, and to your response of the
11 April 1990. We would take this opportunity to repeat our request for financial
assistance for separate legal representation out of Police Authority Funds,
pursuant to the provisions of the Home Office Circular No 77/87.
It is our intention to provide representation by Counsel on behalf of two
police constables in particular, Police Constable David Alfred Illingworth and
Police Constable Peter Edward Smith. It is our firm view that these officers
remain open to substantial criticism, despite the decision of the Director of
Public Prosecutions not to bring criminal proceedings. As you will fully
appreciate, there is still a threat of private prosecutions by individual
complainants. We are satisfied that if called to give evidence before the
Inquests, these officers are reasonably likely to face examination by solicitors
or Counsel on behalf of relatives of the deceased, which may be prejudicial to
the officers. There also remains the threat of disciplinary proceedings,
arising out of the investigation by West Midlands Police. Again, as long as
that threat remains, we feel that representation can be justified.
You will no doubt appreciate that the allegations made against these particular
officers, are of a serious nature and include abuse to members of the public, a
failure to act with speed, which individual complainants will say, had a direct
bearing upon the deaths of individuals and further, allegations of assault. -In
the case of Constable Illingworth, there are a number of allegations, but in
particular there is a complaint by Edward Spearritt, father of the deceased
Adam Edward Spearritt, who alleges that the officer failed to open Gate 4 in
the perimeter fencing, despite loud appeals directed to him, his position being
in such close proximity to the complainant which, it is alleged, had a direct
bearing on the death of his son and the cause of injuries to himself. In the
case of Peter Edward Smith, he faces allegations by a David Anthony Lackley to
the effect that the officer failed to open Gate 3 when asked, which had he done
so, would have saved the life of some supporters and when the gate was opened,
Police Constable Smith pushed one person back into the crowd.   This presents a
                                                                                                                                                 Cont/d. . . . . .
  J VI U c b b c t T D B T*\lor I J   U*lkci A F t th ir e h e * d R J Turner R VI Abbr% I R Ftnefc ei C C SolK W D 0 ‘l n r n * A P b n e P j   D * n J M .P C o t a i n R C
       J I   R a ik in S R atkin E J O C oopei S G I n f u m Ni B f W n * * J C CUrfce-Uilliam i S L W ebb D A B V * * P R A i t a n i J .M . P irne S J N AUw                  J   i


                                                      R egulated b' T h e La* S o o e t \ m the c o n d u c t of In vestm ent Business
                                                      LONDON          LEEDS        BI RV1INGHAVI          BRISTOL         VUNCHESTtR
The Deputy Chief Constable                                19 September 1990

This presents a general allegation that the officer's behaviour on the day in
question, had a direct bearing upon the deaths of a number of unnamed supporters.
Additionally, he faces an allegation by Stephen Paul Hendry to like effect, in
that it is said he failed to open Gate 3, despite protestations and ordered
people to push back. It is also alleged against this officer that he assaulted
an unknown person by pushing him back over the fence, into Pen 3.
We anticipate that you will see from these allegations, that these officers are
at risk and the interests of justice require them to be represented.
We would maintain that in this instance, the officers were acting at all times
in good faith and in pursuance of their duties. We would also maintain that
the particular interests of these officers are such that they could not properly
be represented by those representing the interests of the Police Authority/Chief
Constable. We are sure that you will give our above comments full consideration
and we would ask that appropriate recommendations be made to the Police Authority.
We thank you in anticipation.




        JONES & WALKER




cc:   Constables' Central Committee
                                               HOME OFFICE
                                       Queen Anne’s Gate Losdos SVX'lH 9AT
                                                  D :u ;i tin   Oi-213
                                               s -.v M w *   o;jo?: flf>pfcNp|*              p

                   POL/87   1027/1/2
     • f. 7'iC.,




  The Clerk to the Police Authority
  The Chief Officer of Police
                                                                         4 Deceaber 1987




  t.ar Sir

  HOKE OFFICE CIRCULAR KO 77/87                                                         ^
  FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS XN ZJEGAL PROCEEDINGS - '
                                                                              . A»*.*   '5


  There is statutory authority in section 48 of the Police Act 1964 for
  payments to be Bade froa the police fund to aeet expenditure incurred
  b y police officers in defending proceedings in tort* Also, acting in
  pursuance of its general statutory duty to Baintain an adequate and
   efficient police force for its area, the police authority fees
   discretion to Beet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds
   legal proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in
  pursuance of their duties, or the interests of the force aa a vhole
   are involved.   The purpose of this circular is to give guidance to
/-^police authorities to help then in considering requests on bahalf of
v*^*ficers for financial assistance. This guidance has been discussed
   . .d agreed with the local authority and with the polioe staff
   associations.
  2.    The central principle which ahould guide conaideration of
  individual cases is that, where a polioe authority considers that an
  officer has acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties or that
  the interests of a force as a whole are involved, the offioar ahould
  have the aupport of the police authority to ansure that he has tha
  services of a lawyer and that he ahould not be out of pocket. Tha
  following paragraphs provide general guidance to the different
  classes of proceedings. Payaents Bade to officers in accordance with
  this guidance will be eligible for police grant.



                                                                                                 1
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Prosecution bv the Crovn Prosecution Service
2.   An officer vho is the subject of a public prosecution for an
alleged offence committed vhile carrying out his duties es a police
officer is in the sane position as any other defendant and aust be
expected to bear the costs of his defence. If ha is acquitted, he
should,   like any other defendant, look to the court for
reimbursement of his axpenses. If the costs ara not paid, or not
paid in full fron central funds, the police authority ara in a
position to decide, on the full facts, vhathar or not to make a
payment to the officer or to tha Police Faderation .if they have
provided the funding.   There aay be cases vhara it ‘is proper to
provide lagal advice and/or lagal representation avan vhara the
officer is found guilty. This aay arise for axaapla in test case*
where the officar «has baan carrying out a practiea hitherto
approved of but is found guilty as a rasult of that practiea being
found unlawful by the court in tha light of tha eireumstanees of
that particular case.

Privet* Frgitgytlaaf
4. A police officer should be able to carry out hia dutias isdfcha
confidence that, if he acts in good faith and exercises llift
judgement reasonably, his polica authority jftfill support;feim. If,
in a case where a member of the public brings a prosecution against
an officer, the authority is satisfied that the officer has acted
in this way, the authority should provide or fund legal advice
and/or representation.
5.   Where a court decides that a prosacution brought against an
officar was not brought in good faith, it aay order the prosecutor
to pay the whola or any part of tha costa incurrad by the defence;
again, if the officer is acquitted on Indictment, his eosts may be
aet froa central funds. Xn either of these eases, the question of
the police authority providing financial support to the officer may
not arise.   However, where the costs of an acquitted officar are
not awarded by the court or awarded only in part, the police
authority ahould consider whether to reimburse any eosts mot
covered, taking into account the reasons, if any, given toy the
court for failing to award all costs claimed.

CIVIL PROCEEDINGS
civil Action. Aaainst tl.e Chilf PfflCtr tQI ,Wrongful A rt! „gI
ggngtftblti
6. Under section 48(1) of the Police Act It6 4 , the chief officer
of a force is liable in respect of torts e m i t t e d toy constables
under his direction and control (which Includes spacial oonstablas
and officers of other .forces se^tog to ^        l^ice m w ^ under
autual aid arrangeaents)       in the                  er P ^ T 0*t*«
perforaance of their functions. Under section 48(2) any damages or
costs awarded against th« chief officar in such proceedings, sny
costs he incurs himself, and any sua paid in connection vith the
settlement of a claim, provided the settlement is approved by the
police authority, Bust be paid out of the police fund.      In such
cases, therefore, the police authority's discretion extends only to
whether or not to approve a proposed settlement of the claim.

Qivil Actlont Against Individual        Ptilctrf
7. Alternatively, the plaintiff Bay be awarded damages against an
individual police officer, though he cannot recover the damages
twice over against the chief officer as well. Section 49(4) of the
Police Act 1964 specifically empowers a police authority "to such
extent as they think fit" to pay out of the police fund sny damages
or costs swarded against an officer, sny costs he Incurs himself,
and any sums paid in connection with the settlement of s claim.
This provision applies to actions against officers of the
authority's own force, officers of another force serving the police
area under mutual aid arrangements, snd special constables for the
police area.   Zn considering whether to.give financial assistance
the authority will wish to consider in particular whether the
officer concerned acted in good faith and exercised his judgement
reasonably. Where the court finds for the officer, he may seek his
costs froa the plaintiff; should the costs not be awarded or
awarded only in part, the police authority should consider whether
to reimburse any costs not covered, taking ’ into account the
reasons, if any, given by the court for failing to award all costs
claimed.
8 . Joint actions naaing both the chief officer and an individual
police officer may be brought in some cases. Zn such cases it is
iaportant that any discussion of the merits and quantum of the
proposed settlement should involve all the parties named in the
claia together with advisers even if they are represented by
different advisers.

Civil Actions Under the Data PrPttfftlon Agt IM.4
9.   Under sections 22 and 23 of the Data Protection Act 1914 an
individual who suffers damage as a result of the in*ccaracy,loss
or unauthorised disclosure of personal data is mntitled to
compensation from the data user.        th*               oaV
these provisions, it is unclear whether the acts covered by
sections 22 and 23 amount to torts, to which the
paragraphs 6 and 7 above applies. Xf not,             !t in^iiu th!
Act 1964 does not appl/.       lowever, the                       u!
same.    Under section 3l(3)(t) of thm 1914 Act constables are
treated as servants of the                                     it his
Act    A chief constable is therefore Xiable for the acts of nis
officers falling within s c i o n s 22 and23 in the
liable for their torts under •oetion 4 »(l). » o j ^ i t i o ^ f non
police officers is less clear but it is                         Seir
the chief constable might be regarded as          liability
acts. It follows that it would be proper for the police authority
     to meet all costs, including sny svard of compensation, arising
     fron this liability. It should be notsd that tha liability of tha
     "data usar" under tha Act is not vicarious but his parsonal
     liability. Tharafora his own cara in having instituted a system of
     obtaining, checking and recording data which vould reasonably guard
     against arror and loss undar section 23(3) of the Act should neat
     his responsibility under section 22(3) and be should not be held
     liable if ona of his officers disregards the systea established.
     10. Where compensation is sought froa an individual officer, the
     police authority will wish, in considering whether to asst tha
     eosts which would otherwise fall on the officer, to take account of
     the saae natters as in exercising their power under section 49(4)
     of the Police Act 1964 (see paragraph 7).        Polios authorities
     should apply the sane broad principles and in particular, ***t tha
     costs of any compensation awarded against a chief constable where a
     non-police officer is at fault and the chief constable is found to
     have liability for the aetiona performed.

     Police Officers Bringing Civil Actiont fo r DtftttaUfin
     11.   There nay be occasions when financial assistance is sought
     from a police authority to enable an officer to bring or oensioer
     bringing a civil action for defamation.          An authority ha*
     discretion to give such assistance but it will be eligible for
     police grant only if tha following criteria are all net:-
          (a)   the defamation is aerious;
          (b)   it relates to the actions of an officer acting or
          said to be acting in the discharge of his duty;
          (c)   it has attracted public attention;
          (d)   to bring the action is considered to be in the
          interests of the force or of the police service as a
          whole; and
iy        (a)   the action stands a reasonable chance of success.
     Criterion (d) is central. 2f only the reputation of the individual
     officer is in question, he is in the time position as any other
     citiren and wust be expected to seek his own *•*•**•        E*
     allegation against a particular officer may well reflect on the
     reputation of the whole force or be an exanple of wider
     against the force or a significant section of it. Xn such oaaas
     the police suthority, provided the other criteria are ostisfied,
     »ay reasonably be expected to help to defend the reputation of the
     force.




                                                                       4
    INQUESTS, PUBLIC ENQUIRIES AJTD TRIBUNAJ-S

    I s . q e l   F   t   R   r   c   >   t   n   m   i   g   n   „   I   g   r   ,   C   h   i   t   f   P r i i c f t r p



    12.  Any interested arty nay be legally represented at an inquest
    but at his ovn expense sine* expenses are payable only to witnesses
    and jurors.   An interested party will normally be entitled to be
    legally represented at a public enquiry or other public tribunal.
    Where the interest of the force it affected, it will b« appropriate
    for the police authority to provide at its expense for the chief
    officer to be legally represented on behalf of the force.

    Legal Representation for Individual Officer*
    13. Separate representation for individual officars whose Interest
    la involvad Bay be neceaaary. for example, there will be occasions
    whan (a) the chief officer's lagal representative cannot reasonably
    be axpected to represent the separate interests of such officers
    and (b) the police authority considers that such intarasta should
_   be represented. Zn auch cases the authority should give financial
    assistance to the officers.        In considering (b) above, the
—   authority will wish in particular to assess whether the officers
    are at risk of being held to blase for actions in connection with
    the death to which the inquest relates and whether any such finding
    Bight give rise to legal proceedings for the costs of which the
    police authority would be liable under section 48(1) of tha Polloe
    Act 1964 or for which financial assistance might be appropriate
    within the terms of this circular.

    APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
    14.   An officer wishing to seek financial assistance fro* his
    police authority should have the opportunity in advance of u wall
    as on tha conclusion of tha proceedings to submit to tha chief
    officer an application for financial assistance.
    should put this, together with his own recommendation to the police
    authority for decision.   The officer should normally ba given the
    opportunity by tha police authority to make representations to than
    ‘f hi wishes to do so.
    15.   If it decide* to give financial assistance,
    should inform the officer concerned that, i* Jhs                 JJJ
    which they based their decision to grant tha asslstanc e is ahovnin
    subsequent legal proceedings to be inaccurate or incomplete, the
    authority will normally expect to
    satisfied that no cilpable misrepresan^tion w     ^olv^^that
    to recover the money would Involve the applicant In substantial
        Ahln    on the other hand, if an authority refuses financial
    assistance and then discovers in the light of subsequent events
    that such assistance would have been warranted, then financial
    «Ji.t.nc. “ iuldblVEt«a 1" •"!“ to « « th. rusmabl* eo.t.
    incurred by the officer in seeking legal advice or assistance.


                                                                                                                              5
    Assistance fro* Police Federation Fmd*
    16. Under Regulation 19 of the "Police federation fksgulations It69,
    as amended, Federation fund* Bay be ueed to defray legal charges
    incurred by a member in w onnaction with criminal'proceedings
    brought against his for an offence under the road traffic
    enactments (other than offence* Involving driving when impaired by
    drink or drugs or taking a vehicle without euthority), or for
    offences of causing the death or injury of any person, or for sny
    assault, or in connection with his action for libel or slender. An
    officer seeking financial assistance in circumstances covered by
    Regulation 19 should seek such assistance from the police authority
    in the first instance. If the police authority does not consider
    the request to fall vithin the terms of this circular, the
    Federation may then consider the application vithin the te*** ©r
    Regulation 19. If the officer receives legal assistance from the
    Federation the terms of Home Office Circular Ho 26/19*' vili
    continue to apply.
    17.   General enquiries about the content of this circular Bay be
    addressed to Mr Naghora, Home Office, FI Division on (01) 213 4208.
                                                 Tours faithfully




                                                  K J ADDISON




O




                                                                       €
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 7 DECEMBER 1990


FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS FOR LEGAL REPRESENTATION
IN PROCEEDINGS ARISING OUT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


REPORT OF THE CLERK AND FINANCIAL OFFICER

1     Matter for Consideration
1.1   The provision of financial assistance to the following police
      officers
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
      Superintendents Murray Greenwood and Marshall
      PCs Smith and Illingworth
      under the terms of Home Office Circular No 77/87.
2     Information
2.1   Members have before them a report from the Chief Constable
      which gives the background to the applications and recommends
      the Authority to approve a commitment to provide financial
      assistance for legal representation. The recommendation is
      related to the inquests but, as can be seen from the written
      applications which are appended to the Chief Constable’s
      report, in certain cases the applications are much wider.
2.2 Home Office Circular            No    77/87     (Appendix   F to the Chief
    Constable’s Report)
      This provides guidance to Police Authorities when considering
      applications for financial assistance to police officers.
      The central principle which should guide such consideration
      is that where a Police Authority considers that an officer
      has acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties, or that
      the interests of the Force as a whole are involved, the
      officer should have the support of the Police Authority.
2.3 There is judicial authority for the proposition that this
     creates   a presumption that an officer is entitled to
     reimbursement of his reasonable costs and this can only be
     rebutted if there is some relevant factor which could
     reasonably justify the refusal. This is the case of R V
     Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton. The
     transcript of the judgment in this case will be available at
     the meeting for reference purposes.


         N O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as it
         contains     exempt information
         within para.                          of
         Sch.l2A to the Local Government
         Act 1972 as amended. _ _ _
3     Proceedings to which the Applications relate
      Civil Action
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield in his application dated 21
      September 1990, Appendix A to the Chief Constable’s report
      referred to in paragraph 2.1, requests financial assistance
      from the Authority in connection with the civil hearings due
      to begin on 2 October 1990. These proceedings concern the
      principle of contribution to the damages awarded or agreed in
      civil claims arising out of the disaster, by Sheffield
      Wednesday Football Club and their engineers, Eastwood and
      Partners.   No civil action has been brought against Chief
      Superintendent Duckenfield or any other individual officers
      and therefore the application for financial support in
      connection with civil proceedings need not concern members at
      the present time.
3.1   Criminal Proceedings
      Superintendent Murray has requested financial assistance for
      legal representation in connection with        any criminal
      proceedings which     arise.    (Appendix C to the Chief
      Constable’s report). There are none at present but paragraph
      3 of the Home Office Circular deals with this situation. The
      guidance given is that in a public prosecution the police
      officer is expected to bear the costs of his defence. If he
      is acquitted the Police Authority are in a position to decide
      on the full facts, whether or not to make a payment to the
      officer or to the Police Federation.
      As there are no criminal proceedings, this         particular
      application could stand adjourned in accordance with the
      Circular until after such proceedings have been completed.
3.2   Discipline Proceedings
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield in his application makes
      reference to the possibility of discipline proceedings
      following the Inquests.   It is not clear whether he is
      seeking financial assistance from the Authority in connection
      with any such proceedings but as it is well settled principle
      that the Authority should not provide assistance in these
      proceedings this can be rejected.
3.3   Inquests
      All of the officers make application for financial assistance
      to be separately represented at the inquests which are
      presently ongoing. Paragraph 13 of the Circular provides the
      necessary guidance in this situation and it reads as
      fol1o w s :-
            "Separate representation for individual officers whose
            interest is involved may be necessary. For example,
            there will be occasions when (a) the chief officer’s
            legal representative cannot reasonably be expected to
            represent the separate interests of such officers and
            (b) the police authority considers that such interests
            should be represented.   In such cases the authority
            should give financial assistance to the officers. In
            considering (b) above, the authority will wish in
            particular to assess whether the officers are at risk of
            being held to blame for actions in connection with the
            death to which the inquest relates and whether any such
            finding might give rise to legal proceedings for the
            costs of which the police authority would be liable
            under section 48(1) of the Police Act 1964 or for which
            financial assistance might be appropriate within the
            terms of this Circular.
3.4   The question to be answered under this paragraph is whether
      separate representation of the officers is necessary.
3.5   Paragraph 13 asks the Authority to consider this question in
      two parts.
      (a) Can the Chief Officer’s legal representative reasonably
          be expected to represent the separate interests of the
          officers and;
      (b)   Does the Police Authority consider that   such   interests
            should be represented.
3.6 The answer to (a) in this case is straightforward. The Chief
    Constable’s legal adviser has already advised that he cannot
    represent the separate interests of the officers.
      In determining (b) the Circular asks a Police Authority to
      consider the following factors:-
      (i) The risk of the officers being held to blame for actions
          in connection with the deaths to which the inquests
          relate
            and
      (ii) whether any such finding might give rise to legal
           proceedings for which financial assistance might be
           appropriate within the terms of the Circular.
3.7 There is little doubt that some if not all officers run the
     risk of being held to blame for their actions. It has to be
     further considered whether there is a risk of further
    proceedings    which might      be the subject of financial
     assistance under the Circular.
8 The Director of Public Prosecutions has already decided there
  is   insufficient evidence to bring criminal proceedings
  against any of the officers but fresh evidence may come out
  at the inquests and the Coroner has already alluded to this
  fact; this might give rise to a change of mind on the part of
  the Director of Public Prosecutions. From press statements
  which have previously been made, there is obviously a risk of
  a private prosecution but in all of this it would be
  unreasonable in the view of the Authority’s legal adviser, to
  speculate.
   Good Faith and Reasonable Judgement
1 A decision of the Divisional Court in the case of R v
  Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton
  clearly establishes that it is reasonable for a Police
  Authority to have regard to these two matters in deciding
  whether or not to provide financial assistance in any
  proceedings, whether covered by the Circular or not.
   In his judgment, Lord Justice Ralph Gibson said:-
   "If therefore there was, on the part of an officer,
   negligence ie failure to exercise such care as was reasonably
   to be required in the circumstances of an officer of his rank
   and experience doing his job in the Force, then, in my view,
   the Police Authority is entitled to have regard to it if such
   negligence was so connected to the subject matter of the
   legal proceedings or to the causing of the legal proceedings
   to be taken that it can fairly be regarded as a substantial
   cause of the incurring of the costs. I have no doubt that a
   Police Authority, if satisfied of good faith on the part of
   the officer, would normally act, and be pleased to act, on
   the central principle stated in the Circular; but the
   discretion is given to the Authority and it is impossible, in
   my view, to hold that once good faith is established, a
   Police Authority must disregard clear evidence of negligence
   or of failure to "exercise judgement reasonably".
   So to hold would mean that a Police Authority would be
   required to disregard acts of substantial negligence such
   that it could fairly be said that, although acquitted of bad
   faith, the officer had "brought the proceedings on himself."
   The decision whether evidence of such negligence in a
   particular case justifies withholding reimbursement, wholly
   or in part, is of course entrusted to the Police Authority."
.2 The Police Authority should, when considering the two matters
   of good faith and reasonable judgement, have regard to the
   information that is available.   The only real information
   that is available in this connection is that contained in
   Chapter 18 of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor which
   is appended.
4.3   It is important at this juncture to remind members that each
      officers application should be considered separately.
5     Financial Implications
5.1   Derbyshire case which has previously been mentioned in this
      report,   is   also    authority for the proposition that
      alternative funding should not be taken into account by the
      Authority when deciding whether or not to provide financial
      assistance.   However,    this particular case concerned
      reimbursement of the Police Federation.
5.2   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendents Murray,
      Greenwood and Marshall have policies of insurance which can
      and are being used to finance legal representation at
      present. In the view of the Authority’s legal adviser, a
      decision to provide financial assistance to PCs Smith and
      Illingworth must cover the full cost of legal representation,
      whereas support for the other officers could be by way of a
      contribution to the extent that the policies of insurance do
      not cover the full cost of representation.
5.3   It would also be reasonable for the Authority to determine
      the level of representation, whether it is solicitor, alone,
      solicitor and counsel, etc. However, again, in the view of
      the Authority’s legal adviser, in the event that financial
      assistance is granted, this decision should be left to the
      individuals concerned but with the condition that, failing
      agreement on the amount of the costs, they should be taxed.

6     Refusal of Application
6.1 Paragraph 15 of the Circular provides that if the Authority
     were to refuse an application for financial assistance   and
     then discover in the light of events at the inquests that
     assistance shoul dhave been given, it should meet the
     reasonable costs incurred by the officer. If an application
     is refused for proper reasons the Authority would be acting
     reasonably if they made it clear to the officer(s) that this
     would not preclude a further application which would be
     considered in the light of events at the inquests.
7     Recommendation
      That the Authority consider the applications.




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer
                                                   CHAPTER 18

                                                      P O L IC E

Choice of Ends by the Police
   272. T here was much bitterness amongst Liverpool supporters that they had to make do again for the
second year with the Leppings Lane end. But, cogent as th eir complaints were, they am ounted to reasons for
choosing a different ground altogether. G iven Hillsborough as the venue, I think the police were right to
allocate the sections o f the ground as they did. T he direction o f arrival and the need for segregation made it
sensible and to reverse the 1988 arrangem ents would have made for confusion. As with choice o f venue, I do
n o t consider choice o f ends was causative o f the disaster. H ad it been reversed, the disaster could well have
occurred in a sim ilar m a n n e r b ut to N ottingham supporters.

Police Planning
   273. T h e O perational O rder for 1989 left much unsaid. Apart from the lack o f any provision for late or
congested arrivals, o r any provision for the avoidance o f overcrowding on the terraces, there was a n u m b er of
o th e r omissions. For example, there was no specific deploym ent o f officers to m an the perim eter gates. The
O rd e r did not detail the duties o f the m o un ted officers deployed at the Leppings Lane entrance, who included
Liverpool officers to assist in marshalling their own fans. The duties o f Superintendents (especially Mr
G reenw ood and M r Marshall) were not defined so as to achieve clarity and efficiency. By an oversight, the
provision requiring mobile (Tango) patrols to assist the emergency services was om itted from the text.

  274. The 1988 O rd e r was never substantially reviewed save to reduce the n u m b e r o f officers deployed i n
shopping areas and to em phasise in capital letters the embargo on fans having access to the pitch. Satisfaction
with the 1988 event led to complacency. T h a t som e thought the pens overfull in 1988 and that the tunnel was
closed o ff on that occasion did not figure in or influence the plan for 1989.

   275. M r Duckenfield was p rom oted and put in charge o f F Division only 21 days before this semi-final. The
pre-planning was already in progress und er M r Mole who had been in com m and both in 1987 and in 1988. It
m ight have been wiser to have left M r Mole in charge o f this operation. On the oth er hand, it is quite
understand ab le that M r D uckenfield should have been expected to take com m and o f events in his Division
from th e date o f his prom otion. In view o f his lack o f experience at Hillsborough and o f a semi-final match,
however, it was im perative that he be fully briefed and that he should also brief himself.

   276. He was not inform ed o f the crushing incident in 1981 nor did he make inquiries which would have
revealed it. He did not know the arrangem ent as between Club and police for m onitoring the Leppings Lane
terraces. H e did not visit and to ur the ground before approving the Operational Order. Although he attended a
m atch on 2 April, there was only a small crowd present and he left control o f the game to the Superintendents.

Policing on the Day
   277. One o f the regrettable features o f the football scene as it has developed is the enorm ous expenditure of
money, tim e and effort in employing large num bers o f police all over the country to guard against the sort of
d iso rd e r and m isbehaviour which have becom e endemic. Police m anagement o f a gam eoffootball has become
a m ilitary operation. T he problem s faced and the responses received must be disheartening and may have
te n d e d to harden police attitudes to supporters in general.

   278. It is fair to state that over m any years the South Yorkshire Police have given excellent service to the
public. They have handled crowd problem s sensitively and successfully at a large nu m ber o f football games
including m ajor matches, during strikes in the coal industry and the steel industry, and in oth er contexts.
U nfortunately, their policing on 15 April broke down in th e ways already described and, although there were
o th e r causes, the m a in reason for the disaster was the failure o f police control.

   279. In all som e 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I m ust report that for the most
p a r t the quality o f their evidence was in inverse proportion to their rank. There were many young Constable s
w h o as witnesses were alert, intelligent and open. O n the day. they and many others strove heroically in ghastly
circum stances aggravated by hostility to rescue and succour victims. They inspired confidence and hope.

   280. By contrast, with som e notable exceptions, the senior officers in com m and were defensive and evasive
witnesses. T h e ir feelings o f grief and sorrow were obvious and genuine. N o doubt those feelings were
intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had occurred under their management. But, neither their
h a n d lin g o f problem s on the day n o r their account o f it in evidence showed the qualities o f leadership to be
expected o f their rank.


                                                          49
   281. M r Duckenfield leant heavily on M r M urray’s experience. Between them they misjudged the build-up
at the turnstiles and did little about it until they received Mr Marshall’s request to open the gate. They did not.
for example, check the turnstile figures available from Club control or check with Tango units as to the
n um bers still to come. They did not alert M r Greenwood to the situation at the fringe o f his area o f com m and.
They gave no instructions as to the m anagem ent o f the crowd at Leppings Lane. Inflexibly they declined to
postpone kick-off.

   282. W hen M r Marshall’s request came, M r D uckenfield’s capacity to take decisions and give orders
seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last, the opening o f the gates, he failed to give necessary
consequential orders or to exert any control when the disaster occurred. He misinterpreted the emergence o f
fans from pens 3 and 4. W hen he was unsure o f the problem, he sent others down to “assess the situation"
ra th e r than descend to see for himself. H e gave no inform ation to the crowd.

   283. Most surprisingly, he gave M r Kelly and others to think that there had been an inrush due to Liverpool
fans forcing open a gate. This was not only untruthful. It set o ff a widely reported allegation against the
supporters which caused grave offence and distress. It revived against football fans, and especially those from
Liverpool, accusations o f hooliganism which caused reaction not only nationw ide but from Europe too. I can
only assume that M r Duckenfield’s lack o f ca n d o u r on this occasion was out o f character. He said his reason for
not telling the truth was that if the crowd becam e aware o f it there might be a very hostile reaction and this
might impede rescue work. He did not wish to divulge what had happened until he had spoken to a senior
officer. However, reluctance to tell M r Kelly the truth did not require that he be told a falsehood. Moreover,
although Assistant C hief Constable Jackson was at hand, M r Duckenfield did not disclose the truth to hir~
until much later.

  284. The likeliest explanation o f M r Duckenfield’s conduct is that he simply could not face the enormity o f
the decision to open the gates and all that flowed therefrom. T hat would explain what he said to M r Kelly, what
he did not say to M r Jackson, his aversion to addressing the crowd and his failure to take effective control o f the
disaster situation. He froze.

T he Police Case at the Inquiry
  285.     It is a m atter o f regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions, the South Yorkshire Police were not
prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in what occurred. M r Duckenfield, under pressure o f
cross-examination, apologised for blam ing the Liverpool fans forcausing the deaths. But, that apart, the police
case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk, and to blame the Club for failing to m onitor the pens. It was
argued that the fatal crush was not caused by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a being
defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to w hether lessons have been learnt. It would
have been more seemly and encouraging for the future if responsibility had been faced.




                                                          50
o                                                                         APPENDIX


          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
          REVENUE ESTIMATES 1991/92
          VARIATION STATEMENT
          ORIGINAL ESTIMATE 1990/91 TO REVISED 1990/91
                                                                  £


1 1990/91 ESTIMATE                                          47,245,500
2 ADD 8QVERNNEKT 6RANT                                      48,190,400

3                                                   93,435, W O
4 REAL VARIATIONS (MAJOR ITEMS DETAILED OVERLEAF)          ( 1,679,600)
5 INFLATION (FULL YEAR EFFECT, NQV 1989 TO NOV 1990)         6,572,100


7 1990/91 NET EXPENDITURE BEFORE 60VERNHENT BRANT          100,326,200
S LESS GOVERNMENT SftANT                                    50,149,300

9 1990/91 REVENUE ESTIMATE AT OUTTURN PRICES                50,178,900
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

                REVENUE ESTIMATES 1991/92

                REAL VARIATIONS ORIGINAL 1990/91 TO REVISED 1990/91

                                                                       £


1 a)   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                                         579,000
 b)    KOUSINS ALLOWANCE VARIATIONS                             ( 179,6001
 e)    INCREASE IN TRANSFER VALUES RECEIVEABLE                  ( 300,000)
 s)    REDUCTION IN THE EMPLOYERS LOCALSOVERXHENT
        SUPERANNUATION CONTRIBUTION RATE                        ( 181,300)
 f)    VEHICLE REPLACEMENT PR08RAMME                            ( 1,485,300)
 g)    REDUCTION IN COMPUTER CHAR5E5                            I      70,200)
 h)    DECREASE IN PENSION COMMUTATIONS                         (       65,700)
 jl    REDUCTION IN THE NUMBER OF SECONDED OFFICERS                    81,200
 k)    OTHER VARIATIONS                                         (       57,700)


                                                               ( 1,679,800)
                                                             » « w v v c a e a iiv i
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 7 DRgKMRTO    1 aon



riMAHCIAL A5SISTANCB TO POLICE OFFICERS POR LEGAL MPftgfiBttTATIOH
IK PROCEEDINGS ARISING OUT OP THE HILLSBQBOPGB DISASTER


REPORT OF THB CHIEF CONSTABLE


1      Matter for Consideration

1.1    The provision     of   financial   assistance     to   the   following   police
       officerst-

                  Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
                  Superintendents Murray, Greenwood and Marshall
                  Constables Smith and Illingworth

        under the terms of Home Office Circular No. 77/1987.


2      information

2.1    Members have already received a reportby the Chief Constable which
        is dated 19 October 1990/2 November 1990.

2.2    This date they also have for         their consideration        a   new report
        prepared by the Clerk fi Financial Officer.

2.3    This report should be read in conjunction with those previous papers.


3       The RiskFactor

3.1      All the officers subject ofthis application consider themselves
        at significant risk due to the following factora;-

        1.   The possibility at the Inquest of a verdict of
              unlawful killing.

        2.   Of additional evidence being given at the Inquest
              which may cause the Director of Public Prosecutions
              to further   considerthe question of       criminal
              liability.

        3.   Recently in a similar case where the Director
              of PublicProsecutions     decided against criminal
              proceedings#   representatives   of  the deceased
              instigated a Judicial Review of the Director's
              decision.   The officers see this as possible in
              this case.

        4.   Private criminal prosecutions may be brought.
                                  - 2 -


      5.   The officer* face possible disciplinary proceedings
           where dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction
           in rank are all possibilities.

3.2   The  officer at greatest risk and    therefore most in need of your
      support is Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield.

3.3   In the case of Hr Duckenfield his financial provision has already
       proved   insufficient  to   provide   proper  and   adequate   legal
       representation for himself at the on-going Inquest proceedings,
      often he is to be seen sitting unrepresented at the Inquest,
      conserving the scant resources he does have for those times when
      personal representation is absolutely necessary. From every point
      of view this is totally unsatisfactory and, In my view, undesirable.


4     Legal Representation

4.1   Counsel representing the Force is, of course, responding to the
       evidence given at the Inquest as appropriate to ensure that the
       interests of the Force and the Police Authority are properly
       represented and to a small degree ha is, at the same time,
       representing the interests of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.
       This Is not sufficient to allow for evidence to emerge to best public
       advantage.

4.2   The other officers who are represented, and who are funded through
       private Insurance, have already made significant in-roads into that
       provision. The Inquest is proceeding slowly and so their financial
       problems will become greater over time.


5     Good Faith and Reasonable Judgment

5.1   in the case R. -v- Derbyshire Police Authority ex-parte Wilson and
       Dalton (an extract of this is contained In the clerk t Financial
       Officer's paper) it was said "...a Police Authority if satisfied
       of good faith on the pert of the officer(s) would nonutlly act and
       be pleaeed to act on the central principle stated in the Circular*..*
       - (HOC 77/87). It was held in that case that this "...aaant that
       there ia a preemption that if an officer ia shown to have acted
       in good faith la pursuance of hie duties (this baa already been
       accepted to be the ease by this Authority at their Mating on
       16 Voveaber 1990), be should be entitled to reiaborsoftest of his
       reasonable costa and that a refusal to reiabursa in such
       circumstances auat ba a bad decision unless there ie easts relevant
       factor which could reasonably justify tha refusal.      Without such
       justification the Police Aathority smst be taken to h a w failed
       to have had proper regard for the central principle."

5.2   The Clerk fi Financial Officer advisee that a Police Authority
       satisfied the officers acted in good faith may consider further
       the extent to which those concerned in an epplication for euch
       assistance are subject to evidence of negligence possibly substantial
       negligence or of any failure to axerclse judgment reasonably.
                                   - 3 -


5.3    The Chief Constable advances the view that there is no doubt all
        the officers on the day were acting in pursuance of their duties
        and in good faith.

5.4    These officers were faced, in terms of what occurred and the
        difficulties which emerged, with a situation which in their
        experience, and probably everyone else's was unique.

5.5    There was real concern at one point in time for the lives of
        spectators, including many children and young people, outside the
        turnstiles at the Lappings Lane end of the Hillsborough football
        ground.

5.6    The decisions which were made and which have been end ere etill
        the subject of protracted enquiry, were aide to save life and for
        no other reason.

5.7    The enormous management, logistical problems and experienced stress
        which was present at the relevant time needs to be taken into
        account.

5.8    It may be said that the worst decision would, at that time, have
        bean to make no decision.

5.9    All the officers, including Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, were
        acting in accordance with their duties, in good faith, and, despite
        what occurred, were exercising their judgment to the best of their
        abilities in the circumstances.

5.10   The Clerk fc Financial Officer has    drawn   your   attention   to the
        question of reasonable judgment.

5.11   If tha issue of negligence or the exercise of judgment is a relevant
        consideration in your deliberations there must be clear evidence
        of negligence, possibly substantial negligence.      Your attention
        has been drawn to the report of Lord Justice Taylor. It must b*
        remembered that Lord Justice Taylor was acting as the chairman e_
        a Public Inquiry which is not a judicial hearing and that the
        witnesses were not giving evidence in the strict sense that applies
        in normal legal proceedings.

5.12   The Director of Public Prosecutions when considering the question
        of criminal liability against all or any of the officers concerned
        in this application of course could do sc only on the basis of clear
        evidence.   He utilised the services of the Nest Midlands Police
        to investigate and compile a report which was based on the evidenoe
        available. His conclusion was, after considering the West Midlands
        Police report, there was insufficient evidence to justify proceedings
        against anyone.

5.13   It may be concluded that what this means is that there was
         insufficient evidence of negligence or failure to exercise judgment
        reasonably, on the part of any police officers, which would amount
        to criminal culpability.
The on-going inquest is again concerned with evident:* concerning
these sana issues.    It would probably be imprudent of the Police
Authority to come to judgmental conclusions on the questions of
negligence or reasonable judgment in advance of the Inquest findings.


Finance

The Circular makes it clear that expenditure incurred in this regard
is eligible for police grant.

When this Committee last considered these applications questions
were raised about the private insurance available to the chief
superintendent and three superintendents. The position iss-

a.   Through the insurance provided by Allianz Cornhill
     each officer has a financial limitation of £50«000
     which after VAT is taken into account amounts
     in fact to £42,500 each,

b.   The policy does not specifically cover inquest
     Hearings but it is understood that the insurers
     are prepared to provide cover in this instance.

c.   In relation to future risks the officers may need
     further legaladvice and representation after
     the inquest Hearings have been concluded/ for
     example, in relation to criminal, private or
     discipline proceedings. If the Director of Public
     Prosecutions were to bring criminal proceedings,
     in the first instance the Police Authority could
     not - even if they so wished - fund the officers'
     legal costs.     There is no provision for the
     Authority   to    fund legal   representation    at
     discipline hearings.    Therefore, in terms' of the
     insurance    provision,    such possible      future
     requirements must be borne in mind.

In relation to the two constables, they do not have private insurance
but to date have been supported from Police Federation funds. Their
application,   as   with   the   chief   superintendent   and   three
superintendents, is for Police Authority funding in relation to
legal costs incurred by them at the inquest Hearing only.

The Clerk & Financial Officer in his latest paper has drawn attention
to the fact that the Derbyshire case is authority for the proposition
that, when deciding whether or not to provide financial assistance,
alternative fending should not be taken into account.      Certainly,
the continuing needs of the officers as described above must be
considered.

whilst it is difficult to assess the amount of money involved in
these applications, the position in reapect of each officer at the
                                   -   5 -


        tima of the 2 November meeting, was made available to the Clerk
        & Financial officer and nay be helpful in this regard.

6.6    A third decision by the Authority not to support any or all of the
       officers will havs a significant detrimental impact on Force morale.
       South Yorkshire Police officers go about their daily duties
       performing difficult and often dangerous tasks in the sincere belief
       that they have the full support of the Police Authority who as part
       o£ their function strive to provide such support and not the
       converse.


Conclusion

If funding for legal assistance is denied to any of tha officers, the best
needs of natural justice will be neglected, allowing the real risk of less
evidence emerging in the public interest - whether to tha credit or detriment
Of the Force.




R B WELLS
CHIEF CONSTABLE


                                         NOT FOR PUBLICATION as i t
                                         contains exempt information
                                         within para.                                 ..of
                                         S c h . l 2 A to t h e Local G o v e r n m e n t
                                         A c t 1 9 7 2 as a m e n d e d .
                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

                            7 DECEMBER 1990

                            AGENDA ITEM 18




               FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN
                            LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


                         SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS




WP006687/SJL
SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS


YELLOW         Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer to Police Authority -
               7 December 1990.

GREEN          Report of Chief Constable to Police Authority - 7 December 1990.

MAUVE          Report of Chief Constable to Police Authority - 19 October and
               2 November.

BLUE           Letter from Messrs Hepworth and Chadwick (representing Chief
               Superintendent Duckenfield) and application for assistance from
               Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. Extract from a note of the
               meeting of the Police Authority on 16 November 1990.




WP006687/SJL
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 7 DECEMBER 1990


FINANCIALASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS FOR LEGAL REPRESENTATION
I n PROCEEDINGS ARISING OUT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


REPORT OF THE CLERK AND FINANCIAL OFFICER

1     Matter fo r Consideration

1.1   The provision o f financial assistance to the following police
      o ffic e rs

      Chief Superintendent Duckenfleld
      Superintendents Murray Greenwood and Marshall
      PCs Smith and Illin g w o rth

      under the terms o f Home Office C ircular No 77/87.
2     Information

2.1    Members have before them a report from the Chief Constable
      which gives the background to the applications and recommends
      the Authority to approve a commitment to provide financial
      assistance fo r legal representation. The recommendation 1s
      related to the Inquests but, as can be seen from the w ritten
      applications which are appended to the Chief Constable’ s
      report, In certain cases the applications are much wider.
2.2   Home O ffice C ircular No 77/87(Appendix          F   to the Chief
      Constable’ s Report!
      This provides guidance to Police Authorities when considering
      applications fo r financial assistance to police o ffic e rs .
      The central p rin cip le which should guide such consideration
      Is that where a Police Authority considers tha t an o ffic e r
      has acted In good fa ith In pursuance o f his duties, or that
      the Interests o f the Force as a whole are Involved, the
      o ffic e r should have thesupport o f the Police Authority.
2.3   There Is ju d ic ia l authority fo r the proposition tha t th is
      creates        a presumption tha t an o ffic e r Is e n title d to
      reimbursement o f his reasonable costs and th is can only be
      rebutted 1f there Is some relevant factor which could
      reasonably ju s t if y the refusal. This Is the case o f R V
      Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton. The
      tra n s c rip t o f the judgment In th is case w ill be available at
      the meeting fo r reference purposes.


         NOT FOR PUBLICATION as i t
         contains exempt      Information
         within para.         .....
         Sch.l2A to the Local Government
         Act 1972 as amended._________
3     Proceedings to which the Applications relate
      C iv il Action

      Chief Superintendent Duckenfleld in his application dated 21
      September 1990, Appendix A to the Chief Constable's report
      referred to 1n paragraph 2.1, requests financial assistance
      from the Authority In connection with the c iv il hearings due
      to begin on 2 October 1990. These proceedings concern the
      p rin c ip le o f contribution to the damages awarded or agreed In
      c iv il claims arising out o f the disaster, by Sheffield
      Wednesday Football Club and th e ir engineers, Eastwood and
      Partners.        No c iv il action has been brought against Chief
      Superintendent Duckenfield or any other Individual o ffic e rs
      and therefore the application fo r financial support 1n
      connection with c iv il proceedings need not concern members at
      the present time.
3.1   Criminal Proceedings
      Superintendent Murray has requested financial assistance fo r
      legal representation In connection with           any criminal
      proceedings      which   arise.    (Appendix   C to the Chief
      Constable’ s rep ort). There are none at present but paragraph
      3 of the Home Office Circular deals with th is s itu a tio n . The
      guidance given 1s that in a public prosecution the police
      o ffic e r Is expected to bear the costs o f his defence. I f he
      is acquitted the Police Authority are In a position to decide
      on the f u ll facts, whether or not to make a payment to the
      o ffic e r or to the Police Federation.
      As there are no criminal proceedings, th is             p a rtic u la r
      application could stand adjourned in accordance with the
      C ircular u n til a fte r such proceedings have been completed.
3.2   D iscipline Proceedings
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield 1n his application makes
      reference   to the p o s s ib ility o f d isc ip lin e proceedings
      following the Inquests.    I t is not clear whether he is
      seeking financial assistance from the Authority In connection
      with any such proceedings but as I t Is well settled principle
      that the Authority should not provide assistance In these
      proceedings th is can be rejected.

3.3    Inquests
      A ll o f the o ffic e rs make application fo r financial assistance
      to be separately represented at the Inquests which are
      presently ongoing. Paragraph 13 o f the Circular provides the
      necessary guidance In th is situa tion and 1t reads as
      fo llo w s :-
             "Separate representation fo r Individual o ffic e rs whose
             Intere st Is Involved may be necessary. For example,
             there w ill be occasions when (a) the chief o ffic e r ’ s
             legal representative cannot reasonably be expected to
             represent the separate Interests o f such o ffic e rs and
             (b) the police authority considers th a t such Interests
             should be represented.        In such cases the authority
             should give fina ncial assistance to the o ffic e rs . In
             considering (b) above, the authority w ill wish in
             p a rtic u la r to assess whether the o ffic e rs are at r is k of
             being held to blame fo r actions in connection with the
             death to which the inquest relates and whether any such
             finding might give rise to legal proceedings fo r the
              costs o f which the police authority would be lia b le
             under section 48(1) o f the Police Act 1964 or fo r which
              fin a n cia l assistance might be appropriate w ithin the
             terms o f th is C ircular.
3.4   The question to be answered under th is paragraph 1s whether
      separate representation o f the o ffic e rs Is necessary.
3.5   Paragraph 13 asks the Authority to consider th is question in
      two parts.

      (a)    Can the Chief O ffic e r’ s legal representative reasonably
             be expected to represent the separate Interests o f the
             o ffic e rs and;
      (b)    Does the Police Authority consider that         such   Interests
             should be represented.
3.6 The answer to (a) In th is case Is straightforward. The Chief
    Constable’ s legal adviser has already advised tha t he cannot
    represent the separate Interests o f the o ffic e rs .
      In determining (b) the C ircular asks a Police Authority to
      consider the follow ing fa cto rs:-
      ( i)   The ris k o f the o ffic e rs being held to blame fo r actions
              in connection with the deaths to which the Inquests
             relate
             and
      (11) whether any such finding might give ris e to legal
           proceedings fo r which financial assistance might be
           appropriate w ithin the terms o f the C ircular.
3.7 There 1s l i t t l e doubt tha t some i f not a ll o ffic e rs run the
    r is k o f being held to blame fo r th e ir actions. I t has to be
    fu rth e r considered whether there is a r is k o f fu rth e r
    proceedings         which might     be the subject o f financial
    assistance under the C ircular.
3.8   The Director o f Public Prosecutions has already decided there
      is     In s u ffic ie n t evidence to bring criminal proceedings
      against any o f the o ffice rs but fresh evidence may come out
      at the Inquests and the Coroner has already alluded to th is
      fa c t; th is might give ris e to a change o f mind on the part of
      the D irector o f Public Prosecutions. From press statements
      which have previously been made, there is obviously a r is k of
      a private prosecution but in a ll o f th is 1t would be
      unreasonable in the view o f the A uthority’ s legal adviser, to
      speculate.
4     Good Faith and Reasonable Judgement
4.1   A decision o f the Divisional Court In the case o f R v
      Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton
      clearly, establishes that 1t 1s reasonable fo r a Police
      Authority to have regard to these two matters In deciding
      whether or not to provide financial assistance 1n any
      proceedings, whether covered by the Circular or not.
      In his judgment, Lord Justice Ralph Gibson said:-
      " I f therefore there was, on the part o f an o ffic e r,
      negligence 1e fa ilu re to exercise such care as was reasonably
      to be required In the circumstances o f an o ffic e r o f his rank
      and experience doing his job In the Force, then, 1n my view,
      the Police Authority Is e n title d to have regard to 1t i f such
      negligence was so connected to the subject matter o f the
      legal proceedings or to the causing o f the legal proceedings
      to be taken that I t can f a ir ly be regarded as a substantial
      cause o f the Incurring of the costs. I have no doubt tha t a
      Police Authority, I f sa tisfie d o f good fa ith on the part o f
      the o ffic e r , would normally act, and be pleased to act, on
      the central p rin c ip le stated 1n the C ircular; but the
      discretion Is given to the Authority and 1t Is Impossible, In
      my view, to hold that once good fa ith Is established, a
       Police Authority must disregard clear evidence o f negligence
       or o f fa ilu re to "exercise judgement reasonably".
      So to hold would mean that a Police Authority would be
      required to disregard acts o f substantial negligence such
      tha t i t could f a ir ly be said tha t, although acquitted o f bad
      f a ith , the o ffic e r had "brought the proceedings on him self."
      The decision whether evidence o f such negligence in a
      p a rtic u la r case ju s tifie s withholding reimbursement, wholly
      or 1n p a rt, 1s o f course entrusted to the Police A u th ority."
4.2   The Police Authority should, when considering the two matters
      o f good fa ith and reasonable judgement, have regard to the
      Information that Is available.    The only real Information
      that Is available In th is connection is that contained 1n
      Chapter 18 o f the Interim Report o f Lord Justice Taylor which
      is appended.
4.3 I t 1s Important at th is juncture to remind members that each
     o ffic e rs application should be considered separately.
5      Financial Implications
5.1     Derbyshire case which has previously been mentioned In th is
        report,        Is   also    authority    fo r the proposition that
        a lte rn a tiv e funding should not be taken Into account by the
        Authority when deciding whether or not to provide financial
        assistance.        However,    th is  p a rtic u la r case concerned
        reimbursement o f the Police Federation.
5.2     Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendents Hurray,
        Greenwood and Marshall have po licies o f insurance which can
        and are being used to finance legal representation at
        present. In the view o f the A u th ority's legal adviser, a
        decision to provide financial assistance to PCs Smith and
        Illin g w o rth must cover the f u ll cost o f legal representation,
        whereas support fo r the other o ffic e rs could be by way of a
        contribution to the extent that the po licies o f insurance do
        not cover the f u ll cost o f representation.
5.3     I t would also be reasonable fo r the Authority to determine
        the level o f representation, whether i t is s o lic ito r , alone,
        s o lic it o r and counsel, etc. However, again, in the view of
        the A u th ority's legal adviser, 1n the event that financial
        assistance 1s granted, th is decision should be le f t to the
        individuals concerned but with the condition th a t, fa ilin g
        agreement on the amount of the costs, they should be taxed.


6       Refusal of Application
6.1 Paragraph 15 o f the C ircular provides that 1f the Authority
    were to refuse an application fo r financial assistance and
     then discover 1n the lig h t o f events at the inquests that
     assistance shoul dhave been given, 1t should meet the
     reasonable costs incurred by the o ffic e r. I f an application
     1s refused fo r proper reasons the Authority would be acting
     reasonably i f they made 1t clear to the o ffic e r(s ) that th is
     would not preclude a fu rth e r application which would be
     considered 1n the lig h t o f events at the inquests.

 7      Recommendation
         That the Authority consider the applications.




    R C Johnston
    Clerk and Financial O ffice r
                                                CHAPTER 18

                                                   POLICE

Choice of Ends by the Police
   272. There was much bitterness amongst Liverpool supporters that they had to make do again for the
second year with the Leppings Lane end. But, cogent as their complaints were, they amounted to reasons for
choosing a different ground altogether. Given Hillsborough as the venue, I think the police were right to
allocate the sections of the ground as they did. The direction of arrival and the need for segregation made it
sensible and to reverse the 1988 arrangements would have made for confusion. As with choice of venue, I do
not consider choice of ends was causative of the disaster. Had it been reversed, the disaster could well have
occurred in a similar manner but to Nottingham supporters.

Police Planning
  273. The Operational Order for 1989 left much unsaid. Apart from the lack of any provision for late or
congested arrivals, or any provision for the avoidance of overcrowding on the terraces, there was a number of
other omissions. For example, there was no specific deployment of officers to man the perimeter gates. The
Order did not detail the duties of the mounted officers deployed at the Leppings Lane entrance, who included
Liverpool officers to assist in marshalling their own fans. The duties of Superintendents (especially Mr
Greenwood and Mr Marshall) were not defined so as to achieve clarity and efficiency. By an oversight, the
provision requiring mobile (Tango) patrols to assist the emergency services was omitted from the text.

  274. The 1988 Order was never substantially reviewed save to reduce the number of officers deployed in
shopping areas and to emphasise in capital letters the embargo on fans having access to the pitch. Satisfaction
with the 1988 event led to complacency. That some thought the pens overfull in 1988 and that the tunnel was
closed off on that occasion did not figure in or influence the plan for 1989.

   275. M r Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge of F Division only 21 days before this semi-final. The
pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It
might have been wiser to have left M r Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite
understandable that Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
from the date of his promotion. In view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and of a semi-final match,
however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he should also brief himself.

   276. He was not informed of the crushing incident in 1981 nor did he make inquiries which would have
revealed it. He did not know the arrangement as between Club and police for monitoring the Leppings Lane
terraces. He did not visit and tour the ground before approving the Operational Order. Although he attended a
match on 2 April, there was only a small crowd present and he left control of the game to the Superintendents.

Policing on the Day
  277. One of the regrettable features of the football scene as it has developed is the enormous expenditure of
money, time and efion in employing large numbers of police all over the country to guard against the son of
disorder and misbehaviour which have become endemic. Police management of a game of football has become
a military operation. The problems faced and the responses received must be disheartening and may have
tended to harden police attitudes to supporters in general.
   278. It is fair to state that over many years the South Yorkshire Police have given excellent service to the
 public. They have handled crowd problems sensitively and successfully at a large number of football games
 including major matches, during strikes in the coal industry and the steel industry, and in other contexts.
 Unfortunately, their policing on 15 April broke down in the ways already described and, although there were
 other causes, the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control.
    279. In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must report that for the most
 part the quality of their evidence was in inverse proportion to their rank. There were many young Constables
 who as witnesses were alert, intelligent and open. On the day. they and many others strove heroically in ghastly
 circumstances aggravated by hostility to rescue and succour victims. They inspired confidence and hope.

   280. By contrast, with some notable exceptions, the senior officers in command were defensive and evasi ve
 witnesses. Their feelings of grief and sorrow were obvious and genuine. No doubt those feelings were
 intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had occurred under their management. But, neither their
 handling of problems on the day nor their account of it in evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be
 expected of their rank.

                                                        49
   281. Mr Duckenfield leant heavily on Mr Murray's experience. Between them they misjudged the build-up
at the turnstiles and did little about it until they received Mr Marshall’s request to open the gate. They did not.
for example, check the tumslile figures available from Club control or check with Tango units as to the
numbers still to come. They did not alert Mr Greenwood to the situation at the fringe of his area of command.
They gave no instructions as to the management of the crowd at Leppings Lane. Inflexibly they declined 10
postpone kick-off.

  282. When Mr Marshall's request came, Mr Duckenfield’s capacity to take decisions and give orders
seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last, the opening of the gates, he failed to give necessary
consequential orders or to exert any control when the disaster occurred. He misinterpreted the emergence of
fans from pens 3 and 4. When he was unsure of the problem, he sent others down to “assess the situation
rather than descend to see for himself. He gave no information to the crowd.

   283. Most surprisingly, he gave M r Kelly and others to think that there had been an inrush due to Li verpool
fans forcing open a gate. This was not only untruthful. It set off a widely reported allegation against the
supporters which caused grave offence and distress. It revived against football fans, and especially those from
Liverpool, accusations of hooliganism which caused reaction not only nationwide but from Europe too. I can
only assume that M r Duckenfield's lack of candour on this occasion was out ofcharacter. He said his reason for
not telling the truth was that if the crowd became aware of it there might be a very hostile reaction and this
might impede rescue work. He did not wish to divulge what had happened until he had spoken to a senior
officer. However, reluctance to tell Mr Kelly the truth did not require that he be told a falsehood. Moreover,
although Assistant Chief Constable Jackson was at hand. Mr Duckenfield did not disclose the truth to him
until much later.

  284. The likeliest explanation of Mr Duckenfield'S conduct is that he simply could not face the enormity of
the decision to open thegatesandall that flowed therefrom. That would explain what he said to Mr Kell), what
he did not say to Mr Jackson, his aversion to addressing the crowd and his failure to take effective control of the
disaster situation. He froze.

The Police Case at the Inquiry
  285. It is a matter of regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions, the South Yorkshire Police were not
prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in what occurred. Mr Duckenfield, under pressure of
cross-examination, apologised for blaming the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But, that apart, the pol ice
case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk, and to blame the Club for failing to monitor the pens. It was
argued that the fatal crush was not caused by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a being
defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt. It would
have been more seemly and encouraging for the future if responsibility had been faced.




                                                         50
SOUTH YOKKSBIRB POIICB AUTHORITY - 7 DtCPPgg 1990


J^JKAMCIAL ASSIfiTAHCB TO POLICE QFFICPS PO* M C A L RIPRgfiBHTATIOM
IM PROCE8DIHG3 AEXBIWC OPT OF THE q j U J BOROOCB DlflASTER


M P O K T Or * M


1        Matter for Consideration

1.1      Tha provision        of   financial   assistance   to   tha   following   police
         officersi-

                        Chitf Superintendent Duckenfield
                        Superintendents Murray, Greenwood and Marshall
                        Constables Smith and Illingworth

          under the teras of Eotne Office Circular No. 77/1987.


2        Information

2.1      Member* hava already received a reportby the Chief Conata'jle which
          is dated 19 October 1990/2 November 1990.

2.2      This date they also have for       their consideration            a new report
          prepared by the Clark & Financial Officer.

2.3      This report should ba       raad inconjunction with those previous        papers.


3          The Risk Factoi

3.1       All the officers subject of this application consider thamaelvai
          at significant risk due to the following factors»-

          1.       The possibility at tha Inguaat of a verdict of
                    unlawful killing.

          2.       of additional evidence being given at tha Inquest
                    which stay cause the Director of Public Prosecutions
                    to further    considerthe question of       erlainal
                    liability.

          3.       Recently in a similar ease where the Director
                    of Public Prosecutions decided against criminal
                    proceedings,   representatives of the deceased
                    instigated a Judicial Review of tha Director'e
                    decision.   The officers oae this as possible in
                    this ossa.

           4.      Private criminal prosecutions aay be brought*
5.   The officer* face possible disciplinary proceedings
     where dismissal, requirement to resign or reduction
     in rank are all poaalbilitlaa.

The officer at greateat risk and therefore aoat in need of your
support is Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield.

Zn the eaae of Kr Duckenfield hie financial provision fees already
proved   insufficient   to   provide  proper   and   adequate   legal
repreaentation for hiaself at the on-going Inquest proceedings.
Often he Is to be aeen sitting unrepresented at the Inquest*
conserving the scant reaoureea he does have for those tinea vhen
personal representation ia absolutely necessary.. froo every point
of view this ia totally unsatisfactory and# In ay view, undesirable.


Legal Repreaentation

Couniel representing the force is# of couree, responding to the
evidence given at the Snqueat aa appropriate to ensure that the
intereits of the Force and the Police Authority are properly
represented and to a small degree he is, at the ease time,
representing the intereats of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.
This is not sufficient to allow for evidence to esterge to best public
advantage.

The other officers w?>o are represented, and who are funded through
private insurance, have already aada significant in-roads into that
provision. The Inquest ia proceeding slowly and so their financial
problems will becoae greater over tine.


Good Faith and Reasonable Judgment

in the ease R. -v- Derbyshire Police Authority ex»parte Wilson end
Dalton (an extract of thia is contained in the Clerk t Financial
Offlcer'a paper) it was said "...a Police Authority if setisfied
of good faith on the pert of the officer (a) would aetaaHy act and
be pleased to act on the oentral principle stated in the Circular..."
- (h o c ??/*?). Zt was held In that eese that this ' . . . nu t that
there is a preemption that if an officer la Shows to hare actad
ia food faith ia pureuanoe of U s duties (this has already been
accaptad to be the ease by this Authority at thair aaetiag on
1C Boveaber 1*90), be should be antitlad to reiaborsenant of his
reasonable oosts and that a refusal to ralafeurse ia such
circuastaoces asst be a bad decision unless there is M a s ralsvaat
factor which eould reasonably Justify the rsfosal. Without such
Ratifiestioa the Polios Authority aust be takas to have failed
to have had proper regard for the central principle."

The Clerk » Financial Officer advises thet a Police Authority
satisfied the officers acted in good feith suty consider further
the extent to which those concerned in an application for sueh
assistance sre subjeet to evidaaee of bagligasea peaaibly safeetastiel
negligence or of any failure to acaroise jodgaant raaaoasbly*
                                    - 3 *


5.3     The Chief Constable advances tha view that there is no doubt ell
        the officers on the day were acting in pursuance of their duties
         and in good faith.

5.4     These officers were faced,      in terse of whatoccurred and     the
         difficulties which energed,     with a situation     whichin their
         experience, and probably everyone else's was unique.

5.5     There was real concern at one point in tine      for tha lives of
         spectators, Including nany children and young people, outside the
         turnstiles at the Lappings Lane and of the Hillsborough football
         ground.

5.6     The deciaiona which ware wade sad which have baas and are still
        the aubjeet of protracted enquiry, ware aada to nave life and for
        bo other reaaoa.

5.7     The enormous management, logistical problems and experienced stress
        which waa present at the relevant tine needs to be taken into
        account.

5.8     it may be eaid that the worst decision would, at that time, have
         been to make no decision,

5.9     All the officers, Including Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, were
         acting in accordance with their dutiee, is good faith, and, deipite
         what occurred, were exercising their judgment to the best of thsir
         abilities in the circumstances.

5.10    The Clerk t Financial Officer hai      drawn   your attention   to the
         question of reasonable judgment.

5.11    If the issue of negligence or the exercise of judgment is a relevant
         consideration in your deliberations there Bust be clear evidence
         of Bagllgence, poseibly substantial negligence.      Your attention
         has been drawn to the report of Lord Justice Taylor. It Bust b»
         remembered that Lord Justice Taylor wai acting as the chairman o.
         a Public Inquiry which is not a judicial hearing and that the
         witnesses were not giving evidence in tha strict aense that applies
         in normal legal proceedings.

5.12    The Director of Public Prosecutions whan considering the question
         of criminal liability against all or any of tha officers concerned
         in this application of course could do to only on the basis of elaar
         •vidance.   Be utilised the services of the West Midlands Police
         to investigate and coapile a report which Was based on the cvilaaoc
         available. Bis conclusion was, after considering the Vest Midlands
         Police report, tbere waa insufficient evidence to justify proceedings
         •gainat anyone.

 5.13    It nay be concluded that what this naans is that there was
         insufficient evidence of negllgenee or failure to exercise judgment
         reasonably, on the part of any polioe officers, which would amount
         to criminal culpability.
The on-going Inquast it again concerned with evidence concerning
these a u « issues.   It would probably be imprudent of the Police
Authority to come to Judgmental conclusion* on the questions of
negligence or reaaonable judgment in Advance of the Inqoeat finding*.


Finance

The Circular makes it clear that expenditure incurred la thie regard
ia eligible for police grant.

when thie Committee lest considered theae application* questions
ware raised about the private insurance available to the ehief
•uperintendent and three euperintendente. The position isi-

a.   Through the insurance provided by Allianz Cornhill
     each officer has a financial limitation of *50,000
     which after VAT la taken into account amounts
     In fact to £42,500 each,

b.   The policy does not specifically cover inquest
     Bearings but It ia understood that the Insurers
     art prepared to provide cover In thie instance.

c.   In relation to future riaks the officers may need
     further legal advice and representation after
     the Inquest Bearing* have been concluded* for
     example, in relation to criminal, private or
     discipline proceedings. If the Director of Public
     Prosecution* were to bring criminal proceeding*,
     In the firat inatance the Police Authority eould
     net - even If they eo wished - fund the officer*'
     legal costs.    Thare is no provision for the
     Authority   to   fund   legal   represantation   at
     dieciplins hearings.   Therefore, In terms' of the
     insurance   provision,    such    possible   future
     requirements must be borne in mind.

In relation to the two eonstablee, they do not beve private insurance
but to dat* have been eupported from Police federation funds. Their
application,   as   with   the   ehief   superintendent   snd   three
superintendents, is for Police Authority funding in relation to
legal cost* incurred by them at the Inquest Bearing only.

The Clerk t Financial Officer in his lateet paper has drawn attention
to the fact that th« Derbyshire ease la authority for the proposition
that, when deciding whether or not to provide financiel aesistance,
a£tentative fwading should mot be taksn into sooount. Certainly,
the continuing needs of the officers as described above must be
considered.

whilst It is difficult to esseae the amount of aoney involved In
theae appllcationa, the position in respect of sach offioer at tha
                                   - 5 -


        tin* of the 2 November meeting» was made Available to the Clerk
        & Financial Officer and may be helpful in thie regard.

6.6     A third decision by the Authority not to support any or all of the
        officers will have a significant detrimental impact on Force srarale.
        South Yorkshire Police officers 90 about their dally duties
        performing difficult and often dangerous taska in the sincere belief
        that they have the full support of the Polios Authority who ss part
        of their function strivs to provide such support and not the
        converse.


Conclusion

Zf funding for legal assistance is denied to any of the officers, the best
needs of natural justice will be neglected, allowing the rsal risk Of lass
evidence emerging in the publle interest - whether to the credit or detriment
of the Force.




* B WELLS
CHIEF COHSTASLE


                                       H O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as 1t
                                       contains exempt Information
                                       within para. .. ./&........ of
                                       Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                                       Act 1972 as amended.
SOUTH Y O RK SH I RE POLICE AU T HORIT Y

19 o c tob er 1990   AND 2 NOVEMBER 1990
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE



F I N A NC IAL ASSIST ANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS



1.    Ma tter for Consideration

1.1   The pr ovision of financial assistan ce to police officers involved in
      legal proceedings arising   from the events at Hillsborough Football
      Ground on 15 April 1989.



2.    B a ckgro und Information

2.1   Home Offi ce Circular No. 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987 and
      adopted by this Au thorit y on 8 April 1988, provides guidance to Police
      Aut horities in considering applications, on behalf of police officers,
      for financial assistance in legal proceedings.

2.2   The central principle whi ch should guide conside ration of individual
      cases is that, where a police author ity considers that an officer has
      acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties or that the interests
      of the force as a w hole are    involved,  the officer should have the
      support of the police authority to ensure that he has the services
      of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket.

2.3   After the publication of the Interim Report           of Lord Justice Taylor
       into the Hillsborough Disaster the Chief Constable of the West Midlands
       Police was    appointed   to enquire    into   the possibility   of criminal
       proceedings arising from the       disaster.   At that time an application
       for   financial   assista nce  was    received   from  Chief   Superintendent
       Duckenfield, the officer in comman d at Hil lsboro ugh on the day of the
       disaster.

2.4   At the time of that appli cation        it was ack nowle dged that similar
      applications for assistance, under the terms of Home Office Circular
      N o . 77/1987, could be anticipa ted from other officers directly invol'ved
      in legal proceedings arising from the H illsborough Disaster.

2.5   The application from Chief Sup erinte ndent Duckenf ield was considered
      by the Finance and General Purposes C ommittee on 15 September 1989
      when the matter was deferred for further considerati on of the role
      of the Authority's insurers.

2.6   Fol lowing advice from the Auth ority 's insurers and solicitors, Chief
      Sup erintendent Ducke nfield o b t aine d independent legal representation
      from solicitors engaged through his staff association and financed
      by his personal legal insurance.

2.7   The  funds available  to Chief S uperin tenden t Duckenfield under this
      policy amounted to £50,000.    His solicitors have advised him that that
      amount  may  be  exhausted   by   one  or  both  of  the  o n-going Civil
      Contributions Hearing and the forthcoming Coroner's Inquest.
                                       - 2 -



2.8   A further application has now been received from Chief Superintendent
      Duc kenfield for his original application to be re-considered and, as
      anticipated,   similar   ap plications       have  now   been received  from
      Superintendents  Marshall,    G r e e n wood and Murray;  and an application
      has also been received from Russell Jones and Walker, solicitors, on
      behalf of Police Constables Smith and Illingworth.

2.9   All  officers  making  applicati on have  been  the  direct  subject of
      enquiries by the Chief Constable of the Wes t Midlands Police arising
      from allegations of criminal conduct received from third parties.



3     Comment

3.1   Following the disaster and throug hout the Public Inquiry conducted
      by Lord Justice Taylor,    the interests of the Police Authority, the
      Chief Co nstable and all officers of the Force were represented by legal
      officers ap pointed by the Police A u t h orit y insurers. In relation to
      the subsequent criminal enquiry and possible proceedings the insurers
      indicated to seven South Yorkshire Police officers that a possibility
      of conflict could arise betwee n the interests of the Force and each
      of them independently.    The questi on of separate legal representation
      was considered, one officer cont inued to be represented by the insurers
      and the six applicants obtained in dependent representation.

3.2   Members will be aware that the Director of Public Prosecutions, having
      considered the evidence resulting from the enquiry by the We st Midlands
      Police,   announced on  30 A ug ust 1990 his  decision that   there was
      insufficient evidence to justify criminal proceedings against any South
      Yorkshire Police officer.    There are, however, certain civil actions
      und er-way and the Coroner's Inquest into the deaths at Hillsborough
      will resume on 19 November 1990.

3.3   At the Coroner's Inquest the officers concerned are likely to be called
      upon to give evidence.     It is ackn owledg ed that cross exa mination by
      Counsel repre senting other parties may be prejudicial to the individual
      officers  in respect of their personal liabilities.        These officers
      consider it nec essary to continue to be i ndependently represented at
      this hearing where the Chief Constable's legal representative cannot
      reasonably be expected to represent the separate interests of each
      of them.

3.4   It will be seen from paragraph 13 of the Home Office Circular that
      separate representation should be provide d at a Coroner's Inquest where
      (a)    the  Chief Officers  legal representative  cannot   reasonably be
      expected to represent the interests of such officers and, (b) the Police
      A uth ority considers  that such interests  should be represented.    In
      such cases the authority should, in the terms of the Circular, provide
      financial assistance to the individual officers concerned.

3.5   It will be noted at paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing
      to seek financial a ssistance from his police authority should have
      the o ppor tunity in advance of the proceedings to submit to the Chief
      Con stable an application for financial assistance.  The Chief Constable
      is oblige d to put such application to the authority for decision.
      It will be further seen that the applying officer should normally be
      given the opportunity by the police authority to make representations
      to them if he wishes to do so.
                                       - 3 -



3.6   The  events   at  Hills borough   were   extraordinary  in  respect   of the
      potential   individual   liability    of   police  officers  involved.   The
      officers were acting in good        faith in accordance with established
      practice.   The nature of the various investigation into the Hillsborough
      Disaster also means that the interests of the South Yorkshire Police,
      as a whole, are involved.       For these two reasons (see para 2.2 ante)
      it is recommended that these officers should have the support of the
      Police A uthority to ensure that they each have the services of a lawyer
      repres enting their individual interests, at the forthcoming Coroner's
      Inquest.

3.7   It wou ld be sensible for the officers concerned to retain the services
      of those lawyers who currently represent them throughout subsequent
      proceedings.



4     Fi nancial Implications

4.1   The cost of independent r e p r e se ntatio n has to date been met by personal
      legal insurance arranged through The Superintendents' A ssociation for
      Chief Su perintendent Duckenfie ld and Superintendents Marshall, Murray,
      and Greenwood.   Constables Smith and Illingworth, meanwhile, have been
      rep resented by Messrs Russell Jones and Walker, the Police Federation
      solicitor, paid for by central Police Federation funds.

4.2   The extent of future costs will be determined by the time taken to
      conclude the Inquest.   There is no specific provision in the Revenue
      Budget for these costs.



5     Rec ommen dation

5.1   The  A u t h o rity  is  recommended   to  approve  a  commitment to  provide
      financial       assistance   for  legal   representation  at  the forthcoming
      Inquest, to the officers concerned, in accordance with the principles
      of Home Office Circular N o . 77/1987.




                                                 N O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as it
R I C H A R D WELLS                              contains     exempt information
C H I E F CONSTABLE
                                                 within para. ..Hr. . . . . . . of
                                                 Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                                                 Act 1972 as amended.
APPENDICES:   A.   Application from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

              B.   A pplication from Superintendent Marshall

              C.   Ap plication from Superintendent Murray

              D.   Application from Superintendent Greenwood

              E.   Letter from Messrs Russell Jones and Walker,
                   solicitors re presenting Constables Smith and Illingworth

              F.   Home Office Circular N o . 77/1987
                                                            flPP^NiW A '
                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                             Ref:       DGD/CJD

    From:    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield                Station/Dept:
    To:      The Chief Constable                             Date;         21 September 1990



            SUBJECT:   Hillsborough Disaster - Funding for Legal Representation

            On 24 August 1989 I made application under Home Office Circular
            No 77/87 for yourself and the Police Authority to give due
            consideration for funds to be made available for my legal
            representation in connection with any proceedings which may arise
            from the Hillsborough Disaster.

            These proceedings are currently the Civil Hearings due to begin in
            Manchester on 2 October to be followed by the Coroner's Inquest on
            19 November 1990. There is also the possibility that Discipline
            Proceedings may follow at a later stage.

            Whilst the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
            of Criminal Matters has been favourable it is not unreasonable to
            assume that if further evidence came to light he would reconsider
            the position with regard to myself and other officers.

            There is also the stated intention, admittedly via the media, by
            families of the deceased that they intend to launch a private
            prosecution for manslaughter against officers of South Yorkshire
            Police.

            It is therefore of paramount importance that the best independent
            legal advice possible is available for myself and other officers.

            My previous application for financial assistance was, as I understand
            it, 'left on the table' in the knowledge that I had insurance cover
            for my legal defence up to the sum of £50,000.

            If I require legal representation at the Civil Hearings and Coroner's
            Inquest it is likely that my defence costs will exceed the sum assured
            and I will require additional funding (bearing in mind Discipline
            and Private Prosecution).

            I ask for urgent reconsideration of my request in the hope that a
            contribution could be made towards my legal defence costs or an
            agreement to meet all reasonable expenditure over and above the sum
            assured.

            I have attached a letter from my solicitor and copies of previous
            papers.




Gen/2
Solicitors             T elephone


C loth Hall C o u rt
                       1)532 43(1391
                       T elex                                                     __
                                                                                               iEPVORTH
“ “ Is”
Leeds
                       5S7917
                       F a c s im i le         —
                                                                                           & CHADWICK
                                                                                ________________________________ _       ___ _____
lsi   2JB              0 5 3 -'   4 5 6 188                                                A M E M B E R O F EVERSHEDS
                       D X 12027 L e e d s




                                                                                                                  17 Septemb er 1990




                                                                                            Our Rcicrcncc        L/CCC/3/mCi
                                                                                                                   DUC KEN F I E L D

Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield
8 Durvale Court
SHEFFIELD SI7 3PT


Dear Da vid

Hillsborough

As you are aware, we are obtaining Counsel's Advice as to your personal
position in relation to the forthcoming civil hearing in Manchester
commencing on 2nd October and the Coroner's Inquests which are due to
resume on 19th November 1990.

In a d d i t i o n to r e p r e s e n t i n g y o u r i n t e r e s t s at the above, y o u r p o s i t i o n
will also n e e d c o n s i d e r a t i o n and yoursel f poss i b l e r e p r e s e n t a t i o n at the
d i s c i p l i n a r y hearing, as and w h e n this commences.

 Fin ally,            t h e r e is,   of course,   the spectre                                      of       a      possible                private
 p r o s e c u t i o n w h i c h may arise at some s t a g e .

 It s e e m s l i k e l y that the p r e s e n t f u n d s a v a i l a b l e u n d e r the A l l i a n z
 Personal Law P l a n ma y well be e x h a u s t e d by one or b o t h of the Civil and
 C o r o ne r's hearings. C an we impress u p o n you, therefore, that you make the
 s t r o n g e s t r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s b o t h to the H o m e O f f i c e a n d to the Ch ief
 S u p e r i n t e n d e n t ' s A s s o c i a t i o n to a s c e r t a i n the a v a i l a b i l i t y of f unds to
 a s s i s t y o u w i t h legal r e p r e s e n t a t i o n .           T h i s m u s t b e c a r r i e d out as a
 m a t t e r of p r i o r i t y for you, b a s e d o n the ti me s c a l e for the v a r i o u s
 heari




 Yours

 c c c




                            C. I C Bramley         D. i Gray           A. N. Brown              Other Pnnopal               Regulated by The L*w
   D F. L. Syke*            R. M. Ponerton         J R. Heaps          I. A. Rjrtunfcofl        Evershedi office* at        Sooety m the conduct
                            P E A Winter           J. M. Foster        D M Strachan             Birmingham. Cardiff.        of investment buMitevs
   J. P Margenson
   J H. Bryan               R. Chapman             i R. G u m          Alnon J Sumforth         Derby. London.
   J. H Finnigan            A. W Latchmore         R. M. A i n c o c                            Manchester. Newcastle.
   P. J. S Thompson         P. R P. Chadwick       P. A. Smith                                  Norwich. Nottingham.
                            R C Davis              B. i Horrocks                                Warrington
                                      SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
 Staff in confidence                                              Ref:            TWS/MR
        From:   Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield              Station/Dept:   Headquarters
        To:     The Chief Constable                               Date:           24 August 1989



                SUBJECT:      APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE


                 The interim report of the Inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor into
                 the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster that occurred on the 15 April 1989 was
                 published at 1100 hours on Friday 4 August 1989. The report was very
                 critical of the South Yorkshire Police in general and, in particular, myself
                 and a number of other police officers.

                 National media interest   and comments followed publication and, in view of
                 the extensive criticism   in the report regarding my handling of events on
                 the day of the disaster   and the possibility of actions of criminal
                 negligence/disciplinary   proceedings, I was suspended from duty on the 4
                 August 1989.

                 The Director of Public Prosecutions was, I understand, requested          to examine
                 Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report and subsequently instructed          the West
                 Midlands Police to carry out a full criminal investigation, 'not          limited
                 to the criminal culpability of the police alone' into the events          that
                 occurred at Hillsborough on the 15 April 1 9 8 9 .

                 Whilst no criminal charges have been brought to date against me, the
                 possibility of charges being brought exists and I will, no doubt, be
                 interviewed by the West Midlands Police during the course of their criminal
                 investigations. There is also a possibility of interviews in respect of
                 disciplinary allegations made against me for which a Regulation 7 Notice
                 has been served.

                 I was authorised to obtain independent legal advice from Hammond Suddards
                 resulting in being advised by them to obtain further private independent
                 legal advice as Hammond Suddards could not assist me personally as no
                 criminal charges had been made. I am now obtaining independent legal advice
                 through a personal Legal Protection Insurance Policy.

                 The policy gives a maximum cover of £50,000. If I need legal representation
                 at interviews with the West Midlands Inquiry Team regarding possible
                 criminal or disciplinary matters and at protracted inquest hearings, which
                 are unlikely to take place until early 1990, then there is little doubt
                 my legal costs will be very much in excess of this figure.

                 If any criminal proceedings are brought against members of the South
                 Yorkshire Police (and manslaughter charges are possible), it is imperative,
                 in the interests of the force, the Police Authority and any individual
                 officer, that those concerned have had the benefit of the best possible
                 legal advice and representation at any forthcoming judicial hearings.

                 Whilst the force has been, and continues to be, legally represented matters
                 are very complex and conflict of interest can arise in areas concerning
                 different individuals.




Gen/2
Attached is a copy of Home Office Circular No.77/1987 - 'Financial
Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings'.   I draw your attention
to paragraphs 1, 2, 12 - 15 inclusive.  In accordance with paragraph 131
I therefore respectfully request that application be made to the Police
Authority for financial assistance in order that   I am properly advised and
represented at any future criminal or disciplinary hearings.
As indicated at paragraph 2 of the circular, any   payments made toofficers
in accordance with the guidance are eligible for police grant.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY     H O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as It
FINANCE & GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE contains     exempt         Information
                                     within para.                         0f
15 SEPTEMBER 1989
                                     Sch.12A to the Local Government I
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE        Act 1972 as amended.                    I

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

1.    Matter for Consideration

      The provision of financial assistance to police officers involved In
      legal proceedings arising from the event at Hillsborough Football Ground
      on 15 April 1989.


2.    Background Information

2.1   Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987, provides
      guidance to Police Authorities on the exercise of their discretion In
      considering applications, on behalf of police officers, for financial
      assistance towards the cost of legal advice and representation arising
      from Involvement In legal proceedings which result from the pursuance. In
      good faith, of their duties or where the Interests of the Force as
      whole are Involved. A copy of the Circular Is attached.

2.2   Arising from the publication of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor
      Into the Hillsborough Disaster, the subsequent appointment of the Chief
      Constable of the West Midlands Police to enquire Into the justification
      for criminal proceedings arising from the disaster and the forthcoming
      Coroner*8 Inquest Into the deaths, an application for assistance has been
      received from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who was Involved In
      command of the policing arrangements for the football Semi-Final and
      similar applications from other officers similarly Involved night be
      anticipated.


3.    Comment

3.1   Following the disaster and throughout the Public Inquiry the interests of
      the Police Authority, the Chief Constable and all officers of the Force
      have been represented by legal officers appointed by the Police Authority
      insurers. The legal officers appointed by the insurers have indicated
      that in relation to criminal proceedings they would be unable to provide
      representation for individual officers who should seek independent legal
      advice and representation.

3.2   It will be seen from the Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, that the
      central principle which should guide consideration of individual cases Is
      that, where a Police Authority considers that an officer has acted in
      good faith in pursuance of his duties or that where the interests of the
      Force as a whole are Involved, the officer should have the support of the
      Police Authority to ensure that he has the services of a lawyer and that
      he should not be out of pocket.


3.3   It will be further seen that in respect of criminal proceedings pursued
      by the Crown Prosecution Service against an individual officer he should
      be expected to bear the costs of his own defence and the Police
                                    - 2 -

      Authority, at the conclusion of the proceedings, are able to consider, on
      the full facts, whether or not to reimburse any expenses incurred by the
      officer and not awarded by the trial court, even where proceedings have
      resulted in conviction in certain circumstances. It will be noted from
      paragraph 14 of the Circular that an officer wishing to seek financial
      assistance should have the opportunity to submit to the Chief Officer an
      application for financial assistance, upon receipt of which the Chief
      Officer should refer the application to the Police Authority together
      with his own recommendation. It will be further seen that the applying
      officer should normally be given the opportunity by the Police Authority
      to make representations to them If he wishes to do so. At this stage
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield wishes to reserve the right to so appear
      at a future date if necessary.

3.4   The events at Hillsborough were unique in respect of the potential
      criminal liability of police officers involved. The officers were acting
      in good faith in accordance with well established practices and any
      criminal proceedings will largely constitute a test case similar to the
      example provided In paragraph three of the Home Office Circular. The
      unique nature of the circumstances of this particular criminal enquiry
      with Its wide implications for the interests of the Force as a whole is
      such that the Police Authority may wish to consi<|4jjpj; at this stage, a
      commitment to the funding of independent legal1edv|*e for the officer(s)
      concerned. The financial commitment of the officers is likely to^'\
      commence with advice and representation prior to and during Interviews
      undertaken by Vest Midlands Police officers in the course of their
      enquiry. It would be prudent for that representation to continue
      throughout the enquiry and any subsequent criminal proceedings and to
      extend to representation at the Coroner's Inquest vhlch will ultimately
      be held.

3.5   At this stage it is anticipated that representation In any civil actions
      subsequently pursued will be provided by the Police Authority Insurers•

3.6   It should be noted that there is available, to all officers of
      superintendent and chief superintendent rank who liiye chosen to
      contribute, a measure of personal liability insurance arranged by the
      Superintendents' Association of England and Vales. The individual
      liability limit of this insurance cover is £50,000.


4.    Financial Implications

      It is not possible at this stage to assess the financial Implications of
      this matter which will depend entirely on the course and extent of the
      criminal enquiry and the ultimate outcome, and the duration of the
      Inquest proceedings. There is no specific provision in the Revenue
      Budget for this expenditure.


5.    Recommendation

      The Committee is recommended to approve a commitment to provide financial
      assistance for legal representation to the officer(s) concerned in
      accordance with the central principle of Home Office Circular No.
      77/1987.


P WRIGHT
CHIEF CONSTABLE
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
Constable was submitted on the guidelines contained in Home Office
Circular No. 77/87 on the responsibilities of Police Authorities in
respect of legal costs arising from the involvement of police officers
and non-police employees of Police Authority in legal proceedings.
The Circular both confirmed and expanded current policies within the
South Yorkshire Police and recommended criteria to assist Police
Authorities in considering whether financial assistance should be
approved in any particular proceedings. If followed, the criteria
would ensure that any payments authorised in consequence to be met
from the Police Fund would qualify for Home Office grant.
RESOLVED - That the Police Authority adopt the procedures in Home
Office Circular No. 77/87 and enclose the current policies detailed
in the report now submitted relating to legal costs arising from the
involvement of police officers and non-police employees of the Police
Authority in legal proceedings, subject to any applications continuing
to be submitted to the Police Authority for consideration should the
Authority's Insurers decline to undertake any particular defence.
HIGH VELOCITY CATAPULTS
The Authority considered a letter dated 8th February, 1988 from the
Management Co-ordinator of the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council
requesting the Police Authority to consider Minute 1171 of the
Council's Consumer and Enviornmental Services Committee of 8th
January, 1988 relating to the Council's concern over the availability
of high velocity catapults. The letter included a report considered
by the Committee detailing the tests and test results on four
catapults purchased locally and tested at the Department of Civil and
Structural Engineering of the University of Sheffield. The results
were considered to be disturbing;-
The Chief Constable displayed to the Authority the type of catapult
referred to and reported that he had already responded to the AMA that
such catapults should be regarded as designated weapons. The Clerk
and Financial Officer also pointed out that the Criminal Justice Bill
would prohibit their manufacture and sale.
RESOLVED
1.    That the representations already made by the Chief Constable and
      the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council to the Association of
      Metropolitan Authorities be supported.
2.    That the Clerk and Financial Officer be requested to write to
      the Chambers of Trade to seek their support of a voluntary ban
      on the sale of high velocity catapults, pending the
      implementation of the provisions of the Criminal Justice Bill.
                                                                     Af>P6ls»P/>c 16
                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                    Ref:                F/RM/GP

    From :   Superintendent Marshall, *F * Division                 Station I Dept:      F DHQ
                                                                    Data:     24 September 1990
    To   :   Deputy Chief Constable, Mr P Hayes, HQs


             SUBJECT;                  HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER -
                                  RESUMED INQUESTS 19 N O VBfiH l 1 9 9 0


             Sir

             Through my solicitor, Mr Vincent Hale, of Nash House, 140 Upperthorpe,
             Sheffield, I have received intimation of the resumed inquests into the
             deaths at Hillsborough.    I shall be required to give evidence at this
             inquest which resumes on 19 November 1990.

             You will perhaps be aware that I have been represented throughout the West
             Midlands Police enquiry into the disaster by Mr Hale and that his costs to
             date are subject of a claim upon private insurance effected by myself
             through my membership of the Superintendents Association.        Mr Hale has
             submitted an interim account upon the insurers, which has not yet been met.
             I wish, 7therefore, to make formal application under the terms of the Home
             Office Circular 77/87 to t h e South Yorkshire Police Authority for financial
             assistance towards Mr A yiHcent Hale's costs in connection with his
             representation of my intfojests at the forthcoming inquest.




GEN/2
                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                              Ref:
    From :     Superintendent Murray                          Station I Dept:Rawmarsh

    To         Deputy Chief Constable                         Date :   1 October 1990


             SUBJECT:         APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE




               In connection with the Hillsborough tragedy of 1989 and allegations
               made against me, I have been taking legal advice frcm Walker, Morris,
               Scott and Turnbull, Solicitors of Leeds, and in particular Mr Richard
               Manning of that company.      The finance for this advice has been
               available through my own private insurance.    Although the Director of
               Public Prosecutions has stated that proceedings will not be taken
               against any Police officer, there are still many matters unsettled and
               I may still require significant legal advice and assistance.

               I have been informed that the Coroners Inquest is to start on 19
               November 1990, and that this will be a lengthy enquiry and it is
               probable that my legal costs will exceed the limit of my Insurance,
               particularly if other matters follow the Inquest, e.g. criminal or
               disciplinary proceedings.

               Accordingly under Home Office circular No. 77 of 1987, I ask that an
               approach be made to the Police Authority to give consideration to
               making funds available for my Legal Representation in connection with
               the forthcoming Inquest, civil hearing and any criminal proceedings
               which may arise, which would allow me to maintain the services of Mr.
               Manning,   who with his      existing knowledge of my particular
               circumstances, I feel is the best person to represent myself.




GEN/2
                                                           APftSrsaDlK p
                            SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
                                                         Ref:

From:   Superintendent Greenwood                        Statlon/Dept: A1 Doncaster

To:     Chief Constable                                 Date.            October 1990



        SUBJECT:   FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IN RESPECT of legal support


        Emanating from the 'Hillsborough Disaster' certain proceedings require to
        be finalised, in particular the inquest proceedings which I understand
        will commence on the 19th November.

        I hereby make formal application, through you,to the Police Authority for
        funding in respect of such legal advice and representation as is deemed
        necessary by my legal advisors.

        I am represented in this matter by Messrs Barlow, Hyde and Gilbert,
        Beaufort House, 15 Batolph Street, London, EC3A 7NJ.




        Super
                           RUSSELL JONES & WALKER
                               _______________ ____________ ______ _________ _______________________ ________ S O L I C I T O R S _________________


                                 4 t h F l o o r B r a z e n n o s e H o u ^ e B r a z e n n u s e S t r e e t M a n c h o t e r M 2 5 A Z T e l e p h o n e : Oft I 8 3 2 8 8 7 '
                                                                                                       Fax: 0 ' ) l 8 .!.’ 7t i l t h               D \       I4.'>40




                                                                                                                                                                                            Your Ref:            DCC/JEL
The Deputy Chief Constable                                                                                                                                                                   Our Ref: NH/LP/HILLSBRO/387044
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters                                                                                                                                                                                Dace:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 19 September 1990
Snig Hill
SHEFFIELD
S3 8LY

Dear Sir,
Hillsborough Disaster - Inquest
We have been notified by Her Majesty's Coroner of his intention to resume the
Inquests in the deaths of the 95 people on the 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough
Stadium, which Inquests are to resume on the 19 November 1990.
We would refer to previous correspondence and, in particular, to our letter of
the 6 April 1990, addressed to the Chief Constable, and to your response of the
11 April 1990. We would take this opportunity to repeat our request for financial
assistance for separate legal representation out of Police Authority Funds,
pursuant to the provisions of the Home Office Circular No 77/87.
It is our intention to provide representation by Counsel on behalf of two
police constables in particular, Police Constable David Alfred Illingworth and
Police Constable Peter Edward Smith. It is our firm view that these officers
remain open to substantial criticism, despite the decision of the Director of
Public Prosecutions not to bring criminal proceedings. As you will fully
appreciate, there is still a threat of private prosecutions by individual
complainants. We are satisfied that if called to give evidence before the
Inquests, these officers are reasonably likely to face examination by solicitors
or Counsel on behalf of relatives of the deceased, which may be prejudicial to
the officers. There also remains the threat of disciplinary proceedings,
arising out of the investigation by West Midlands Police. Again, as lor j as
that threat remains, we feel that representation can be justified.
You will no doubt appreciate that the allegations made against these particular
officers, are of a serious nature and include abuse to members of the public, a
failure to act with speed, which individual complainants will say, had a direct
bearing upon the deaths of individuals and further, allegations of assault. In
the case of Constable Illingworth, there are a number of allegations, but in
particular there is a complaint by Edward Spearritt, father of the deceased
Adam Edward Spearritt, who alleges that the officer failed to open Gate 4 in
the perimeter fencing, despite loud appeals directed to him, his position being
in such close proximity to the complainant which, it is alleged, had a direct
bearing on the death of his son and the cause of injuries to himself. In the
case of Peter Edward Smith, he faces allegations by a David Anthony Lackley to
the effect that the officer failed to open Gate 3 when asked, which had he done
so, would have saved the life of some supporters and when the gate was opened,
Police Constable Smith pushed one person back into the crowd.   This presents a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cont/d
  J.M . W ebber T .D .B        Tav lor | . J . W a lk e i A . f W h i t e h e a d R J. T u r n e r R . M         Abbey i.R        F l e t c h e i G . C . Solly W .D . O ' B r i e n R .A . P l a n e P J - D a v ij J . M . R C o l m a n R . C . L a n g t o n D . R - L o u w
       J . L . R a s k i n S. R a s k i n E . J . O . C o o p e r S . G . I n g r a m N . B . H ol ro yd J . C    C la r k e - W i l l i a m s S . L . W e b b D . A . B . Tw ig * P R . As h u r s r J . M . P i r r i e S . J . N . A lle n   Contuitont: J . C . W al ke r


                                                                        R e g u l a t e d by T h e L a w S o c i e t y in t h e c o n d u c t o f I n v e s t m e n t B u s in e s s
                                                                        L O N D O N            LE E D S            BIR M IN G H A M                    BRISTOL                 M A N C H E ST E R
The Deputy Chief Constable                                19 September 1990

This presents a general allegation that the officer's behaviour on the day in
question, had a direct bearing upon the deaths of a number of unnamed supporters.
Additionally, he faces an allegation by Stephen Paul Hendry to like effect, in
that it is said he failed to open Gate 3, despite protestations and ordered
people to push back. It is also alleged against this officer that he assaulted
an unknown person by pushing him back over the fence, into Pen 3.
We anticipate that you will see from these allegations, that these officers are
at risk and the interests of justice require them to be represented.
We would maintain that in this instance, the officers were acting at all times
in good faith and in pursuance of their duties. We would also maintain that
the particular interests of these officers are such that they could not properly
be represented by those representing the interests of the Police Authority/Chief
Constable. We are sure that you will give our above comments full consideration
and we would ask that appropriate recommendations be made to the Police Authority.
We thank you in anticipation.




        JONES & WALKER




cc:   Constables' Central Committee
    -j*                                                      HOME OFFICE
                                              Q u e e n A n n e ’s G a t e L O N D O N SW’ l H 9 A T
   sjS&L                                                         Din.t h n Oi-213
                                                             5-             o‘-:3                          ix F

   t).'vvv-.-.v           POL/87   1027/1/2
   V.',." ' Y W ' I . Y




  The Clerk to the Police Authority
  The Chief Officer of Police
                                                                                          4 December 1987




  Dear Sir

  HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 77/87
  FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
                                                                                                       f   ”,


  There is statutory authority in section 48 of the Police Act 1964 for
  payments to be made from the police fund to meet expenditure incurred
  by police officers in defending proceedings in tort..' Also, acting in
  pursuance of its general statutory duty to maintain an adequate and
  efficient police force for its area, the police authority has
  discretion to meet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds 'ibf
  legal proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in
  pursuance of their duties, or the interests of the force as a whole
  are involved.   The purpose of this circular is to give guidance to
.^police authorities to help them in considering requests on behalf of
^officers for financial assistance. This guidance has been discussed
  and agreed with the local authority and with the police staff
  associations.
  2.    The central principle which should guide consideration of
  individual cases is that, where a police authority considers that an
  officer has acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties or that
  the interests of a force as a whole are involved, the officer should
  have the support of the police authority to ensure that he has the
  services of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket. The
  following paragraphs provide general guidance to the different
  classes of proceedings. Payments made to officers in accordance with
  this guidance will be eligible for police grant.



                                                                                                                  1
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Prosecution bv the Crown Prosecution Service

3.   An officer who is the subject of a public prosecution for an
alleged offence committed while carrying out his duties as a police
officer is in the same position as any other defendant and must be
expected to bear the costs of his defence.   If he is acquitted, he
should,   like any other defendant , look to the court for
reimbursement of his expenses.   If the costs are not paid/ or not
paid in full from central funds, the police authority are in a
position to decide, on the full facts, whether or not to make a
payment to the officer or to the Police Federation if they have
provided the funding.   There may be cases where it is proper to
provide legal advice and/or legal representation even where the
officer is found guilty. This may arise for example in tsst cases
where the officer has been carrying out a practice hitherto
approved of but is found guilty as a result of that practice being
found unlawful by the court in the light of the circumstances of
that particular case.

Private

4. A police officer should be able to carry out his duties
confidence that, if he acts in good f*ith and exercises
judgement reasonably, his police authorityvWill support him. If,
in a case where a member of the public brings a prosecution against
an officer, the authority is satisfied that the officer has acted
in this way, the authority should provide or fund legal advice
and/or representation.
5.   Where a court decides that a prosecution brought against an
officer was not brought in good faith, it may order the prosecutor
to pay the whole or any part of ths costs incurred by the defence;
again, if the officer is acquitted on indictment, his costs may be
met from central funds. In either of these cases, the question of
the police authority providing financial support to the officer may
not arise.   However, where the costs of an acquitted officer are
not awarded by the court or awarded only in part, the police
authority should consider whether to reimburse any costs not
covered, taking into account the reasons, if any, given by the
court for failing to award all costs claimed.

CIVIL PROCEEDINGS
civil     Actions   Against   the   chief   Officer for— HrgMful   Acts si
Cpngtflfrlfeg

6 .  Under section 48(1) of the Police Act 1964, the chief officer
of a force is liable in respect of torts committed by constables
under his direction and control (which includes special constables
and officers of other forces serving in the police area under
mutual aid arrangements)       in the performance or purported
performance of their functions. Under section 48(2) any damages or
                                                                        2
costs awarded against the chief officer in such proceedings, any
costs he incurs himself, and any sum paid in connection with the
settlement of a claim, provided the settlement is approved by the
police authority, must be paid out of the police fund.      In such
cases, therefore, the police authority's discretion extends only to
whether or not to approve a proposed settlement of the claim.


Civil Actions Against Individual Police Officers

7 .  Alternatively, the plaintiff nay be awarded damages against an
individual police officer, though he cannot recover the damages
twice over against the chief officer as well. Section 48(4) of the
Police Act 1964 specifically empowers a police authority "to such
extent as they think fitM to pay out of the police fund any damages
or costs awarded against an officer, any costs he incurs himself,
and any sums paid in connection with the settlement of a claim.
This provision applies to actions against officers of the
authority's own force, officers of another force serving the police
area under mutual aid arrangements, and special constables for the
police area.    In considering whether to.give financial assistance
the authority will wish to consider in particular whether the
officer concerned acted in good faith and exercised his judgement
reasonably. Where the court finds for the officer, he may seek his
costs from the plaintiff; should the costs not be awarded or
awarded only in part, the police authority should consider whether
to reimburse any costs not covered, taking ‘ into account the
reasons, if any, given by the court for failing to award all costs
claimed.
8 .  Joint actions naming both the chief officer and an individual
police officer may be brought in some cases. In such cases it is
important that any discussion of the merits and quantum of the
proposed settlement should involve all the parties named in the
claim together with advisers even if they are represented by
different advisers.

Civil Actions Under the Data Protection Act 1984
9.   Under sections 22 and 23 of the Data Protection Act 1984 an
individual who suffers damage as a result of the inaccuracy, loss
or unauthorised disclosure of personal data is entitled to
compensation from the data user. Zn the absence of any ease law on
these provisions, it is unclear whether the acts covered by
sections 22 and 23 amount to torts, to which the guidance in
paragraphs 6 and 7 above applies. If not, section 48 of the Police
Act 1964 does not apply.     However, the position is broadly the
same.    Under section 38(3) (a) of the 1984 Act constables are
treated as servants of the chief officer for the purposes of the
Act.   A chief constable is therefore liable for the acts of his
officers falling within sections 22 and 23 in the same way as he is
liable for their torts under section 48(1). The position of non­
police officers is less clear but it is possible that in some cases
the chief constable might be regarded as having liability for their
acts. It follows that it would be proper for the police authority
to meet all costs, including any award of compensation, arising
from this liability. It should be noted that the liability of the
"data user" under the Act is not vicarious but his personal
liability. Therefore his own care in having instituted a system of
obtaining, checking and recording data which would reasonably guard
against error and loss under section 23(3) of the Act should meet
his responsibility under section 22(3) and he should not be held
liable if one of his officers disregards the system •stablished.
10.   Where compensation is sought from an individual officer, the
police authority will wish, in considering whether to moot the
costs which would otherwise fall on the officer, to take account of
the same matters as in exercising their power under section 48(4)
of the Police Act 1964 (see paragraph 7).        Police authorities
should apply the same broad principles and in particular, aeet the
costs of any compensation awarded against a chief constable where a
non-police officer is at fault and the chief constable is found to
have liability for the actions performed.

Police Officers Bringing Civil Actions for Defamation
11.   There may be occasions when financial assistance is soubht
from a police authority to enable an officer to bring or consider
bringing a civil action for defamation.          An authority
discretion to give such assistance but it will be eligible for
police grant only if the following criteria are all aet:-
     (a)   the defamation is serious;
     (b)    it relates to the actions of an officer acting or
     said to be acting in the discharge of his duty;
     (c)   it has attracted public attention;
     (d)   to bring the action     is considered tobe in the
     interests of the force or     of the police service as a
     whole; and
     (e)   the action stands a reasonable chance of success.
Criterion (d) is central. If only the reputation of the individual
officer is in question, he is in the ease position as any other
citizen and must be expected to seek his own remedy.         But an
allegation against a particular officer »ay well reflect on the
reputation of the whole force or be an example of wider allegations
against the force or a significant section of it.     In such cases
the police authority, provided the other criteria are satisfied,
nay reasonably be expected to help to defend the reputation of the
force.




                                                                  4
    INQUESTS, PUBLIC ENQUIRIES A?TD TRIBUNAJjS
    Legal Representation for Chief Officers
    12.   Any interested arty may be legally represented at an inquest
    but at his own expense since expenses are payable only to witnesses
    and jurors.   An interested party will nonsally be entitled to be
    legally represented at a public enquiry or other public tribunal.
    Where the interest of the force is affected, it will be appropriate
    for the police authority to provide at its expense for the chief
    officer to be legally represented on behalf of the force.

    Lecral Representation for Individual Officers
    13.      Separate representation for individual officers whose interest
    is involved say be necessary. For example, there will be occasions
    when (a) the chief officer's legal representative cannot reasonably
    be expected to represent the separate interests of such officers
    and (b) the police authority considers that such interests should
    be represented. In such cases the authority should give financial
j   assistance to the officers.        In considering (b) above, the
    authority will wish in particular to assess whether the officers
    are at risk of being held to blame for actions in connection with
    the death to which the inquest relates and whether any such finding
    night give rise to legal proceedings for the costs of which the
    police authority would be liable under section 48(1) of the Police
    Act 1964 or for which financial assistance night be approprii$*
    within the terns of this circular.                               v'

    APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
    14.    An officer wishing to seek financial assistance from bis
    police authority should have the opportunity in advance of as well
    as on the conclusion of the proceedings to submit to the chief
    officer an application for financial assistance. The chief officer
    should put this, together with his own recommendation to the police
    authority for decision.   The officer should normally be given the
    opportunity by the police authority to make representations to them
    if he wishes to do so.
    15.    If it decide* to give financial assistance, the authority
    should inform the officer concerned that, if the information on
    which they based their decision to grant the assistance is shown in
    subsequent legal proceedings to be inaccurate or incomplete, the
    authority will normally expect to recover the money unless it is
    satisfied that no cilpable misrepresentation was involved and that
    to recover the money would involve the applicant in substantial
    hardship.   On the other hand, if an authority refuses financial
    assistance and then discovers in the light of subsequent events
    that such assistance vould have been warranted, then financial
    assistance should be granted in order to meet the reasonable costs
    incurred by the officer in seeking legal advice or assistance.


                                                                      5
•A s s i s t a n c e from Police Fede r ation Funds

16. Under Regulation 19 of the Police Federation Regulations 1969,
as amended, Federation funds nay be used to defray legal charges
incurred by a nember in connection with crininal proceedings
brought against him for an offence under the road traffic
enactments (other than offences involving driving when inpaired by
drink or drugs or taking a vehicle without authority), or fox
offences of causing the death or injury of any person, or for any
assault, or in connection with his action for libel or slander. An
officer seeking financial assistance in circunstances covered by
Regulation 19 should seek such assistance fron the police authority
in the first instance. If the police authority does not consider
the request to fall within the terns of this circular, the
Federation nay then consider the application within the terns of
Regulation 19.   If the officer receives legal assistance fron the
Federation the terns of Hone Office Circular No 26/1967 will
continue to apply.
17.   General enquiries about the content of this circular nay be
addressed to Mr Waghorn, Hone Office, FI Division on (01) 213 4208.
                                                      Yours faithfully




                                                      M J ADDISON
 S o lic ito r! )         T elephone
                          0 5 3 2 4 30 3 91
 C loth H all C o u rt    T elex                                                           HEPWORTH
 Infirm ary S treet       557917
 Leeds                    Facsim ile                                                       & CHADW ICK
 LSI 2JB                  0532 456188                                                      A M E M B E R O F E V E RSH E D S
                          D X 12 0 27 L e e d s




                                                                                                            5th December 1990
                                                                                           Date


                                                                                                         SW/MR
                                                                                           Your Rcfcrcncc
South Yorkshire Police
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat                                                                           L/3/CCC/WMG
P 0 Box 37
Regent Street
BA R NS LEY
South Yorkshire                           S70 2PQ



F O R T H E A T T E N T I O N OF M R S WALKER




Dear Sir

Applications by Police Officers for Financial Assistance:
Hillsborough Inquests

Thank you for your letters of 28th and 30th November together with that
of 4th December.

With regard to the meeting on 7th December we will not be in attendance
due to the very limited funds a v ailable to our client Chief
Superintendent D G Duckenfield.   In the circumstances, Mr I Walker of
Russell Jones & Walker will be representing our client's interest at the
meeting together with those of the other Officers, as indicated in his
letter to you of 3rd December.

We note,    however, your confirmation that all representations, both
written and oral, already submitted on behalf of Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield will be before, and considered at, the meeting.  By way of
summary, the following in particular should be noted:-

1                Chief Superintendent                      Duckenfield's                applications                 for      financial
                 assistance.

2                Letter from Prosecution Service to Chief Constable South Yorkshire
                  30.08.90

3                Letter from Chief Constable L Sharp to Hepworth & Chadwick dated
                 6th September 1990.

4                The written and oral representations made to the Police Authority
                 meeting on 2nd November by the South Yorkshire Deputy Chief
                 Constable Peter Hayes and Chief Superintendent Duckenfield (extract
                 attached).

5                The oral representation of the writer Mr C Coughlin to the
                 authority meeting on 16th November (the minutes will recall what
                 was said)


                            C.    I. C. Bramley    D. J. Gray      A. N. Brown               Other Principal           Regulated by The Law
    n F. L. S y k e s       R M. Potterton         J. R. Heap*    I. A. Richardson           Evcrsheds' offices at     Society in the conduct
    J.   P. Margervtfin     P. E. A Winter         J. M. Foster   D. M. Strachan             Birmingham.Cardiff.       of investment business
    J    H Bryan            R. Chapman             J. R. Guest    Alison J. Suniforth        Derby. London.
    J    H. Fmmgjn         A. W. Lalchmore        R. M. Aintcoc                              Manchester.Newcastle.
    P.   J. S. Thompson    P. R. P. Chadwick      P A. Smith                                 Nonw h. Noftmgham.
                            R C. Davis            B J. Horrotks                              Warrington
C O M I M ATlUN




    6         The letters from the   writer   to   you   of   14th and   20th November
              (copies attached).

    We have read the correspondence forwarded by you under cover of your
    letter of 4th December, namely the Russell Jones & Walker letter to you
    of 3rd December and your response of 4th December.     Mr Walker will be
    addressing you on the application of the "Derbyshire" case.

    We note that you lay stress on the question of the Officers acting in
    "good faith", "reasonable exercise of judgement" and "clear evidence of
    negligence".

    With regard to the question of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield acting in
    good faith and indeed acting in the interests of the force as a whole, it
    is our view that this cannot be in issue based on the full support
    provided by both the Chief Constable Richard Wells and the Deputy Chief
    Constable Peter Hayes in representations made to you and the Authority
    both in writing and orally.

    As to the question of "reasonable exercise of judgement" and there being
    "clear evidence of negligence" we would say there is insufficient
    evidence or information upon which the Authority could seek to refuse to
    grant financial support to our client.   In this regard, we would support
    the points already made by Russell Jones & Walker in their letter of 3rd
    December and to be made to you personally at the forthcoming meeting. We
    would say, however, that whilst parts of the report of Lord Justice
    Taylor may be critical of the Police as a whole, the Director of Public
    Prosecutions,  in arriving at his decision on 30th August 1990 (see
    extract attached), concluded that there was "insufficient evidence to
    justify the institution of proceedings against any Officer in the South
    Yorkshire Police Force..."

     The reality now, however, is that we are faced with inquests which have
     been running for some days and which will run to some several weeks.   At
     these inquests, as you are aware, there is likely to be heard the
     evidence of in excess of 200 witnesses. The point which must be grasped,
     therefore, and already made by personal representations to the Authority,
     is that each witness will give oral testimony. That evidence is then
     subject to cross examination.    Without representation, there can be no
     challenge on the part of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield of any
     criticism of his control or conduct of proceedings on the day in
     question.   As you are well aware, on the opening day of the Coroner's
     proceedings, the press recorded the comments of a number of individuals
     that new evidence may well emerge which may cause the DPP to re-consider
     his decision.    There can be little doubt that certain group(s) at the
     Inquest will endeavour to show the police actions on the day in a less
     than favourable light.   We refer you to our letter of 20th November with
     enclosure.   The point must be made again that unchallenged criticism of
     our client will be considered by the DPP and we refer you to the letter
     of the Chief Constable of Cumbria, Mr Leslie Sharp dated 6th September
     1990 in which he made it clear to us that any new evidence which arises
     in the Coroner's Inquest will be considered by the DPP.

     In conclusion, we would ask the Authority to consider our client's case
     so far presented together with the representations of Mr Walker to be
     made on behalf of all applicants on the 7th and that the Authority does
     grant financial assistance.  In our view, they ought properly so to do in
('ONTINTATION



    accordance with the home office circular for the purposes of providing
    financial assistance for our client's representation at the inquest.

    Please do not hesitate to contact the writer,   Mr Coughlin,   should you
    require further information.




           7
                              Director of Public Prosecutions                             Deputy Director and Chief Executive
                                              AllanGreenQ C                               D S G a n d y C B OB E




                                                       Dire ctor o f H e a d q u a rte rs Casework
                                                                   C W P Newe"


                                                                                                 Crown Prosecution Service
           The C hief C o n s ta b l e
           S o u th Y o rk s h ire Police                                                        Headquarters Casework
           S n i g g H ill
           Sheffield                                                                             10 Fumival Street
           S3 8LY                                                                                London
                                                                                                 EC4A 1 PE

                                                                                                 Telephone 071-831-303E
                                                                                                           Ext



Your Ref                                              Our Ref                                                 Date

                                                             PGK.3341.89                                       30 A u g u s t 1990



           D e a r Sir

           HILLS3QRQUGH STADH'M DISASTER

           T h e D i r e c t o r o f P u b l i c P r o s e c u t i o n s h a s now r e c e i v e d f r o m t h e West
           M i d l a n d s P o l i c e t h e f i n a l r e p o r t in t h i s c r i m i n a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n t o g e t h e r
           w i t h s u b s t a n t i a l s u p p o r t i n g e v i d e n c e a n d d o c u m e n t a t i o n . You w ill r e c a l l
           in A u g u s t 1989 t h a t t h e D i r e c t o r r e q u e s t e d a f u l l c r i m i n a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n
           fo llo w in g p u b l i c a t i o n of th e Interim R e p o rt p r o d u c e d a f t e r th e Public
           E n q u i r y c o n d u c t e d by L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r i n t o t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s
                                    r.c
           1989.

           T h e m os t c a r e f u l c o n s i d e r a t i o n h a s b e e n g i v e n t o a l l t h e e v i d e n c e a n d
           d o c u m e n ta tio n . The D ir e c t o r h a s d e cid ed t h a t t h e r e is no ev idence to
           j u s t i f y any crim in a l p ro c e e d in g s being i n s t i t u t e d a g a i n s t S o u th Y o rk sh ire
           P o lice, S h e f f ie ld W ednesday F o o tb a ll Club, Messrs E a stw o o d and P a r tn e rs
           o r S h e f f i e l d C i t y C o u n c i l in c o n n e c t i o n w i t h t h e d i s a s t e r a t t h e
           H i l l s b o r o u g h F o o t b a l l S t a d i u m S h e f f i e l d o n 15th A p r i l 1989.

           T he D irector h a s also concluded t h a t th e re is i n s u f f i c i e n t evidence to
           j u s t i f y p r o c e e d in g s a g a i n s t any o f f i c e r of th e S o u th Y o r k s h i r e Police o r
           a n y o t h e r p e r s o n f o r any offence.

           I am s e n d i n g a c o p y o f t h i s l e t t e r t o y o u by FAX.

           I am a l s o s e n d i n g c o p i e s t o t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r , C h i e f C o n s t a b l e
           L e s l i e S h a r p , t o t h e C o r o n e r Dr P o p p e r a n d t o t h e P o l i c e C o m p l a i n t s
           A u t h o r i t y . C o p i e s w il l a l s o be s e n t t o s o l i c i t o r s r e p r e s e n t i n g t h e
           H i l l s b o r o u g h S t e e r i n g C o m m it te e , t h e S h e f l i e l d C i t y C o u n c i l , S h e f f i e l d
                                                       - 2 -




I a l s o e n c l o s e a cop y o f a p r e s s r e l e a s e t o be i s s u e d b y t h e C r o w n
P r o s e c u t i o n S e r v i c e P r e s s O f f i c e a t 3.00pm t o d a y .

Yours fa ith fu lly




C J C le ug h
Head o f P o l i c e C o mp la in t s D iv i s i o n
CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
C H IE F CONSTABLE:                         L. Sharp          Q.P.M., LL.B., F.B.I.M.
A L L C O M M U N I C A T I O N S S H O U L D BE A D D R E S S E D T O " T H E C H I E F C O N S T A B L E "

My Reference:             CC/BMT                                                                                 POLICE HEA DQ UA RTERS
                                                                                                                            CARLETONHALL
Your Reference: L/CCC/3/CH                                                                                                              P E N R IT H
                                                                                                                        C U M B R IA CA10 2AU
                                                                                                                  T E L E P H O N E : 0768 - 64411
                Hepworth and Chadwick                                                                                              T E LE X : 64240
                Solicitors                                                                                                      FA X : 0768 66106
                Cloth Hall Court
                Infirmary Street
                LEEDS
                LSI 2JB

                                                                                                               6 September 1990




                Dear Sir

                HILLSBOROUGH - Chief Superintendent David DUCKENFIELD

                I reply to your letter dated 31 August 1990 which was addressed to the
                Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police.

                You are correct when you say that the DPP has decided that there is
                insufficient evidence to prosecute your client for any criminal offence
                arising out of the Hillsborough tragedy.    It is also correct to say that
                the disciplinary issues now have to be considered by South Yorkshire Police
                in consultation with the Police Complaints Authority.

                I believe you are also aware that there are outstanding civil actions being
                brought by various parties with an interest in the matter, and that there
                are 95 Coroner’s Inquests to be reconvened.

                I am aware that at the interview on 3 July 1990 your client intimated that
                once the DPP had made his decision in respect of the criminal issues, he
                would consider being interviewed in respect of any disciplinary matters.
                If that is still his wish then I am ready to conduct that interview but it
                must be understood that the disciplinary matters are very closely related
                to the criminal issues, so any interview would have to be conducted under a
                Police and Criminal Evidence Act caution, and the transcript of the
                questions and answers would have to be sent to the DPP for further
                consideration of the criminal matters.
That is the position in respect of any new or additional evidence which
comes to light, for example, that which may arise out of the civil actions
or the Coroner’s Inquests. It is not for me to advise you or your client
as to how you, or he, should proceed, but it seems to me that you should be
aware of the foregoing information.

If I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact
me.

Ycurs faithfully




unier uonstaoie
Investigating Officer
                  SPECIAL P O L I C E A U T H O R I T Y M E E T I N G       - 2 NOVEMBER 1990



Introduction

This meeting    is c onsid e r i n g an a p p l i c a t i o n  from six officers (a chief
superintendent,   three    s upe rinten dents      and       two constables) for financial
support to provide them with legal r e p r e s e n t a t i o n at the forthcoming Inquest
Hearing into the Hil lsb o r o u g h tragedy.

They have all been inves t i g a t e d by the W e s t Midlands Police, acting for
the Director of Public Prosecutions, in r e l a t i o n to the question of criminal
liability.    The  D i r ector has    a n n o u nced that   at   this  time there is
insuff icient evidence on which to b ring c r i m i n a l proceedings.

All the officers c o n t i n u e to see themselves to be at considerable risk and
consider independent       legal   r e p r esent ation abso lu t e l y essential for each
of them.

The risks arise fro m the fo llowing factors

    1.    The p o s sibili ty       at    the    Inquest       of       a    verdict   of   unlawful
           killing.

    2.    Of additiona l  evidence   being g iven at the Inquest which
           may cause the Director of Public Pro secutions to further
           consider the questi on of c riminal liability.

    3.    Recently in a similar case w h e r e        the Director of Public
           Prosecutions       decide d    against      criminal        proceedings,
           representatives of the d e c eased i n s t i g a t e d a Judicial Review
           of  the  D irect o r ' s decision.    The    officers      see  this  as
           possible in this case.

    4.    Private crimina l prosecutions m a y be brought.

    5.    The officers face possible d i s c i p l i n a r y proceedings where
           dismissal, r e quirem ent to resign or reduction in rank are
           all possibilities.



R e l e v a n t Co nsiderations

A l l the officers thus far have prov ided for their own legal                                    advice and
re p r e s e n t a t i o n and the applicat ion toda y is concerned solely                        with costs
l i k e l y to be incurred at the Inquest Hearings.

To help you with your decision clear a d v i c e is                              provided    in   Home   Office
C i r c u l a r 77/1987 which is included in your papers.

T h i s Circular refers to a central principle:        this is "that where the Police
A u t h o r i t y considers that an officer has a c t e d in good faith in pursuance
of his duties or that the interests of the Force as a whole are involved
(and both of these consider ations are fully satisfied in this case) the
o f f i c e r should have the support of the P ol ice Authority to ensure that he
h a s the services of a lawyer and that he s h o u l d not be out-of-pocket".
                                                   -     2   -




I wish to emphasise that all these off icers were "acting in good faith in
pu rsuanc e of their duties" and u n d o u b t e d l y "the interests of the Force as
a whole are involved".     Also, the further risks these officers fear are
very real.

Par agrap h 13 refers sp ecifically to "Legal Repr esentation for Individual
Off icers"    particularly  to   occasions   when   "the Chief   Officer's  legal
r epr esentative   cannot reason ably  be  expected   to represent   the separate
interests of officers".

This issue has been considered on yo ur behalf by the lawyers representing
the Aut horit y and the Chief C o n s t a b l e in this matter.    Their advice is that
ind epende nt  legal  rep resent ation       is   appropriate  for   all  the  officers
concerned.

In the Circular reference is s p e c i f i c a l l y made to the Authority "wishing
in particular to assess w h e ther o f f ic ers are at risk of being held to blame
for actions in connection with the d eaths to which an Inquest relates and
w h e r e any such finding might g i v e rise to legal proceedings for which the
Po l i c e Authority would be liable or for         which financial assistance  might
be appropriate".      It will be seen therefore the advice          in this Circular
r e lat es very precisely to our situat ion.



Fi n a n c e

The Circular makes it clear                 that       ex pend i t u r e   incurred   in   this   regard   is
e l i g i b l e for police grant.

W h e n this Committee last c o n s i d e r e d these applications q uestions were raised
a b o u t the private insurance a v a i l a b l e to the chief su perintendent and three
superintendents.      I can now i n f o r m you that:-

     a.        Through  the insurance    provided       by Allianz Cornhill each
               officer has a financial lim ita t i o n of £50,000 which after
               VAT is taken into accou nt a m o u n t s in fact to £42,500 each.

     b.        The policy does   not  s p e c i f i c a l l y cover Inquest Hearings
               but my understanding is that the insurers are prepared to
               provide cover in this instance.

     c.        In relation to future risks the officers may need further
                legal advice and r e p r e s e n t a t i o n after the Inquest Hearings
               have been concluded, for example,                in relation to criminal,
               private or discipline p rocee d i n g s .        If the D irector of Public
               Prosecutions were    to b r i n g         criminal proceedings,      in the
                first instance the Police A u t h o r i t y could not - even if
                they so wished - fund the officers' legal costs.                Also there
                is   no  provision     for         the      Authority    to   fund    legal
               representation at di scip l i n e hearings.           Therefore, in terms
               of the insurance provision, su ch possible future requirements
               must be borne in mind.
                                      -   3   -




Some information is now a vailable as to the e xtent these officers have
already incurred legal costs and their estimate of costs likely to be
incurred through representation at the  Inquest Hearings.  I can provide
you with the details as you wish.

In relation to the two constables, they do not have private insurance but
to date have been supported from Police Federation funds. Their application,
as with the chief superintendent and three superintendents, is for Police
Authority funding in relation to legal costs incurred by them at the Inquest
Hearings.



Separate Representations

The Circular, at paragraph 14, makes clear that officers should normally
be given the opportunity by the Police Aut ho r i t y to make representations
to them if they so wish.

With  the exception of Constable Smith,     all   the officers and some legal
advisors  are in close attendance.     Some  of t h e m have intimated they may
wish  to exercise their right to appear before you      today and make their own
representation as to their applicat ion for financial assistance.



Recommendation

South Yorkshire Police officers must be able to go about their normal duties
secure in the knowledge that prov ided they act in good faith and to the
best  of their ability they will a lways   be d e s e r v i n g of and receive the
support of this Police Authority, inc luding f inancial provision for legal
representation when that is appropriate.

I have no hesitation whatsoever in r e co mmendi ng to you that the proper course
of action is for these applications to be fully supported.




Deputy Chief Constable
2 November 1990
                          1e k ' p l n n u '


C lo th 1 I.ill C o m !
                          05*2 4.WM
                          IVIcv                                            HEPWORTH
In lir n u r y Sncct
I .cods
                          5S79I7
                          I'iJCMmilo
                                                                           & C H A D W IC K
i.si 2.1n                 0 5 3 2 4 5 6 1 XX                               A M E M B E R O F EVERSHEDS
                          OX 12027 I.cods




                                                                           i).           14 No vember      1990




IN C O N F I D E N C E                                                                   L/CCC/3/mci/
                                                                                          D UCK ENFIEL D

Mr S Walker
So licito r to the South Y o r k s h i r e
Joint Secretariat
PO 37
R e g e n t Street
B a r ns ley
S Y O R K SHIR E S70 2DX



S E N T B Y FAX 0226 730442 A N D POST

Dear Sir

Chief S u p e r intend ent D G D u c k e n f i e l d - Hil lsb r o u g h
Inquests

W e r e f e r to the W r i t e r ' s l e t t e r to M r R C J o h n s t o n d a t e d 7th N ovember,
t o g e t h e r w i t h o u r s u b s e q u e n t t e l e p h o n e c o n v e r s a t i o n s from w h i c h we
believe you now fully appreciate Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
position.

We      are       grateful   for   your      confirmation             that   in  response       to
representations, the Po lice A u t h ority will review its d e c i s i o n as to the
p r o v i s i o n of funds to Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Duckenfield. We unders t a n d the
spe cially conve ned m e e t i n g will be this c omi ng Friday

Y o u as ked for some c l a r i f i c a t i o n on the q u e s tion of the sug gested figure
for costs as set out in our letter of the 7th November. This figure was
c o n s i d e r e d o n the b a s i s of t h e I n q u e s t s r u n n i n g for 8 w e e k s a n d wa s
exc lusiv e of VAT.

 Cou nsel's Clerk has a g r e e d to r e duce the Brief fee to £5,000 wi th a daily
 re f r e s h e r fee of £500, t o g e t h e r w i t h V A T thereon. A n a r t i c l e d clerk will
 n e e d to be in a t t e n d a n c e to instruct Counsel. In addition, there will be
 cost of B r i e f i n g Counsel and I n s t r u c t i n g Solicitors' atte ndanc e at Court
 as r e q u ire d. T h e r e f o r e , w e w o u l d c o n s i d e r that a f i g u r e of £ 4 0 , 0 0 0 for
 the 8 w e e k s w o u l d b e t h e m i n i m u m r e a l i s t i c f i g u r e for r e p r e s e n t a t i o n ,
 together w i t h V A T and d i s b u r s e m e n t s such as travelling expenses.

 If the I n q u e s t s r u n o v e r the 8 w e e k period, we c o n s i d e r                   the m i n i n u m
 w eek ly cost to be £5,000 plus V A T and disbursements.

 Finally,             we can co n f i r m that the Allianz/Co rnhill                  Insurers have
 r e - a f f i r m e d th at n o f u n d s w i l l b e a v a i l a b l e to C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
 Duc ken f i e l d over and a b o v e the a gr eed limit of £50,000. As you know, this



                                                         A N (u.«
      t   l su                   M                       I \      KhIi.,
      i- m n                     I   A \\                I)   M    Si m          H.-n
                                                          •\t<-<i. I s           Ivif.
                                  U I ,1. I
< i IN I I N I A I I' i.N




          sum h a s           largely been exhausted               during       the    previous      12    months        in
          r e p r e s e n t i n g his interests.

          At present, the W r ite r w ould antici p a t e attending                      the h e aring       on Friday
          t o g et her w i t h Chief S u p e rinte ndent Duckenfield.

          S h o u l d y o u r e q u i r e a ny f u r t h e r   inf orm a t i o n ,   please   do n o t h e s i t a t e   to
          c o nta ct the Writer, Mr Coughlin.



          Yours             faithfully




           1
    .lO lO fN                  Telephone


C l o t h M a li C o u r t
                               05 32 430391
                               Telex
                                                                          HEPWORTH
I n f i r m a r y S t re e t
Le e ds
                               55 7917
                               Fac simile
                                                                          & CHADW ICK
L S I 2JB                      0 5 3 2 4 5 6 1 K8
                                                                          A M E M B E R O F EV ER SHEDS
                               OX    12027 Lee ds




                                                                                             20 N o v emb er   1990

                                                                          Your kckf» .:K i

IN C O N F I D E N C E
                                                                          out Bj.irtt         L/CCC/3/mci
                                                                                              DUCKENFIELD
Mr S W al ker
S o l i c i t o r to the South Y orkshire Joint
Secretariat
PO Box 37
R e g e n t St reet
Barnsley
S Y O R K S H I R E S70 2DX



S E N T BY F A X 0226 730442 A N D POST



De a r Sir

C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t D G Duckenfi eld
H i l l s b o r o u g h Inquests.

We refer       to C h i e f      Superintendent's D u c k e n f i e l d ' s a p p l i c a t i o n for
fin ancial s u ppo rt to the South Yo rkshir e Police Authority and the meeting
h e l d o n 16th N o v e m b e r 1990.

A s you are well aware, it is our view, e x p r ess ed to you and the Authority
b o t h in w r i t i n g a n d by way of verbal submission, that the p rincipal risk
to our C l ien t lays in n e w evidence b eing adduced b efore the C o ron er which
i n t u r n m a y b e s u b m i t t e d to t he D P P w h o may r e v i e w h i s d e c i s i o n not to
i n s t i t u t e crim inal proceedings. As you know, of equal concern, was that
a n y n e w e v i d e n c e m a y p r o v i d e a p l a t f o r m f or i n d i v i d u a l s i n t e n t on
b r i n g i n g a p r i v a t e prosecution.

I n o w a t t a c h a c o p y of the fron t p a g e of the " S h e f f i e l d Star " for
y e s t e r d a y M o n d a y 19th N ovem b e r 1990. The articl e is self explanato ry and
is c l e arly s u p p o r t i v e of o ur concerns o n behalf of Chief Superintendent
D u c k e n f i e l d as to the r i s k s f a c e d by him, if his o w n p o s i t i o n is not
p r o p e r l y p r o t e c t e d b y legal r e p r e s e n t a t i o n at Court. W i l l y o u p l e a s e
e n s u r e that this i nfor mation is placed immediately b e fore the members of
t h e A u t h o r i t y a n d s t e p s t a k e n to r e c o n s i d e r t h e i r d e c i s i o n ,       as the
I n q u e s t s a r e n o w in s e s s i o n a n d e v i d e n c e is b e i n g hear d.                    D u e to
i n s u f f i c i e n t funds,          w e h a v e h a d to take a d e c i s i o n to l i m i t Chief
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t ' s D u c k e n f i e l d ' s r e p r e s e n t a t i o n to a m a t t e r of d a y s in
Court.          T h i s d e c i s i o n is m a d e so as n o t to e x h a u s t t h e m o n i e s left
a v a i l a b l e to h i m under the Insurance Policy, in order that we m a y p r o v i d e
s o m e r e p r e s e n t a t i o n to h i m in r e s p e c t of a n y f o r t h c o m i n g disciplinary*
proceedings.
Will you please contact the Writer, Mr   Coughlin, without delay.


Yours faithfully

HEPWORTH & CHADWICK.
 S o lic ito rs               T e lep h o n e


 C lo th H all C o u rt
                              0 5 3 2 4 30391
                              T e le x                                                             HEPWORTH
 I n firm a ry S tree t
 Leeds
                              557917
                              F acsim ile
                                                                                                   & CHADWICK
 LSI 2JB                      0532 456188                                                        A M E M B E R O F EVE RSHE DS
                              D X 12027 L e e d s




                                                                                                                        5th December 1990

                                                                                                                        SW/MR
                                                                                                   Yoor Rcfcrcncc
South Yorkshire Police
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat                                                                                       L/3/CCC/WMG
                                                                                                             cfcrcfto^
P 0 Box 37
Regent Street
BARNSLEY                                                                                                 ■          (f)
                                                                                             C-3
South Yorkshire    S70 2PQ                                                                  Tn                   •w '
                                                                                            O '
                                                                                                     -          c

                                                                                           BI                  Cfj
                                                                                           c s                           ;
F O R T HE A T T E N T I O N OF M R S WALKER                                                                        y



Dear Sir

Applications by Police Officers for Financial Assistance:
Hillsborough Inquests

Thank you for your letters of 28th and 30th November together with that
of 4th December.

With regard to the meeting on 7th December we will not be in attendance
due to the very limited funds available to our client Chief
Superintendent D G Duckenfield.   In the circumstances, Mr I Walker of
Russell Jones & Walker will be representing our client's interest at the
meeting together with those of the other Officers, as indicated in his
letter to you of 3rd December.

We note,    however, your confirmation that all representations, both
written and oral, already submitted on behalf of Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield will be before, and considered at, the meeting.  By way of
summary, the following in particular should be noted:-

1              Chief Superintendent                          Duckenfield's applications                                      for    financial
                assistance.

2                 Letter from Prosecution Service to Chief Constable South Yorkshire
                  30.08.90

3              Letter from Chief Constable L Sharp                                     to Hepworth & Chadwick dated
                6th September 1990.

4              The written and oral representations made to the Police Authority
                meeting on 2nd November by the South Yorkshire Deputy Chief
                Constable Peter Hayes and Chief Superintendent Duckenfield (extract
                attached).

5              The oral representation of the writer Mr C       Coughlin to the
                authority meeting on 16th November (the minutes will recall what
                was said)


    ^ rtn e r s                 C. 1. C. Bramley    D. J. Cray        A. N. Brown                        Other Principal           Regulated by The Law
    D.          F. L. Sykes     R. M. Potterion     J. R. Heaps       1. A. Richardson                   Eversheds'offices at      Society in the conduct
    J. P. Margerison            P. E. A. Winter     J. M. Foster      D. M. Strachan                     Birmingham, Cardiff.      of investment business
    J. H. Bryan                 R. Chapman          J. R. Guest       Alison J. Sunifonh                 Derby. London.
    J. H. Finnigan              A. W. Latchmore      R. M. Ain-coe                                       Manchester. Newcastle.
    P. J. S. Thompson           P R. P. Chadwick     P. A. Smith                                         Norwich. Nottingham.
                                 R. C. Davis         B. J. Horrocks                                      Warrington
6     The letters from the   writer   to   you   of   14th   and   20th November
      (copies attached).

We have read the correspondence forwarded by you under cover of your
letter of 4th December, namely the Russell Jones & Walker letter to you
of 3rd December and your response of 4th December.     Mr Walker will be
addressing you on the application of the "Derbyshire" case.

We note that you lay stress on the question of the Officers acting in
"good faith", "reasonable exercise of judgement" and "clear evidence of
negligence".

With regard to the question of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield acting in
good faith and indeed acting in the interests of the force as a whole, it
is our view that this cannot be in issue based on the full support
provided by both the Chief Constable Richard Wells and the Deputy Chief
Constable Peter Hayes in representations made to you and the Authority
both in writing and orally.

As to the question of "reasonable exercise of judgement" and there being
"clear evidence of negligence" we would say there is insufficient
evidence or information upon which the Authority could seek to refuse to
grant financial support to our client.   In this regard, we would support
the points already made by Russell Jones & Walker in their letter of 3rd
December and to be made to you personally at the forthcoming meeting. We
would say, however, that whilst parts of the report of Lord Justice
Taylor may be critical of the Police as a whole, the Director of Public
Prosecutions,  in arriving at his decision on 30th August 1990 (see
extract attached), concluded that there was "insufficient evidence to
justify the institution of proceedings against any Officer in the South
Yorkshire Police Force..."

The reality now, however, is that we are faced with inquests which have
been running for some days and which will run to some several weeks.   At
these inquests, as you are aware, there is likely to be heard the
evidence of in excess of 200 witnesses.  The point which must be grasped,
therefore, and already made by personal representations to the Authority,
is that each witness will give oral testimony. That evidence is then
subject to cross examination.    Without representation, there can be no
challenge on the part of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield of any
criticism of his control or conduct of proceedings on the day in
question.   As you are well aware, on the opening day of the Coroner's
proceedings, the press recorded the comments of a number of individuals
that new evidence may well emerge which may cause the DPP to re-consider
his decision.    There can be little doubt that certain group(s) at the
Inquest will endeavour to show the police actions on the day in a less
than favourable light.   We refer you to our letter of 20th November with,
enclosure.   The point must be made again that unchallenged criticism of
our client will be considered by the DPP and we refer you to the letter
of the Chief Constable of Cumbria, Mr Leslie Sharp dated 6th September
1990 in which he made it clear to us that any new evidence which arises
in the Coroner's Inquest will be considered by the DPP.

In conclusion, we would ask the Authority to consider our client's case
so far presented together with the representations of Mr Walker to be
made on behalf of all applicants on the 7th and that the Authority does
grant financial assistance.  In our view, they ought properly so to do in
CONTINUATION


   accordance with the home office circular for the purposes of providing
   financial assistance for our client's representation at the inquest.

   Please do not hesitate to contact the writer,   Mr Coughlin,   should you
   require further information.

   Vftiire   f ai fV>fn1 1                  ^




             7
                                                              flPPfSNJH* 'A'
                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                Ref;            DGD/CJD

        From:    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield               Station/Dept:

        To:      The Chief Constable                            Date:           21 September 1990



                SUBJECT:   Hillsborough Disaster - Funding for Legal Representation

                On 24 August 1989 I made application under Home Office Circular
                No 77/87 for yourself and the Police Authority to give due
                consideration for funds to be made available for my legal
                representation in connection with any proceedings which may arise
                from the Hillsborough Disaster.

                These proceedings are currently the Civil Hearings due to begin in
                Manchester on 2 October to be followed by the Coroner's Inquest on
                19 November 1990. There is also the possibility that Discipline
                Proceedings may follow at a later stage.

                Whilst the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions in respect
                of Criminal Matters has been favourable it is not unreasonable to
                assume that if further evidence came to light he would reconsider
                the position with regard to myself and other officers.

                There is also the stated intention, admittedly via the media, by
                families of the deceased that they intend to launch a private
                prosecution for manslaughter against officers of South Yorkshire
                Police.

                It is therefore of paramount importance that the best independent
                legal advice possible is available for myself and other officers.

                My previous application for financial assistance was, as I understand
                it, 'left on the table' in the knowledge that I had insurance cover
                for my legal defence up to the sum of £5 0 ,0 0 0 .

                If I require legal representation at the Civil Hearings and Coroner's
                Inquest it is likely that my defence costs will exceed the sum assured
                and I will require additional funding (bearing in mind Discipline
                and Private Prosecution).

                I ask for urgent reconsideration of my request in the hope that a
i               contribution could be made towards my legal defence costs or an
                agreement to meet all reasonable expenditure over and above the sum
                assured.

                I have attached a letter from my solicitor and copies of previous
                papers.




    Gen/2
S olicitors                  T e lep h o n e
                             0 5 . '2 450391
C l n t h H a ll C o u r t   T elex
                                                                                            HEPVORTH
In firm ary S tree t
Leeds
                             557917
                             F acsim ile
                                                                                            ,V C H A D W I C K
LSI 2JB                      0 5 3 2 456 1X8                                                A M E M B E R O F EV ERSH ED S
                             D X i : o : -’ L e e d s




                                                                                            Dalc                  17 September 1990

                                                                                            Your Rctcrcnce




                                                                                            Our Rcfcrcncc         L/CCC/3/mCi
                                                                                                                   DUCKENFIELD

Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield
8 Durvale Court
SHEFFIELD SI7 3PT


 Dear David

Hillsborough

As you are aware, we are obtaining Counsel's Advice as to your personal
position in relation to the forthcoming civil hearing in Manchester
commencing on 2nd October and the Coroner's Inquests which are due to
resume on 19th November 1990.

 In addition to representing your interests at the above, your position
 will also need consideration and yourself possible representation at the
 disciplinary hearing, as and when this commences.

 Finally,   there is,   of course,   the spectre                                                    of        a      possible           private
 prosecution which may arise at some stage.

 It seems likely that the present funds available under the Allianz
 Personal Law Plan may well be exhausted by one or both of the Civil and
 Coroner's hearings. Can we impress upon you, therefore, that you make the
 strongest representations both to the Home Office and to the Chief
 Superintendent's Association to ascertain the availability of funds to
 assist you with legal representation. This must be carried out as a
 matter of priority for you, based on the time scale for the various




^ ^ —w u v j i u j j j n




                                 C. I C Bramle>         H J. Cray       A. N. Brown             Other Principal          Regulated by The Law
    D. F. L. Svke>               R. M. Ponerton         J R Heaps       1. A Richardson         E»ershcd»offx.r»at       Sooetv in the condut
    J. P. Margenson              P. E. A Winter         J. M. Foster    D M. Strachan           Birmingham. Cardiff.     of investment buwnev.
    J H. Bryan                   R. Chapman             JR Cue*         Alnon J Suniforth       Derby. London.
    J. H. Finnigan               A. W Latchmore         R. M. A im ax                           Manchester. Newcastle.
    P J. S- Thompson             P. R P Chadwick        P A. Smith                              Norwich. Non ingham.
                                 R. C Davis             B J Horrocks                            Wamnpon
                                      SOUTH YO RKSHIRE POLICE
Staff in confidence                                              R ef;           TWS/MR

        From:   Chief Superintendent D G Duckenfield             Station/Dept:   Headquarters

        To:     The Chief Constable                              Date:           24 August 1989



                SUBJECT:      APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE


                 The interim report of the Inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor into
                 the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster that occurred on the 15 April 1989 was
                 published at 1100 hours on Friday 4 August 1989. The report was very
                 critical of the South Yorkshire Police in general and, in particular, myself
                 and a number of other police officers.

                 National media interest   and comments followed publication and, in view of
                 the extensive criticism   in the report regarding my handling of events on
                 the day of the disaster   and the possibility of actions of criminal
                 negligence/disciplinary   proceedings, I was suspended from duty on the 4
                 August 1989-

                 The Director of Public Prosecutions was, I understand, requested         to examine
                 Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and subsequently instructed         the West
                 Midlands Police to carry out a full criminal investigation, 'not         limited
                 to the criminal culpability of the police alone' into the events         that
                 occurred at Hillsborough on the 15 April 1989*

                 Whilst no criminal charges have been brought to date against me, the
                 possibility of charges being brought exists and I will, no doubt, be
                 interviewed by the West Midlands Police during the course of their criminal
                 investigations. There is also a possibility of interviews in respect of
                 disciplinary allegations made against me for which a Regulation 7 Notice
                 has been served.

                 I was authorised to obtain independent legal advice from Hammond Suddards
                 resulting in being advised by them to obtain further private independent
                 legal advice as Hammond Suddards could not assist me personally as no
                 criminal charges had been made.  I am now obtaining independent legal advice
                 through a personal Legal Protection Insurance Policy.

                 The policy gives a maximum cover of £50,000.  If I need legal representation
                 at interviews with the West Midlands Inquiry Team regarding possible
                 criminal or disciplinary matters and at protracted inquest hearings, vhich
                 are unlikely to take place until early 1990, then there is little doubt
                 my legal costs will be very much in excess of this figure.

                 If any criminal proceedings are brought against members of the South
                 Yorkshire Police (and manslaughter charges are possible), it is imperative,
                 in the interests of the force, the Police Authority and any individual
                 officer, that those concerned have had the benefit of the best possible
                 legal advice and representation at any forthcoming judicial hearings.

    M            Whilst the force has been, and continues to be, legally represented matters
                 are very complex and conflict of interest can arise in areas concerning
                 different individuals.




Gen/2
Attached is a copy of Home Office Circular No.77/1987 - 'Financial
Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings'.   I draw your attention
to paragraphs 1, 2, 12 - 15 inclusive.  In accordance with paragraph 13.
I therefore respectfully request that application be made to the Police
Authority for financial assistance in order that   I am properly advised and
represented at any future criminal or disciplinary hearings.
As indicated at paragraph 2 of the circular, any   payments made toofficers
in accordance with the guidance are eligible for police grant.




V I I            T T V
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY         N O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as it
FINANCE & GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE
                                         contains     exempt         information
                                         within para.                         0f
15 SEPTEMBER 1989
                                         Sch.l2A to the Local Government !
REPORT BY THE CHIEF CONSTABLE            Act 1972 as amended.                    I

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

1.    Matter for Consideration

      The provision of financial assistance to police officers involved in
      legal proceedings arising from the event at Hillsborough Football Ground
      on 15 April 1989.


2.    Background Information

2.1 Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, published on * December 1987, provides
     guidance to Police Authorities on the exercise of their discretion in
     considering applications, on behalf of police officers, for financial
     assistance towards the cost of legal advice and representation arising
     from involvement In legal proceedings which result from the pursuance, in
     good faith, of their duties or where the interests of the Force
     whole are involved. A copy of the Circular is attached.                •
                                 •   '                       •


2.2 Arising from the publication of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor
     into the Hillsborough Disaster, the subsequent appointment of the Chief
     Constable of the West Midlands Police to enquire into the Justification
     for criminal proceedings arising from the disaster and the forthcoming
     Coroner's Inquest into the deaths, an application for assistance has been
     received from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who was involved in
     command of the policing arrangements for the football Semi-Final and
     similar applications from other officers similarly involved night be
     anticipated.


3.    Comment

3.1   Following the disaster and throughout the Public Inquiry the interests of
      the Police Authority, the Chief Constable and all officers of the Force
      have been represented by legal officers appointed by the Police Authority
      insurers. The legal officers appointed by the insurers have indicated
      that in relation to criminal proceedings they would be unable to provide
      representation for individual officers who should seek independent legal
      advice and representation.

3.2   It will be seen from the Home Office Circular No. 77/1987, that the
      central principle which should guide consideration of individual cases is
      that, where a Police Authority considers that an officer has acted in
      good faith in pursuance of his duties or that where the interests of the
      Force as a whole are involved, the officer should have the support of the
      Police Authority to ensure that he has the services of a lawyer and that
      he should not be out of pocket.


3.3   It will be further seen that in respect of criminal proceedings pursued
      by the Crown Prosecution Service against an individual officer he should
      be expected to bear the costs of his own defence and the Police
                                    - 2 -

      Authority, at the conclusion of the proceedings, are able to consider, on
      the full facts, whether or not to reimburse any expenses incurred by the
      officer and not awarded by the trial court, even where proceedings have
      resulted in conviction in certain circumstances. Ic will be noted from
      paragraph 1A of the Circular that an officer wishing to seek financial
      assistance should have the opportunity to submit to the Chief Officer an
      application for financial assistance, upon receipt of which the Chief           ^
      Officer should refer the application to the Police Authority together
      with his own recommendation. It will be further seen that the applying
      officer should normally be given the opportunity by the Police Authority
      to make representations to them if he wishes to do so. At this stage
      Chief Superintendent Duckenfield wishes to reserve the right to so appear
      at a future date if necessary.

3.4   The events at Hillsborough were unique in respect of the potential
      criminal liability of police officers involved. The officers were acting
      in good faith in accordance with well established practices and any
      criminal proceedings will largely constitute a test case similar to the
      example provided in paragraph three of the Home Office Circular. The        \
      unique nature of the circumstances of this particular criminal enquiry
      with its wide implications for the interests of tfc# Force as a whole is
      such that the Police Authority may wish to consigfji* at this stage, a
      commitment to the funding of independent legaladvice for the officer(s)
      concerned. The financial commitment of the officers is likely to^'v
      commence with advice and representation prior to and during interviews      ^
      undertaken by West Midlands Police officers in the course of their
      enquiry. It would be prudent for that representation to continue
      throughout the enquiry and any subsequent criminal proceedings and to       i
      extend to representation at the Coroner’s Inquest which will ultimately
      be held.

3.5   At this stage it is anticipated that representation in any civil actions
      subsequently pursued will be provided by the Police Authority insurers.

3.6   It should be noted that there is available, to all officers of
      superintendent and chief superintendent rank who liiftye chosen to
      contribute, a measure of personal liability insurance arranged by the
      Superintendents’ Association of England and Wales. The individual
      liability limit of this insurance cover is £50,000.


4.    Financial Implications

      It is not possible at this stage to assess the financial implications of
      this matter which will depend entirely on the course and extent of the
      criminal enquiry and the ultimate outcome, and the duration of the
      Inquest proceedings. There is no specific provision in the Revenue
      Budget for this expenditure.


5.    Recommendation

      The Committee is recommended to approve a commitment to provide financial
      assistance for legal representation to the officer(s) concerned in
      accordance with the central principle of Home Office Circular No.
      77/1987.


P WRIGHT
CHIEF CONSTABLE
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
Constable was submitted on the guidelines contained in Home Office
Circular Ho. 77/87 on the responsibilities of Police Authorities in
respect of legal costs arising from the involvement of police officers
and non-police employees of Police Authority in legal proceedings.
The Circular both confirmed and expanded current policies within the
South Yorkshire Police and recommended criteria to assist Police
Authorities in considering whether financial assistance should be
approved in any particular proceedings. If followed, the criteria
would ensure that any payments authorised in consequence to be met
from the Police Fund would qualify for Home Office grant.
RESOLVED - That the Police Authority adopt the procedures in Home
Office Circular No. 77/87 and enclose the current policies detailed
in the report now submitted relating to legal costs arising from the
involvement of police officers and non-police employees of the Police
Authority in legal proceedings, subject to any applications continuing
to be submitted to the Police Authority for consideration should the
Authority's Insurers decline to undertake any particular defence.
HIGH VELOCITY CATAPULTS
The Authority considered a letter dated 8th February, 1988 from the
Management Co-ordinator of the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council
requesting the Police Authority to consider Minute 1171 of the
Council's Consumer and Enviornmental Services Committee of 8th
January, 1988 relating to the Council's concern over the availability
of high velocity catapults. The letter included a report considered
by the Committee detailing the tests and test results on four
catapults purchased locally and tested at the Department of Civil and
Structural Engineering of the University of Sheffield. The results
were considered to be disturbing.-
The Chief Constable displayed to the Authority the type of catapult
referred to and reported that he had already responded to the AMA that
such catapults should be regarded as designated weapons. The Clerk
and Financial Officer also pointed out that the Criminal Justice Bill
would prohibit their manufacture and sale.
RESOLVED:-
1.    That the representations already made by the Chief Constable and
      the Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council to the Association of
      Metropolitan Authorities be supported.
2.   That the Clerk and Financial Officer be requested to write to
     the Chambers of Trade to seek their support of a voluntary ban
     on the sale of high velocity catapults, pending the
     implementation of the provisions of the Criminal Justice Bill.
                                  Director of Public Prosecutions                          Deputy Director and Chief Executive
                                                  Allan G r e e n Q C.                     D S. G a n d y CBOB E




                                                             Director of Headquarters Casework
                                                                         C W. P Newell



                                                                                                 Crown Prosecution Service
               The Chief C o n stab le
               S o u th Y o rk sh ire Police                                                     Headquarters Casework
               S n i g g H il l
               Sheffield                                                                         10 Fumival Street
               S3 8LY                                                                            London
                                                                                                 EC4A 1PE
                                                                                                 Telephone 071-831-3038
                                                                                                             Ext




vo u r R e j                                               Our Re/                                           Date
                                                                    PGK.3341.89                                30 A u g u s t 1990



               D e a r Sir

               HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

               T h e D i r e c t o r o f P u b l i c P r o s e c u t i o n s h a s n ow r e c e i v e d f r o m t h e West
               M i d l a n d s P o l i c e t h e f i n a l r e p o r t in t h i s c r i m i n a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n t o g e t h e r
               w i t h s u b s t a n t i a l s u p p o r t i n g e v i d e n c e a n d d o c u m e n t a t i o n . Y ou w ill r e c a l l
               i n A u g u s t 1989 t h a t t h e D i r e c t o r r e q u e s t e d a f u l l c r i m i n a l i n v e s t i g a t i o n
               f o l l o w i n g p u b l i c a t i o n o f t h e I n t e r i m R e p o r t p r o d u c e d a f t e r t h e P u b li c
               E n q u i r y c o n d u c t e d by L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r i n t o t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s
               s u r r o u n d i n g t h e d i s a s t e r a : H i l l s b c - r o u c h S t a d i u m . S h e f f i e l d on 13Ur. A p r i l
               1989.

               T h e m o s t c a r e f u l c o n s i d e r a t i o n h a s b e e n g i v e n t o a l l t h e e v i d e n c e and
               d o c u m e n ta tio n . The D ire c to r has decided t h a t t h e r e is no evidence to
               j u s t i f y any crim inal pro cee d in g s being i n s t i t u t e d a g a i n s t S o u th Y orkshire
               P o lice, S h e ffie ld W ednesday F o o tb a l l Club. Messrs E a stw o o d and P a r tn e rs
               o r S h e f f i e l d C i t y C o u n c i l in c o n n e c t i o n w i t h t h e d i s a s t e r a t t h e
               H i l l s b o r o u g h F o o t b a l l S t a d i u m S h e f f i e l d on 15th A p r i l 1989.

               The D irector h as a lso concluded t h a t th e r e is i n s u f f ic ie n t evidence to
               j u s t i f y p r o c e e d i n g s a g a i n s t a n y o f f i c e r o f t h e S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o li ce o r
               any o th e r p e r s o n f o r any offence.

               I am s e n d i n g a c o p y o f t h i s l e t t e r t o y o u by FAX.

               I am a l s o s e n d i n g c o p i e s t o t h e i n v e s t i g a t i n g o f f i c e r , C h i e f C o n s t a b l e
               L e s l i e S h a r p , t o t h e C o r o n e r Dr P o p p e r a n d t o t h e P o l i c e C o m p l a i n t s
               A u th o r it y . C o p ie s will also be s e n t to s o l i c i t o r s r e p r e s e n t i n g the
               H i l l s b o r o u g h S t e e r i n g C o m m it te e , t h e S h e f f i e l d C i t y C o u n c i l , S h e f f i e l d
               W ednesday F o o tb a ll Ciub and M essrs Eastwood and P a r t n e r s .
                                                       - 2 -




I a l s o e n c l o s e a c o p y o f a p r e s s r e l e a s e t o be i s s u e d by t h e Crown
P r o s e c u t i o n S e r v i c e P r e s s O f f i c e at 3.00pm t o d a y .

Yours f a ith fu lly




C J C le u g h
Head o f P o l i c e C om pl a in ts D i v i s i o n
CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
C H IE F CONSTABLE:                         L. Sharp          Q.P.M., LL.B., F.B.I.M.
A L L C O M M U N I C A T I O N S S H O U L D B E A D D R E S S E D T O “T H E C H I E F C O N S T A B L E "

M y Reference:            CC/BMT                                                                                  POLICE H EA DQ UA RTERS
                                                                                                                             CARLETON HALL
Your Reference:           L/CCC/3/CH                                                                                                     P E N R IT H
                                                                                                                         C U M B R IA CA10 2AU
                                                                                                                   T E L E P H O N E : 0768 - 64411
                Hepworth and Chadwick                                                                                               T ELEX : 64240
                Solicitors                                                                                                       F A X : 0768 66106
                Cloth Hall Court
                Infirmary Street
                LEEDS
                LSI 2JB

                                                                                                               6 September 1990




                Dear Sir

                HILLSBOROUGH - Chief Superintendent David DUCKENFIELD

                I reply to your letter dated 31 August 1990 which was                                          addressed to the
                Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police.

                You are correct when you say that the DPP has decided that there is
                insufficient evidence to prosecute your client for any criminal offence
                arising out of the Hillsborough tragedy.    It is also correct to say that
                the disciplinary issues now have to be considered by South Yorkshire Police
                in consultation with the Police Complaints Authority.

                 I believe you are also aware that there are outstanding civil actions being
                 brought by various parties with an interest in the matter, and that there
                 are 95 Coroner’s Inquests to be reconvened.

                I am aware that at the interview on 3 July 1990 your client intimated that
                once the DPP had made his decision in respect of the criminal issues, he
                would consider being interviewed in respect of any disciplinary matters.
                If that is still his wish then I am ready to conduct that interview but it
                must be understood that the disciplinary' matters are very closely related
                to the criminal issues, so any interview would have to be conducted under a
                Police and Criminal Evidence Act caution, and the transcript of the
                questions and answers would have to be sent to the DPP for further
                consideration of the criminal matters.
That is the position in respect of any new or additional evidence which
comes to light, for example, that which may arise out of the civil actions
or the Coroner’s Inquests.   It is not for me to advise you or your client
as to how you, or he, should proceed, but it seems to me that you should be
aware of the foregoing information.

If I can be of any further assistance,   please do not hesitate to contact
me.

        • ^_1_   T 1   —




Investigating Officer
                 SPECIAL P O L I C E A U T H O R I T Y M E E T I N G       - 2 NOVEMBER 1990



Introduction

This m e eting   is consid e r i n g        an a p p l i c a t i o n  from six officers (a chief
superintendent,    three        super i n t e n d e n t s and       two constables) for financial
support to provide them with legal r e p r e s e n t a t i o n at the forthcoming Inquest
H e aring into the H i l l s b o r o u g h tragedy.

They have all been inv es t i g a t e d by the W e s t Midlands Police, acting for
the Director of Public Prosecutions, in r e l a t i o n to the question of criminal
liability.   The   Director   has      a n n o unced that at   this  time there  is
insufficient evidence on which to bring c r i m i n a l proceedings.

All the officers continu e to see themselves to be at considerable risk and
consider independent  legal  representation  absolu t e l y essential for each
of them.

The risks arise from the following f a c t o r s :-

    1.   The possibility           at    the    Inquest       of       a    verdict   of   unlawful
          killing.

    2.   Of additional     evidence   being give n at the Inquest which
          may cause the Director of Public Prosec utions to further
          consider the q u e stion of criminal liability.

    3.   Recently in a similar case where           the Director of Public
          Prosecutions      decided    a g ainst     criminal      proceedings,
          representatives of the deceased i n s t i g a t e d a Judicial Review
          of  the  D i rector's  decision.      The   officers    see  this  as
          possible in this case.

    4.   Private criminal prosecutions may be brought.

    5.   The officers face possible d i s c i p l i n a r y proceedings where
          dismissal, requir e m e n t to resign or reduction in rank are
          all possibilities.



R e l e v a n t Considerations

All the officers thus far have provided for their own legal                                      advice and
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n and the applicatio n today is concerned solely                       with costs
l ikely to be incurred at the Inquest Hearings.

T o h e l p you with your decision clear a d v i c e is                         provided    in   Home   Office
Circu l a r 77/1987 which is included in your papers.

This Circular refers to a central principle:           this is "that where the Police
A u t h o r i t y considers that an officer has a c t e d in good faith in pursuance
of his duties or that the interests of the Force as a whole are involved
(and both of these conside rations are fully satisfied in this case) the
o f ficer should have the support of the P o l i c e Authority to ensure that he
has the services of a lawyer and that he s h o u l d not be out-of-pocket".
/


                                                 -   2   -




    I wish to emphasise that all these officers were "acting in good faith in
    pursuance of their duties" and u n d o u b t e d l y "the interests of the Force as
    a whole are involved".   Also, the further risks these officers fear are
    very real.

    Parag r a p h 13 refers specif i c a l l y to "Legal Representation for Individual
    Offic ers"     particularly to     occasions    when   "the Chief   Officer's legal
    representative cannot r e a s o n a b l y  be expected   to represent the separate
    interests of officers".

    This issue has been considered on your behalf by the lawyers representing
    the Autho rity and the Chief C o n s t a b l e in this matter.    Their advice is that
    independent   legal  repres e n t a t i o n is  appropriate   for   all  the  officers
    concerned.

    In the Circular reference is s p e c i f i c a l l y made to the Authority "wishing
    in particular to assess w h ether o f f i cers are at risk of being held to blame
    for actions in connection w i t h the deaths to which an Inquest relates and
    w h e r e any such finding m i g h t g i v e rise to legal proceedings for which the
    Police Authority would be liable or for which financial assistance might
    be appropriate".      It will be seen therefore the advice in this Circular
    relates very precisely to our situation.



    Finance

    Th e Circular makes it clear          that   exp enditure   incurred    in   this   regard   is
    e l i g i b l e for police grant.

    W h e n this Committee last con sid e r e d these applications questions were raised
    ab o u t the private insurance a v a i l a b l e to the chief superintendent and three
    superintendents.     I can now i n f o r m you that:-

       a.     Through the   insurance     provided by Allianz Cornhill each
              officer has a financial limita t i o n of £50,000 which after
              VAT is taken into a c coun t amounts in fact to £42,500 each.

       b.     The  policy does  not  specif i c a l l y cover Inquest Hearings
              but my u nderstanding is that the insurers are prepared to
              provide cover in this instance.

       c.     In relation to future risks the officers may need further
              legal advice and r e p r e s e n t a t i o n after the Inquest Hearings
              have been concluded, for example, in relation to criminal,
              private or discipline p r o ceedings.          If the Director of Public
              Prosecutions were   to b r i n g         criminal proceedings,     in the
              first instance the P olice A u t h ority could not - even if
              they so wished - fund the officers' legal costs.               Also there
              is   no   provision    for        the       Authority   to   fund    legal
              representation at discip l i n e hearings.           Therefore, in terms
              of the insurance provision, such possible future requirements
              must be borne in mind.
Some information is now available as to the e x te nt these officers have
already incurred legal costs and their estimate of costs likely to be
incurred through representation at the Inquest Hearings.    I can provide
you with the details as you wish.

In relation to the two constables, they do not have private insurance but
to date have been supported from Police Federation funds. Their application,
as with the chief superintendent and three superintendents, is for Police
Authority funding in relation to legal costs incurred by them at the Inquest
Hearings.



Separate Representations

The Circular, at paragraph 14, makes clear that officers             should normally
be given the opportunity by the   Police A u t h o r i t y to make    representations
to them if they so wish.

With the exception of    Constable   Smith, all the officers   and some legal
advisors are in close    attendance.    Some      of    them  have intimated they       may
wish to exercise their right to appear before you today and make their own
representation as to their appli cation for financial assistance.



Recommendation

South Yorkshire Police officers must be able to go about their normal duties
secure in the knowledge that pr ovided they act in good faith and to the
best of their ability    they will always be d e s e r v i n g of and receive the
support of this Police Authority, including financial provision for legal
representation when that is appropriate.

I have no hesitation whatsoever in recommending to you that the proper course
of action is for these applications to be fully supported.




Deputy Chief Constable
2 November 1990
ORAL REPRESENTATIONS MADE BY CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD TO
THE POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING - 2 NOVEMBER 1990

At the outset of the meeting Superintendent Marshall had said he
felt that the Police Authority would expect him to take decisions
in the direst circumstances. That day was direst circumstances.
It was crucial to public confidence that Police Commanders felt
confident that they will be supported.    Thus the application for
legal costs. He thanked the members for the opportunity to speak
to them.
Chief Superintendent     Duckenfield then had the following exchange
with members
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
He would wish to be associated with the previous remarks.      the
Deputy Chief Constable without the support of the Police Authority
would be unable to arrange representation for them.
Councillor G Gallimore
What about the Superintendents’ Association?
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
Not in these circumstances. The cost falls on the individuals.
Councillor G Gallimore
What cost?
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
So far £34,000. About £16,000 remains. If he has to face a
private prosecution or discipline he will have no funding for
representation.
Councillor Swindell
Each of the Superintendents took out £50,000 insurance so there is
a total of £200,000.
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
This counts individually.     When VAT is considered £50,000 becomes
£42,000.
ORAL PRESENTATION HADE BY DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE, PETER HAYES TO
THE POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING - 2 NOVEMBER 1990
In relation to a question on the cost of legal representation for
Pol ice Officers, Mr Hayes said he had asked solicitors for
estimates of what the costs might be and had some rough figures
available.
In response to the following questions from Councillor Walayat:-
"HOC 77/87
Did they act in good faith.
Lot of material facts.
Whole argument is do they satisfy the criteria.   Until   after   the
inquest not in a position to make a judgement."
Mr Hayes said:
"The officers on the day were faced with a situation which was
wholly unanticipated. If they were not acting in good faith then
must have been bad faith, and must have set out to cause the
disaster."
Extract from a note of the meeting of the Police Authority on 16 November 1990
Coughlin and D Duckenfield
Coughlin   Implications for DD of decision today are grave.   No need to speak on
           applicability and qualifications of HO Circular.
           Risk of further prosecution relatively small.   Assessment of risk is
           primary to financial issue.
           2 areas of risk     1    DPP
                               2    Private Prosecution
           DPP decided insufficient evidence for prosecution. Letter. Also
           letter any fresh evidence will be considered by DPP - door not
           closed. Inquests - forum for new fresh evidence.
           Private Prosecution - Inquest - final chance to get fresh evidence
           for private prosecution.
           Inquest - Key point of new fresh evidence - Coroner 238 witnesses as
           to fact - also expert witnesses.
           Majority did not give evidence at Public Inquiry - may have given
           statement to WM Police.
           Inquest - all evidence orally. Coroners rules - not restricted to
           giving evidence as given previously. Every word potentially fresh
           new evidence. Coroner has to decide how died. Danger area is the
           legal representatives of 10 groups who will examine witnesses.
           Practical effects of lack of representation - anything affecting him
           will go unchallenged.
           Insurance cover - largely expended.
           Any evidence will go unchallenged. Point is we attend when DD giving
           evidence. Anybody could give prejudical evidence then it will be on
           record.
           Likelihood of evidence against DD Man in charge on the day.
           Criticism of him will follow. He is only officer suspended.    He bore
           brunt of Taylor criticism.
           DD bears anguish and anger of relatives.   They will be represented at
           the inquest on every day.
           Relatives - lack forum for their views - DD has to put evidence on
           record.
           If he is not represented then case may be built without any right of
           reply.
           Conclusion that legal representatives for 10 opposing parties - DD
           will be focus of attention.
- 2 -


               DD not asked for full costs - junior Cl or solicitor on each
               day.
               Financial question - risks real as private insurance is largely
               exhausted therefore DD in firing line. Virtually gone.
               Minimum acceptable level of representation - Counsel and
               Articled Clerk.
               My assessment of legal costs for DD - based on 8 weeks - £40,000
               and VAT and disbursements (travelling) - thereafter 4.5 to 5k
               per week.
               Rebate from HO Funds?
               In conclusion - DD has had fully backing of Chief Constable and
               Deputy Chief Constable and DCC that done best and acted in good
               faith - he has inadequate representation - without backing then
               wide open to real risks - tried without success to get funding
               elsewhere.
C Constable     Point clarification.
                DPP - police authorities - insufficient evidence - corporations
                no evidence. You made no distinction.
Coughlin   As representative of DD - police officers insufficient evidence.      Any
           evidence against any party could be reconsidered.
C Betts    Clarify - Ivan Walker said not take a/c of any alternate funding.
           You say DD needs funding.
Coughlin   I am saying that DD has no funds.
           Putting position on DD funds.
S Walker   Emphasised that DD under greatest risk of criticism - Coroner - 6
           categories. Need representative on every day?
Coughlin   Any fresh evidence - could come from any witness.   There are civil
           proceedings in progress.




WP006684
S o licilo is                  Teleph one


C l o t h H a l l C'o uit
                               0 M 2 430.VM
                               Telex                                     HEP WORTH
I n f i r m a r y S tr e e t
Leeds
                               557917
                               Facsimile'
                                                                         & C H A D W IC K
(.S I 2JB                      0 5 3 2 4 5 6 IKK                         A M E M B E R O F EVE RS H ED S
                               D X 12 02 7 L e e d s




                                                                                                    14 N o v ember 1990

                                                                         Y o u r R ^ lc r u n c V




I N CO NFID E N C E                                                      Om     K c U - jv ik l'    L/CCC/3/mci/
                                                                                                     DUCKENFIELD

M r S W alk er
S o l i c i t o r to the South Y o r k shire
Joint Secretariat
P O 37
R egent Street
Barnsle y
S YORKSHIRE S70 2DX



S E N T B Y F A X 0226 7304 42 A N D P O S T

De a r Sir

Chief Superintendent D G D u c k e n f i e l d - H illsbrough
Inquests

We r e f e r to the W r i t e r ' s l e t t e r to M r R C J o h n s t o n d a t e d 7th N o v e mber,
t o g e t h e r w i t h o u r s u b s e q u e n t t e l e p h o n e c o n v e r s a t i o n s from w h i c h we
b e l i e v e y o u n o w f u l l y a p p r e c i a t e Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t D u c k e n f i e l d ' s
position.

We      are       grateful   for   your   confirmation           that   in  response   to
representations, the P o l i c e A u t h ority will revie w its decisi on as to the
p r o v i s i o n of funds to Chief Superi n t e n d e n t Duckenfield. We understand the
special ly conven ed m e eting will be this coming Friday

You asked for some c l a r i f i c a t i o n on the question of the sug gested figure
for costs as set out in o u r letter of the 7th November. This figure w a s
c o n s i d e r e d on the b a s i s of the I n q u e s t s r u n n i n g for 8 w e e k s a n d w a s
e x c l u s i v e of VAT.

Co u n sel's Clerk has a g r e e d to r educe the Brief fee to £5,000 with a daily
re f r e s h e r fee of £500, t o g ether w i t h V A T thereon. An articled clerk will
n e e d to be in a ttendance to instruct Counsel. In addition, there will b e
c o s t of Briefing Counsel a nd In stru c t i n g Solicitors' attenda nce at Court
a s r e q u ired. T h e r e f o r e , w e w o u l d c o n s i d e r that a f i g u r e of £ 4 0 , 0 0 0 for
t h e 8 w e e k s w o u l d be the m i n i m u m r e a l i s t i c f i g u r e for r e p r e sentation,
t o g e t h e r w i t h VAT and d i s b u r s e m e n t s s u c h as travell ing expenses.

If the I n q u e s t s r u n o v e r the 8 w e e k period, we c o n s i d e r                              the m i n i n u m
w e e k l y cost to be £5,000 plus VAT and disbursements.

Finally,             we can confirm that          the A l l i a n z / C o r n h i l l Insurers have
r e - a f f i r m e d that n o f u n d s w i l l b e a v a i l a b l e to Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
D u c k e n f i e l d over and a bove the a g r e e d limit of £50,000. As you know, this
sum has             largely been exhausted   during   the   previous    12    months       in
r e p r e s e n t i n g his interests.

At present, the W r i t e r would antici p a t e attending     the hearing on       Friday
to g e t h e r w i t h Chief S u p e rintendent Duckenfield.

Should you require any further          information,    please   d o not h e s i t a t e   to
contact the Writer, Mr Coughlin.



Y ours faithfully
   .rotors              T e le p h o n e


C loili H all C o u n
                        05 3 2 430391
                        T elex
                                                                          HEPWORTH
In firm ary S tree t
Leeds
                        557917
                        F acsim ile
                                                                          & CHADW ICK
LSI 2JH                 0532 456188                                       A M E M B E R O F E V ERSHEDS
                        D X 120 27 L e e d s




                                                                                                   20 N o v ember 1990



IN C O N F I D E N C E
                                                                          O u r R e tc r c r K V   L/CCC/3/mci
                                                                                                   D U CKENFIELD
Mr S Walker
S o l i citor to the South Yorkshire Joint
S ecretariat
PO Box 37
Regent Street
Barns ley
S Y O R K S H I R E S70 2DX



S E N T BY F A X 0226 730442 A N D POST



De a r Sir

Ch i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t D G D u ckenfiel d
H i l l s b o r o u g h Inquests.

W e r e f e r to C h i e f      Superintendent's D u c k e n f i e l d 's a p p l i c a t i o n for
f inancial s u pp ort to the South Yorkshire Police Authority and the meeting
h e l d on 16th N o v e m b e r 1990.

A s you are well aware, it is our view, exp ressed to you and the Authority
b o t h in w r i t i n g and by way of verbal submission, that the principal risk
to our Cl ient lays in n e w evid ence being adduced b efore the Coroner which
in t u r n m a y b e s u b m i t t e d to the D P P w h o may r e v i e w h i s d e c i s i o n n o t to
i n s t i t u t e crimina l proceedings. As you know, of equal concern, was that
a n y n e w e v i d e n c e m a y p r o v i d e a p l a t f o r m for i n d i v i d u a l s i n t e n t on
b r i n g i n g a p r i v a t e prosecution.

I n o w a t t a c h a c o p y of the f r o n t p a g e of the " S h e f f i e l d Star" for
y e s t e r d a y M o n d a y 19th N o v e m b e r 1990. T h e article is self explanato ry and
is c l early s u p p o r t i v e of our concerns o n behalf of Chief Su perintendent
D u c k e n f i e l d as to the r isks f a c e d by him, if h i s o w n p o s i t i o n is not
p r o p e r l y p r o t e c t e d b y legal r e p r e s e n t a t i o n at Court. W i l l you p l e a s e
e n s u r e that this i n formation is p l a c e d immediately b e f o r e the members of
t h e A u t h o r i t y a n d s t e p s t a k e n to r e c o n s i d e r t h e i r d e c i s i o n ,       as the
I n q u e s t s a r e n o w in s e s s i o n a n d e v i d e n c e is b e i n g heard.                     D u e to
i n s u f f i c i e n t funds,          w e h a v e h a d to take a d e c i s i o n to limit Chief
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t ' s D u c k e n f i e l d ' s r e p r e s e n t a t i o n to a m a t t e r of d a y s in
Court.          T h i s d e c i s i o n is m a d e s o as n o t to e x h a u s t the m o n i e s left
a v a i l a b l e to h i m u n d e r the Insurance Policy, in order that we may p r ovide
s o m e r e p r e s e n t a t i o n to h i m in r e s p e c t of any f o r t h c o m i n g d i s c i p l i n a r y
proceedings.
Will y o u p l e a s e c o n t a c t the Writer,   Mr   Coughlin, without delay.



Yours f ait hfully

H E P W O R T H & CHADWICK.
      ^                                        NEWSPAPER OF THE YEAR^0 32,256 Sheffie ld , Monday, N o ve m b e r 19, 1990                                                                                                      20p         ''

 -1*6 &AK                                                           *1h <s gfAtt                                                                                                                                                                                         $>tm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oh law,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                cottar               Bv Bill Broi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Y O U 'R E N I C K E D           . . .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               as th e s trong a r m o f the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               g a n g o f villans in Sheffie:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B ra n d is h in g llu n c h ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               “ p o lic c m c n " p ic tu re d left d.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1920 K eysto ne cop uniform,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               the d e sp erate -lo oking co n\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b y i h c i r b a l l and chains

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T h is week readers h a \ c th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               homcs more secure w it h ca>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               systems offere d in T h e Star




                                                             EVIDENCE’ ON
Dilemma over
                                                            ASTER DEATHS N E W e v id e n c e w hic h could le a d to m a n ­
                                                                         s la ug hter c h a r g e s a g a in s t H illsb o r o u g h
                                                                         d is a ster p o li ce c h ie fs co uld e m e r g e a t the
                                                                         e ig h t - w e e k in q u e s t w h ich r esu m ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ‘Dou
subs sell-off
                                                                         tod a y .



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             iTPTTi
                                                                            La wyer D o u g F raser, w ho represents 43 o f
                                                                         th e victim s' families, said he believed a sub*
                                                                         stantia! a m o u n t o f fresh in fo rm atio n no t given
 O U N D 2 00 T e t l e y           remainder must be sold or            to the T a y lo r inqu iry h a d n ow been gathered.
i lo r d s are co n sid e rin g     released without any lie.
                                                                            F am ilies ho p e it will be e n o u g h to b rin g in 95
                                       B ritain's largest brewer.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              cha
 r fu tu re as the bre w *
                                    Bass. announced its plans            unla wful killing verdicts which could force the
 d ccid c w h ic h p u b s in
  re g io n to sell off.            last week, affecting more            D ir e c to r o f Public P ro se cu tion s to p ut several
 o m c 2 . 0 0 0 o f A llie d
                                    than 200 South Yorkshire             senio r Sheffield police officers in the dock.
                                    pubs.
  a c i V s 6 . 0 0 0 p u b lic                                          D P P A lla n G re e n Q C          .— B y ----------------
       — including Teiless             Allied licences ha\c been ru le d several weeks ago
 wtl! be released b> the                                                                                      B OB W ESTERDALE
                                    offered ihrec opuoiis for t h a t t her e was not                                                                                                                                                                           A R E L A T I V E o f tw o
                                                                                                                 C h ie f R e p o rte r
  p.m> under monopolies             iheir fmure:
   .iiion.                                                          enough evidence to b rin g                                                                                                                                                                  e ld e rly S h e ffie ld
                                    • A rei.nl pjrin ershtp wiih
                                                                    c r im in a l charccs.             " I f the jucv (tears n e w cvi-                                                                                                                          s \svc\s w h o                  a
 «.u\'ji;Mions arc under-           ih e h r ew e i u h e re t hc
       i i h a ll licensees.        licensee operates midway            A p e t i t i o n o f 5 0.u 0u deuce or c\idence presented                                                                                                                               h ous e fire a p p e a re d s.
 •>uch a decision on who            b et w c e n a t e n a n t a nd           demanding a U-turn in a different light, the DPP                                                                                                                                   in c o u r t t o d a y
    he j f f e c t c d is s t ill                                          delivered to ihc Home can be asked io look again.
                                     • A vanguard lease run­ Office Iasi week
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 cha rged with d o u b le ,,
 tied.                                                                                                      ” Wc arc now 19 months
  c u c rs           'lowed a       ning o \c r 10 years.               S p e a k in g b e f o r e the on and evidence not avail­                                                                                                                                m u rde r.                  >r
                                     # A llo w in g ih e ir pub 10 inquest started ai Sheffield able then may be now."                                                                                                                                                                                rr.
  im u in            ,00 pubs                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ian D a v id K e n t z e r .
  half o f the oalunce. The          become a free house.           Town Hall. M r Fraser said:
                                                                                                            Hesaid that “ a significant                                                                                                                          a g e d -24. o f S p ita l H ill.    di
                                                                                                        p roportion" o f the 200 w it­                                                                                                                           S heffield, is accused o f           h.



    ac ackmsons
                                                                                                        nesses 10 be called did not                                                                                                                              m u r d e r i n g h is g r a n d -   E,
                                                                                                        appear at the lime of the                                                                                                                                m o t h e r Jessie T h o m a s .     O
                                                                                                       Ta ylor inquiry.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 89. and g re a t-a u n t 92-
                                                                                                         TEE STAR SAYS El                                                                                                                                        y e a r -o ld M a r y G o o d -      ai

  ?ash o ff coats gives you                                                                                 B arry Devonsid c. w ^ o
                                                                                                         lost his son Christopher,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r ic h o n o r a b o u t O ct*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o b c r 3 0 (his year.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LV



   s u p e r s ea s o n a l savings                                                                      aged 18. said: “ I hope at last
                                                                                                         we will get to the truth.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    His appearance came
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 after he was interviewed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ti
                                                                                                            **We believe the inquest                                                                                                                             and chatgcd at the week-               H
                                                                                                         should pro vide sufficient                       Je s s ie (left) and M a ry be fore the fatal fire                                                     end at S h e f f i e l d ' s           b;
                                                                                                         evidence to reopen the issue
-iOWER JACKETS.                                                                                          o f c rim in a l charges and
 ere ‘s £ 5 off th e usual price                                                                         bring those people who arc




                                                                                                                                                £15,000 says                                                                                                            FANT,
                                                                                                         so clearly responsible for the
 all styles (excluding                                                                                   deaths to justice".
 lemac and Dannimac).                                                                                       M r Devonside added the
o m colourful Ski-wear to                                                                                campaign w;is not just on
 ssic designs.
   Continental Style Jacket
                                                                                                         behalf o f the 95. but iwo
                                                                                                         o th ers. T o n y b la n d and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
Jilt or thermal lined in                                                                                 A ndrew Devine, who arc




                                                                                                                                                Maggie to win
                                                                                                         still in comas.
tumn shades. 10’s to 2 4 ’s.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1^
                                                                                                             L E G A L B IL L S
  9$               £35.99                                                                                   CoroncT D r Stefan Pop­
                                                                                                         per devoted the morning to
                                                                                                         legal submissions from some                                                                                                                                    Specialists in ho:
                                                                                                         of ihc dozen applicants at
                                                                                                         the hearing.                                                           Mrs Thatcher's aides threw thoughts about it and pass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        w indow dressin
                                                                                                                                           A S H E F F IE L D punt­
                                                      Em '.usv* Myluh shower )*'kets ifn i look g»«ai'      The policemen involved                                              everything into a desperate them on to her” .                                                offering an
                                                                                                                                           er h as p u t £15.000 on             bid to win victory in a quick        Such comments fuelled
                                                                                                         in the inquiry, including sus­
                                                                                                                                           M rs T h a t c h e r to win          kill.                             the idea that lo p To ries                             combination c
                                                                                                         pended Chief Supi Davtd
                                         £ 5 OFF SHOWERCOATS                                             Duckcnfield. facc having to       the T o ry lead ersh ip                  They fear that if voting by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 could urge Mrs Thatehcr to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 suind down if she failed to                                        and cl
                                                                                                         remortgage their homes for        battle.                              MP< goes in to a second
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  win o u trig h t in the first
                                      C h o o s e from a n extensive range of styles, some               legal bills which can run as         T h e - w a g e r w a s ro u n d the skid s w i l l be found o f voting tomorrow.                                          Ready made an
                                      with scarves, some drawstring, some stormcoats.                    high as £1.000 a day.
                                                                                                                                           reve ale d b y L a d b r o k e s     under   her.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     11 cscl tin e s u p p o r t e r s
                                      E.g. Military Style with scarf, quilted lining.                       The ju ry this afternoon       w h o are q u o t in g odds o f          Senior Y o rksh ire T o ry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 accused M rs T h a tc h e r's                             curtaini all a
                                      si2e 10's to 16*s.                               — -v              was expected to hear outline
                                                                                                                                           one to three in f a v o u r o f
                                                                                                                                                                                M P Sir Marcus Fox today
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 aides o f panic                                                                        «
                                      Usually £5 5.                               t5 0                   o f the tragedy from former
                                                                                                         West Midlands police chief
                                                                                                                                                                                acknowledged it would be
                                                                                                                                           the P rim e M i n is t e r w ith " a t o t a lly d if fe r e n t ball     The heat was turned up                             Pelm ets, valanci
                                      (Offer excludes Telem ac & Dannimac)                               Mervyn Jones, who headed          c h a l l e n g e r M t c h a c l cam e” i f M r s T h a tc h e r today after Mrs Thatcher,                                                                  «
                                                                                                         ihe policc investigation.         H cscltin c a i seven to t w o Tailed to get a first round            said     M r Heseltinc's ideas                                      B lin d i o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 were “ more akin to some o f
              £ 10 OFF COATS                                                                                T h ey were also to see        again st.                            knock out and had to go
                                                                                                                                                                                in to a second ballot.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 the Labour Party policies.'“
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1000't o f pa
                                                                                                         video recordings made by             C o r a l q u o te the same                                           In an interview in The
  s. all fashion and classic styles of ladies full length                                                police and TV companies.          odds for Thatcher and four
                                                                                                                                           to one for boih Hcsehtne
                                                                                                                                                                                        ‘Hysterical*             Times she painted him as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 b a c k in g old -siv Je ideas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           half p r i c e c u
  rm. uo ol content coats have b een reduced by
                                                                                                                                           :ind l: o r e ic n S c c r c lii r v                                    hi.-h        , . , . v .,■> - c \ c r \ .
