                                                                                    APPewfct* B;
                                                               HOME OFFICE^
                                                     Queen Anne’s Gate Lokdok SW1H 9AT
                                       .   ;•»       ... *            A'i w01*213 v ..- '• ••-•at ?
                                                       "      Switchboard 01^213 3000    ^   ~ *’   "   .


  ' - Our reference ' POL/87    1 0 2 7 /1 /2 .
      your reference ' _ * "   7-                                          gOUTH 'YORKS

                                           •.    c r                                QDECt^T
                                                 occ
                                            Aw
                                            ~
                                               (S.S.<
                                                   .v?                                  - 4 December -1987
                                            ACC (M.S)
C                                                •



      Dear Sir

      HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 77/87
      FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

      There is statutory authority in section 48 of the Police Act 1964 for
      payments to be made from the police fund to meet expenditure incurred
      by police officers in defending proceedings in tort. Also, acting in
      pursuance of its general statutory duty to maintain an adequate and
       efficient police force for its area,’ the* police authority has
       discretion to meet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds of
       legal ‘proceedings vhere the officers have acted in good faith in
       pursuance of their duties, or the interests of the force as a whole
<v.    are involved. The purpose of this circular is to give guidance to
      kpolice authorities to help them in considering requests on behalf of
       officers for financial assistance. This guidance has been discussed
       and agreed with the .local authority and with the police staff
       associations.
      2.    The central principle which should guide consideration of
      individual cases is that, where a police authority considers that an
      officer has acted in good faith in pursuance of his duties or that
      the interests of a force as a whole are involved, the officer should
      have the support of the police authority to ensure that he has the
      services of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket. The
      following paragraphs provide general •guidance to the different
      classes of proceedings. Payments made to officers in accordance with
      this guidance will be eligible for police grant.


                                                                                                             1
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS   . ..                                 ^
Prosecution bv the Crown Prosecution Service
3. An officer who is the subject of a public prosecution for an
alleged offence committed while carrying out his duties as a police
officer is in the sane position as any other defendant and must be
expected to bear the costs of his defence. If he is acquitted, he
should, like any other defendant, look to the court for
reimbursement of his•expenses. If the costs are not paid, or not
paid in full from central funds, the police authority are in a
position to decide, on the full facts, whether or not to make a
payment to the officer or to the Police Federation if they have
provided the funding.   There may be cases where it is proper to
provide legal advice and/or legal representation even where the
officer is found guilty. This may arise for example in test cases
where the officer has been carrying out a practice hitherto
approved of but is found guilty as a result of that practice being
found unlawful by the court in the light of the circumstances of
that particular case.

Private Prosecutions
4. A police officer should be able to carry out his duties in the
confidence that, if he acts in good faith and exercises .his
judgement reasonably, his police authority will support him. If,
in a case where a member of the public brings a prosecution against
an officer, the authority is satisfied that the officer has acted
in this way, the authority should provide or fund legal advice
and/or representation.
5.   Where a court decides that a prosecution brought against an
officer was not brought in good faith, it may order the prosecutor
to pay the whole or any part of the costs incurred by the defence;
again, if the officer is acquitted on indictment, his costs may be
met from central funds. In either of these cases, the question of
the police authority providing financial support to the officer may
not arise. However, where the costs of an acquitted officer are
not awarded by the court or-^awarded only in part, the police
authority should consider whether to reimburse any costs not
covered, taking into account the reasons, if any, given by the
court for failing to award all costs claimed.

CIVIL PROCEEDINGS
civil Actions Against the Chief Officer for Wrongful Acts of
Constables
6. Under section 48(1) of the Police Act 1964, the chief officer
of a force is liable in respect of torts committed by constables
under his direction and control (which includes special constables
and officers of other forces serving in the police area under
mutual aid arrangements) in the performance or purported
performance of their functions. Under section 48(2) any damages or
                                                                  2
costs awarded against the chief officer in such proceedings, any
costs he incurs himself, and any sum paid in connection with the
settlement of a claim, provided the settlement is approved by the
police authority, must be paid out of the police fund. In such
cases, therefore, the police authority's discretion extends only to
whether or not to approve a proposed settlement of the claim.
                       •                  •   •




Civil Actions Against Individual Police Officers
7. Alternatively, the plaintiff may be awarded damages against an
individual police officer, though he cannot recover the damages
twice over against the chief officer as well. Section 48(4) of the
Police Act 1964 specifically empowers a police authority Mto such
extent as they think fit" to pay out of the police fund any damages
or costs awarded against an officer, any costs he incurs*himself,
and any sums paid in connection with ths settlement of a claim.
This provision applies to actions against officers of the
authority's own force, officers of another force serving the police
area’under mutual aid arrangements, and special constables for the
police area. In considering whether to give financial assistance
the authority will wish to consider in particular whether the
officer concerned acted in good faith and exercised his judgement
reasonably. Where the court finds for the officer, he may seek his
costs from the plaintiff? should the costs not be awarded or
awarded only in part, the police authority should consider whether
to reimburse any costs not covered, taking into account the
reasons, if any, given by the court for failing to award all costs
claimed.
.8. Joint actions naming both the chief officer and an individual
 police officer may be brought in some cases. In such cases it is
 important that any discussion of the merits and quantum of the
 proposed settlement should involve all the parties named in the
 claim together with advisers even if they are represented by
 different advisers.

Civil Actions Under the Data Protection Act 1984
m                  ^


9. Under sections 22 and 23 of the Data Protection Act 1984 an
individual who suffers damage as a result of the inaccuracy, loss
or unauthorised disclosure of personal data is entitled to
compensation from the data user. In the absence of any case law on
these provisions, it is unclear whether the acts covered by
sections 22 and 23 amount to torts, to which the guidance in
paragraphs 6 and 7 above applies. If not, section 48 of the Police
Act 1964 does not apply. However, the position is broadly the
same.    Under section 38(3) (a) of the 1984 Act constables are
treated as servants of the chief officer for the purposes of the
Act. A chief constable is therefore liable for the acts of his
officers falling within sections 22 and 23 in the same way as he is
liable for their .torts under section 48(1). The position of non­
police officers is less clear but it is possible that in some cases
the chief constable might be regarded as having liability for their
acts. It follows that it would be proper for the police authority
to meet' all costs, .including any 1award of ‘compensation, T arising
from this liability. It should be noted that the liability of the
Hdata -user" under the Act ' is not vicarious but his personal
liability. Therefore his own care in having instituted a system of
obtaining, checking and recording data which would reasonably guard
against error and loss tinder section 23(3) of the Act should meet
his responsibility tinder section 22(3) and .he •should ;not be ...held
liable if one of his officers disregards the system established.
10. Where compensation is sought from an individual officer, the
police authority will wish, in considering whether to meet the
costs which would otherwise -fall on the officer, to take account of
the same matters as in exercising their power under section 48(4)
of the Police Act 1964 (see paragraph .7). Police authorities
should apply the same broad principles and in particular, meet the
costs of any compensation awarded against a chief constable where a
non-police officer is at fault and the chief constable is found to
have liability for the actions performed.
                           •                    .   .   »   •   •   •




Police Officers Bringing Civil Actions for Defamation
11.   There may be occasions when financial assistance is sought
from a police authority to enable an officer to bring or consider
bringing a civil action for defamation.         An authority has
discretion to give such assistance but it will be eligible for
police grant only if the following criteria are all met:-
     (a) the defamation is serious;
     (b) it relates to the actions of an officer acting or
     said to be acting in the discharge of his duty;
     (c)   it has attracted public attention;
     (d)   to bring the action is considered tobe in the
     interests of the force or of the police service as a
     whole; and              ^
     (e) the action stands a reasonable chance of success.
Criterion (d) is central. If only the reputation of the individual
officer is in question, he is in the seme position as any other
citizen and must be expected to seek his own remedy.         But an
allegation against a particular officer say well reflect on the
reputation of the whole force or be an example of wider allegations
against the force or a significant section of it. In such cases
the police authority, provided the other criteria are satisfied,
nay reasonably be expected to help to. defend the reputation of the
force.
INQUESTS, PUBLIC ENQUIRIES AND TRIBUNALS
Legal Representat ion for Chief Officers-    '

12   Anv interested party may be legally represented at an inquest
bui a“ hls o “ «^.nse since expenses are pay^le only to vitnesses
and jurors. An interested party will n ° n i i a l l y be entitied w be
legally represented at a public enquiry or o th e r                   •
Where the interest of the force is affected, it will be-Wropriate
for the police authority to provide at ^s^expense for the chief
officer to be legally represented on behalf of the force.

Legal Representation for Individual Officers
13. Separate representation for individual officers vhose interest
is involved nay be necessary. For example, there will be
when (a) the chief officer's legal representative cannot^reasonably
be expected to represent the separate interests of sucn o n icers
and (b) the police authority considers that such             *£cial
b e represented. In such cases the authority shouid giv^iiMnci
assistance to the officers.       In considering <b) «J»ve, the
authority will wish in particular to assess whether the officers
are at risk of being held to blame for actions in connection
the death to which the inquest relates and whether any suc£
might give rise to legal proceedings for the costs of %teich th
police authority would be liable under section 48(1) °£
Act 1964 or for which financial assistance night be appropriate
within the terns of this circular.

 APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
 14.    An officer wishing to seek financiLai assistance / « m his
 police authority should have the opportunity in advance.of.as well
 as on the conclusion of the proceedings to subnit to the chief
 officer an application for financial assistance. The chief officer
 should put this, together with his own reconmendation to
 authority for decision. The officer should normally be given the
 opportunity by the police authority to make representations to then
 if he wishes to do so.
 is    if it decides to give finuxicial assistance, the authority
 should inform the officer concerned that, if t h e in£o™
 which they based their decision to grant the assistance is shown
 subsequent legal proceedings to be inaccurate                 5t ±s
 authority will normally expect, to recover the money unless it
 to^V^^i^toe^on^^w^d^involW^tte^^lS^V^Tn^substantial
 «s?s^nie and ^ e n ° X c £ “ s’ in t“ e U g h / J

             sssxvsss
 incurred by the officer in seeking legal advice or assistanc .


                                                                      5
Assistance from Police Federation FlKldg                    : *
16. Under Regulation 19 of the Police Federation Regulations 1969,
as amended, Federation funds may be used to defray legal charges
incurred by a member in connection with criminal proceedings
brought against him 'for an offence under the road traffic
enactments (other than offences involving driving when impaired by
drink or drugs or taking a vehicle without authority), or for
offences of causing the death or.injury of any person, or for any
assault, or in connection with his action for libel or slander. An
officer seeking financial assistance in circumstances covered by
Regulation 19 should seek such assistance from the police authority
in the first instance. If the police authority does not consider
the request to fall within the terms of this circular, the
Federation nay then consider the application within the terms of
Regulation 19. If the officer receives legal assistance fron the
Federation the terms of Hone Office Circular Ho 26/1967 will
continue to apply.
17. ''General enquiries about the content of this circular nay be
addressed to Hr Waghorn, Hone Office, FI Division on (01) 213 4208.
                                            Yours faithfully




                                             M J ADDISON
