                                                    HOME OFFICE
                                            Queen Anne’s Gate London SWUrt>9AT
                                                   Direct line: 01*273
                                                  Switchboard: 01*273 3000



Our reference: pgp /g j 35/48/36                                   June 1991
Your reference:
    To the Chief Executive:

             County Councils
             Metropolitan District Councils
             London Borough Councils
             Common Council of the City of London


    Dear Sir/Madam

    HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 46/1991

    FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989: POWERS OF THE FOOTBALL LICENSING
    AUTHORITY IN RELATION TO FOOTBALL GROUNDS DESIGNATED UNDER THE
    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

    Introduction and background

    1.   This Circular describes the role of the Football Licensing
    Authority and those of its powers in relation to safety at
    football grounds which came into effect on 3 June 1991.

    2.   The Football Licensing Authority (FLA) was created by
    section 8 of the Football Spectators Act 198S (the 1989 Act).
    Part I of this Act was originally intended to permit the
    introduction of a football membership scheme.     The FLA was
    intended to oversee the operation of the membership scheme and
    the arrangements to prevent or mitigate the effect of offences
    at designated football matches through the operation of a
    football licensing scheme.

     3.   Following Lord Justice Taylor's final report on the
     Hillsborough stadium disaster, the Government decided not to
     proceed with the proposals for a national membership scheme. It
     decided, however, that the FLA should still be set up to ensure
     the implementation of certain key recommendations in the Taylor
     report,   in particular recommendations     nos.  1-4   Con the
     introduction of all seated accommodation) and 6(a ), relating to
     a national inspectorate and review body with power to review the
     discharge of certain safety functions by local authorities.

     4.   The Football Spectators Act 1989 (Commencement no.1) Order
     1990 (SI 1990 No.690 (c.21)) brought into force (in March or June
     1990) sections 8 and 10-12 of the 1989 Act (see Appendix A)
     concerning the Football Licensing Authority, along with other
     provisions creating new powers to deal with those convicted of
     certain football related offences.
5.   Section 13 of the Act, which came into effect on 3 June
1991, provides that the FLA shall keep under review the discharge
by local authorities of their functions under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 in relation to sports grounds at which
designated football matches are played (see Appendix B) and
confers certain powers upon the FLA vis a vis local authorities
and sports grounds.   Further details of section 13 are set out
in Appendix A.   A copy of the relevant Commencement Order (SI
1991 No. 1071 (c.28)) is annexed.

6.   Section 9 of the Act, which creates the offence of admitting
spectators to unlicensed premises, will be brought into force
when the Football Licensing Authority is in a position to issue
licences to all grounds.    This is currently expected to be in
time for the 1992/93 football season.

The Football Licensing Authority

7.   Under section 8 of the Act the Football Licensing Authority
comprises a Chairman and not more than 8 other members, of whom
six have been appointed.     Pending an imminent move to more
permanent accommodation in central London, the Authority's
address is Room 1020A, 50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT.
Its telephone number is 071 273 2322 or 2285.     A list of the
names of members of the Authority, of the Chief Executive and of
the Authority's inspectors, who began their programme of visits
to local authorities,     the police and fire services,      and
inspections of football grounds on 3 June, is also annexed.

Su p p Iementarv

8.   The information in this circular and in the Appendices is
given in good faith but it should be understood that only the
courts can rule authoritatively on points of law.

9.   Any enquiries about this circular should be directed to
Mr S Bilbe (071 273 4138).    Any enquiries about the manner in
which the Football Licensing Authority proposes to undertake its
responsibilities should be addressed to the Chief Executive of
the Authority.

10. Copies of this circular, its appendices and annexes have
been sent for information to fire authorities, fire and civil
defence authorities, Chief Officers of Police, and to Chief Fire
Officers.    Copies are also being sent to the Football
Association, the Football League and all football clubs occupying
football grounds designated under the 1975 Act.

                                         Yours sincerely



                                         P E BOLTON

                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)
                                                      APPENDIX A


Provisions of the Football Spectators A ct 1989 relevant to t-fag
powers and duties of the Football Licensing Authority

Section 8 creates the Authority and provides for members to be
appointed by the Secretary of State.

Section 9 creates the offence of admitting spectators to
unlicensed premises. (This section has not yet been brought into
force).
Section 10 provides the Authority with power to issue licences
to permit spectators to any premises for the purposeof watching
any designated football match. The Authority has discretion to
impose terms and conditions, which if the Secretary of State so
directs, may include conditions imposing requirements as respects
the seating of spectators. The section also creates the offence
of contravention of any term or condition of a licence.

Section 11 permits the Secretary of State to direct the Licensing
Authority to include conditions in licences relating to seating.

Section 12 is concerned with the revocation and suspension of
licences.
Section 13(1) gives the Authority the functions of keeping under
review the discharge by local authorities of their functions
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 in relation to sports
grounds at which designated football matches are played.

Sub-section (2) enables the Authority to require a local
authority to include such terms and conditions in any safety
certificate as may be specified and requires the local authority
to comply with this requirement.

Sub-section (3) requires the Authority to consult the local
authority, the Chief Officer of Police and either the fire
authority or the building authority before making a requirement
under (2), while sub-section (4) relieves the local authority
from the obligations to consult on the same matters.

 Sub-section (6) provides powers to the Authority's inspectors to
 enter sports grounds at which designated matches are played, to
 make inspections and inquiries, to examine the safety certificate
 and related records and to take copies of them.

 Sub-section (7) enables the Authority to require relevant
 information from any local authority and places a duty on the
 local authority to comply with the requirement.

 Sub-section (8) removes the right of appeal against any term or
 condition in a safety certificate required to be included by the
 Football Licensing Authority.
                                                                     APPENDIX B


Designated football Matches


Designated    matches       are    defined    in   the    Football   Spectators
(Designation of Football Matches in England and Wales) Order 1990
(SI 1990 No. 731) as any association football match (played in
England or Wales) being a match which


     (a)     either forms part of a competition organised by or an
     behalf of the Union des Associations Europeenes de Football
     (UEFA) or involves a team which represents:


             (i)     a club which is at the time the match is played,
             a member (whether a full or associate member) of the
             Football League, or


             (ii)     a country or territory, or


             (iii)      a   club    in   a   country     or   territory   outside
             England and Wales, and


     (b)     is played at a sports ground which is, at the time the
     match is played, either designated by order under section
     1(1) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 or occupied
     by a club to which the description in sub-paragraph (a)(i)
     above applies.
              FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY




Chairman                N N Jacobs

Members                 A R Brannon CBE FIFireE
                        K J Bridge IPFA CBIM
                        T D Brooking MBE
                        R F Broome OBE QPM
                        S Inglis
                        Miss M Law FIFireE MSFSE MSFPE

Inspectors              J   A Chalmers
                        F   T Chambers OBE QPM
                        J   w Froggatt RIBA
                        R   H Grainger MIFireE
                        B   W Heath FIFireE
                        E   0 Sheridan M Inst AM
                        J   S Smith
                        A   Swales MIFireE MIRSM
                        G   B Wilson ARICS MIBC

Chief Executive         J R K de Quidt
