                                                      URGENT ITEM
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
---------------------------------------                                  T%
26 February 1999

Report of the Clerk and Treasurer

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER : PROGRESS ON LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

1     Matter for consideration

This report updates Members on the timetable for dealing with the Judicial
Review, and the possible financial implications of the various legal
proceedings which are either in progress or potentially pending.


      2      Recommendation

      Members are asked to note the report.


3     Background

3.1   The Authority has been informed that the Judge has accepted the
      application for an expedited hearing in the High Court. Originally this
      was scheduled for 26 April, but the Authority’s advisers have later
      been informed that it will commence on 13 April. It is expected to take
      up to 3 days.

      In accepting the case, the Judge also included the Hillsborough Family
      Support Group in the application (the Chief Constable being the
      applicant, the Police Authority being the first respondent, and HFSG
      now being the second respondent).

3.2   The Committal Hearing at Leeds Magistrates’ Court is scheduled to
      begin on Monday, 19 April, so clearly there will be insufficient time
      between the conclusion of the Judicial Review and the commencement
      of the Committal Hearing for the Authority to take any view on the
      outcome of the Judicial Review. Garretts have been asked to advise
      on the various options which might arise.

4     Estimated Costs

4.1   The Authority set aside £500,000 of reserves in August 1997 for
      expenditure in connection with the Scrutiny. Since February 1998,
      legal costs arising out of the defence have been charged to the
      reserve, and when the decision was made on 15 January 1999 to
      appoint Garretts, it was agreed that their costs would also be paid out
      of the reserve.


                                                                           1
4.2   Prior to the 5 February meeting the officers' legal advisers were
       requested to supply details of their costs to date. This information was
       included in their submissions to that meeting. Most of the costs
       remained unbilled on 12 January when the Authority wrote to the
       solicitors stating that no further payments would be made pending
       clarification of the legal position.

4.3   Both Garretts and the Chief Constable’s legal advisers have now been
       asked to supply their estimated costs to the conclusion of the Judicial
       Review.

4.4   Putting this information together with the former officers’ costs, the
      estimated position is as follows:-



      Former Officers' costs (to 12 January 1999)            240,000

      Police Authority costs (estimated to include
      Judicial Review)                                       102,000

      Chief Constable’s costs (estimated to include
      Judicial Review)                                        74,000

      Costs in connection with original Scrutiny              20,000

                                                           £ 436,000

      Notes:

      (i)      The notification to the Officers was to pay their reasonable
               costs. It is open to the Force and Authority to seek further
               information regarding the estimated bills.

      (ii)     Of the £240,000 estimated to have been incurred to 12 January,
               only £11,000 has actually been paid.

      Further proceedings

5.1   The Authority and the Chief Constable have so far only been
      financially involved in the initial defence costs and the forthcoming
      Judicial Review. There are potentially several further stages in the
      legal process which may evolve, dependent on the outcome of the
      present proceedings; the scope of any challenges; and the extent to
      which the District Auditor becomes involved.




                                                                             2
5.2   There are potentially two further Judicial Reviews

      ■   firstly of the DPP's decision not to intervene and take over the
          prosecution (the Authority was requested to provide support for
          this, but has not considered the matter)

      ■   secondly of the Sefton court's decision not to award costs to the
          Officers for the aborted Hearing in September 1998

5.3   The Committal Hearing is due to commence on 19 April and is
      scheduled for up to 4 weeks. Dependent on the outcome, it could go
      to the Crown Court and various stages of appeal (Court of
      Appeal/House of Lords). If the outcome at any stage is that the
      prosecution is thrown out, and is not then the subject of an appeal,
      defence costs should be recoverable.

5.4   The Authority could be asked to support any or all of these stages. Its
       response will be determined initially by the outcome of the current
       Judicial Review.

      In the case of challenges (by HFSG or any other party) or in response
      to inquiries by the District Auditor, the Authority will have no option but
      to respond. However it is normal practice for any large local authority
      to have specific budgetary provision or reserves to cover such legal
      costs.



W J W ilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer

Office responsible: Bill Wilkinson, Clerk to the South Yorkshire Joint
Secretariat. 01226 772803

Background papers used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection at the south Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, Barnsley.

Other sources and references: None



                                HOT FOR PUBUOATi'Cv* 03 It
                                                   f       ;• j .   i i v i   i          *«,-'* 1


                               -                       ^                  /2-                       .07
                                Sen,   'i   -:.v                                  '' :
                              i AC:




                                                                                                          3
