SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
ORDINARY MEETING; 28 JUNE 1991

PRESENT:   Councillor Sir John Layden (Chairman)
           Councillors: D A Axe, J M Cromar, R Fisher, D W George, R P McCormick,
           C Swindell, C M Walayat, R Whitfield
           Magistrate Members: Mrs B R Bullivant, Mr K Goodall, Mr J F Staniforth,
           Mr D E Wilburn

8    URGENT ITEMS
     The Chairman announced that he was adding to the Agenda an item dealing with
     “Orgreave - Out of Court Settlement" so as to update members on the position
     to date.
9    MINUTES
     RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Authority held on 24 May
     1991 be signed by the chairman as a correct record subject to the deletion
     of the work "financial" in the first line of minute 173.
10   FOLLOW UP SEMINAR - SUPPORTING THE FORUMS
     The Chief Constable referred to minute 4C of the Accountability Complaints
     and Discipline Committee meeting held on the 26 April 1991 and reported that
     the Police Beat supplement to the Star Newspaper was in abeyance due to

    1
     financial constraints at the Star. This could well be permanent and
     effamp+es. v<ere being examined.
     The Chief Constable welcomed the decision to invite magistrates to attend
     the forums. Despite the contrary view of the Lord Chancellors generally the
     Magistrate Members of the Authority were in favour of their attendance but
     felt that some understanding would be required on the part of the
     participants.
11   HM INSPECTOR - ANNUAL INSPECTION
     The Chief Constable referred to minute 181 and reported that the visit of HM
     Inspector of Constabulary would now take place between 18 and 22 November
     1991.
12   MEETINGS OF THE AUTHORITY AND ITS COMMITTEES 1991/92
     RESOLVED
     1     That the meeting of the Finance and General Purposes Committee
           scheduled for 3 January 1992 be postponed to 10 January 1992.
     2     That the meeting of the Authority scheduled for 29 November, be
           postponed to 13 December 1991.
                                                                                  1




13   MINUTES OF COMMITTEES
     A   Accountability. Complaints and Discipline
          RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Accountability,
          Complaints and Discipline Committee held on the 7 June 1991 as set out
          in Appendix 1, be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
     B   Finance and General Purposes
          RESOLVED - That the minutes of the Finance and General Purposes
          Committee held on the 21 June 1991, as set out in Appendix 2 be signed
          by the Chairman as a correct record.
     C   Minutes - Style
          Arising from the minutes of the Finance and General Purposes Committee
          the Chief Constable commented on the general style of minuting which
          did not admit the presence of police officers other than himself. The
          Clerk and Financial Officer undertook to look into this.
14   CRIME SUMMARY AND STATISTICS                                                     9
     The Chief Constable submitted the crime summary and statistics for January
     to April 1991 including comments by the respective Divisional Commanders on
     the crime position in each of the six divisions of the force.
     In accordance with the arrangements presented to the Authority at the last
     meeting, the crime statistics were presented in the new format.
     Compared with the same period in 1990 there had been an increase of 13% in
     recorded crime with a detection rate of 37% (44% over the same period of
     1990).
15   BURGLARY DWELLING OFFENCES
     Further to the previous minute the Chief Constable presented a report
     including graphical presentations which focused on and analysed burglary
     dwelling offences and making comparisons on a sub-Divisional basis. In the
     12 months to April 1991 36% of offences had been detected.
     In connection with this item and the previous item Authority discussed the
     problem of the ever increasing crime rate and the Home Office attitude that
     police authorities should constantly be able to produce improvements in
     service with ever declining resources. This was compounded by the RSG
     system which was not only an unfair way of distributing resources but the
     gearing effect also meant that for each 1% increase in spending by local
     authorities the amount raised locally had to be increased by a much larger
     percentage.
     RESOLVED:-
     1    That representations be made to the Home Office and Department of the
          Environment about the inherent unfairness of the SSA formula; that in
          view of the ever increasing crime rate it is not possible for this
          Police Authority to continually increase its ability to cope whilst
          real resources decline.
     2    That representations be made to the AMA about the way that Total
          Standard Spending (TSS) is distributed.
- 3 -

        3   That briefings be arranged for South Yorkshire Members of Parliament.
16      CHIEF CONSTABLES ANNUAL REPORT 1990
        The Authority considered certain specific comments on the Chief Constable's
        Annual Report for 1990.

17   PRINCIPLES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
        A report by the Clerk and Financial Officer referred to a joint statement by
        the local authority associations on the principles of local government. The
        Authority considered the statement which set out in broad terms the case of
        democratic local government and the need for local authorities to raise
        finance, determine levels of expenditure and manage their own affairs.
        RESOLVED:-
        1    That the statement on the principles of local government be endorsed.
        2    That the Secretary of State for the Environment and South Yorkshire
             Members of Parliament be informed that the Authority supports the
             statement.
18 INTERNATIONAL SEMINAR - YOUTH AND CRIME - BIRMINGHAM
        A report by the Clerk and Financial Officer referred to the preparations for
        the second international conference on crime prevention and drug abuse to be
        held in Paris in November, 1991. These included an international seminar on
        Youth and Crime being organised by Birmingham City Council in co-operation
        with Crime Concern and NACRO, which would prepare a major report to the
        Paris conference on "Responding to Young People at Risk".
        RESOLVED - That one member from each District plus a magistrate member be
        nominated to attend this conference.
19 CIVILIAN ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS - MAGISTRATES COURTS COMMITTEES
        A joint report by the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
        referred to minute 16 of the meeting of the Finance and General Purposes
        Committee on 11 September, 1987 and minute 7 of 29 July, 1988, when the
        Authority had asked to be supplied with the results of a civilian
        enforcement officer effectiveness monitoring exercise. The Home Office had
        now declined to supply the exercise results except in the most general
        terms.
        The Authority reviewed the position across the County. Generally the
        Magistrates Courts Committees employed civilian enforcement officers so that
        the employment of police officers was kept to the minimum essential.
        However in Sheffield 3 civilian enforcement officers were employed by the
        Police Authority, but in addition 6 Constables had to be deployed. Despite
        the Home Office refusal to supply information this was contrary to the
        generally accepted position that police officers should be deployed only
        where they are warranted.
- 4 -

        RESOLVED - That the Home Office be advised that in the view of this
        Authority police officers are being deployed on duties more appropriate to
        civilians and this is contrary to the Home Office policy of civilianisation
        and that the Home Office be asked to reconsider the position in relation to
        the Sheffield area.
20      VISIT TO HOME OFFICE FORENSIC SCIENCE LABORATORY. WETHERBY
        A report by the Clerk and Financial Officer referred to minute 103 of the
        meeting of the Police Authority on 7 December 1990, when it was decided to
        take up an invitation to visit the Forensic Science Laboratory at Wetherby.
        Members and Officers visited the Laboratory on 17 June and saw a number of
        presentations on the contributions of forensic science to crime detection.
        The presentation had leaned heavily on the change in financing the forensic
        science service, taking it away from the Common Police Services Fund to a
        system where police authorities paid directly for the service they received.
        RESOLVED - That the report be received.
21      FOR INFORMATION
        The Authority noted Home Office Circulars on "Guidance to the Police in the
        line of the Public Order act, section 39" and the "Football Spectators Act
        1989".
22      LIST OF OUTSTANDING AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
     A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
     was submitted on outstanding and/or requested reports.
        RESOLVED - That the report be noted.
23      EXCLUSION OF PUBLIC AND PRESS
        RESOLVED - That, under section 100(A)(4) of the Local Government act, 1972,
        the public be excluded from the meeting for the following items of business
        on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure of exempt information
        as defined in paragraphs 1, 9 and 14 of Part 1 of Schedule 12A of the Act.
24      VOLUNTARY EARLY RETIREMENT
        A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
        referred to an application under the Authority's Voluntary early Retirement
        Scheme.
        RESOLVED - That consideration of this matter be deferred to the next meeting
        of the Finance and General Purposes Committee and that a further more
        detailed report be submitted.
25   AWARD OF POLICE AUTHORITY CERTIFICATE OF COMMENDATION
        A report by the Chief Constable referred to events where courageous action
        had been taken by a member of the public in assisting the police.
        RESOLVED - That a Certificate of Commendation be awarded in this case and
        the recipient invited to a future meeting to receive the award.
26   0R6REAVE - OUT OF COURT SETTLEMENT
     The Clerk and Financial Officer referred to minute 2 of the meeting of the
     Finance and General Purposes Committee on 21 June, when apologies had been
     demanded from Ivan Lawrence MP QC and the Look North BBC TV programme in
     connection with the out of court settlement of claims arising from the
     Orgreave industrial dispute.
     A satisfactory response had been received from BBC "Look North".
     Ivan Lawrence MP QC had replied that he was considering matters.
     RESOLVED:-
     1     That Ivan Lawrence MP QC be given a further 7 days to respond.
     2     That in the event of no satisfactory reply being received the Clerk and
           Financial Officer in consultation with the Chairman and Vice-Chairman
           be authorised to initiate further action.
     3     That a further report be made to the next meeting of the Finance and
           General Purposes Committee.
25   CHARGES FOR POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES
     (FOR THIS ITEM THE CHAIRMAN VACATED THE CHAIR AND LEFT THE MEETING.    THE
     CHAIR WAS TAKEN BY COUNCILLOR R FISHER)
     A report of the Clerk and Financial Officer referred to thecharges     for the
     policing of football matches in 1990/91 and 1991/92.
     In 1990/91 an interim policy   had been adopted of increasing recoveries from
     football clubs in 1990/91 by   50% compared to 1989/90. Agreement had been
     reached in respect of league   games but the clubs were resistingpayment of
     the 50% increase for cup and   other games.
     In considering the level of charges for 1991/92 the Authority considered
     Home Officer Circular 36/1991 which made it clear that charges should aim to
     achieve full recovery of police costs within a 5 year period although
     authorities could take account of local circumstances and the financial
     position of clubs.
     RESOLVED:-
     1      That the period within which the Authority proposes to move to recovery
           of the full cost be extended by one year ie to 1995/96 after allowing
           for the Chief Constable's further discussions with the clubs on the
           categorisation of matches.
     2      That a differential be applied to charges to reflect the circumstances
           of individual clubs.
     3      That this decision be further reviewed at the next meeting of the
           Authority.
     4      That the Authority reaffirm it previous position that the 50% increase
           in 1990/91 changes be applied to all games.

CHAIRMAN                                                          WP011534/SJL
