SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                                     3
FINANCE AND GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE
15TH SEPTEMBER 1989

PRESENT:
Councillor R Fisher (in the Chair)
Councillors J M Cromar and D W George

1.    APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRMAN FOR THE MEETING
      RESOLVED - That, in view of the unavoidable absence of the Chairman and
      Vice-Chairman, Councillor R Fisher be appointed Chairman for this
      meeting of the Committee.
2.   MINUTES
      RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of the Committee held on 21st
      July 1989 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
3*   REVENUE ESTIMATES 1989/90
a.   Revenue Monitoring 1989/90
      In accordance with Police Authority Minute 15 of 12th May 1989, a joint
      report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable was
      submitted on monitoring the Authority's 1989/90 Revenue Estimates as at
      9th August 1989.
      The detailed effects were set out in the report, but it was stressed that
      the projections took no account at this stage of any costs arising out of
      the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.
      RESOLVED
      1. That the contents of the report be noted.
      2. That the officers be requested to submit a report to a future meeting
         of the Committee on the effects of accommodating the projected
         overspend in the Authority's 1989/90 Revenue Estimates.
b.   Development Budget 1989/90 - Proposals Approved to Date
      A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
      was submitted detailing the proposals included within the development
      programme which had been approved to date and on the balance remaining in
      the development programme.
      RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
Pay and Price Increases and other Minor Variations 1989/90
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted on the current situation relating to the effects of
inflation and other variations in the Authority's approved Revenue
Estimates and the extent of which these needed to be financed from the
Contingencies provided.
The report detailed recent pay and price variations and other additional
costs, and summarised the present situation.
RESOLVED: That approval be given to:-
(i)     a supplementary Revenue Estimate of 12,646,000 gross (11,365,000 net
        of Police Grant) to be met out of the Pay and Price Contingency, and
(ii)    the use of savings totalling 145,200 by means of Diversions to meet
        part of the presently unfinanced additional costs.
CAPITAL MONITORING
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted on all capital schemes in respect of which payments were
expected to be made during the current financial year.
A detailed schedule showed current forecasts of total spending and of
current year spending in comparison with the provision made in the
approved Capital Programme.
The report detailed the reasons for the current year spending being
expected to be some 1173,100 (3.4%) less than the approved provision of
15,117,600.
RESOLVED - That the contents of the Capital Monitoring report now
submitted be noted.
PROJECT PROGRESS REPORT
The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on the progress being
made on the Authority's Capital Programme on a scheme by scheme basis.
RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
CIVILIAN STAFF
Additional Janitorial/Cleaning Requirements - Extension to West Bar Police
St a t Tori ~~SHefTTeTcT------------------

A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
was submitted on the need for additional Janitorial/Cleaning Requirements
on the completion of the 3 floor extension to the West Bar premises.
Provision for the proposals now submitted was contained in the Authority's
approved Revenue Estimates for 1989/90.
RESOLVED -
1.     That effective from 1st October 1989 when the new Extension at West
        Bar, Sheffield becomes operational, approval be given to:-
(i)    the appointment of 1 Handyperson (Manual Worker Group 2) and 2
        Cleaners (Manual Worker Group 1);
(ii)   the redesignation and regrading of the present post of Caretaker to
        Building Engineer (APT & C Grade Scale 4), and
(iii) a revenue estimate of 17,900 (13,900 net of Police Grant) in
       1989/90.
2.     That the effects of the foregoing approval be included in the
        further report referred to in Minute 3a.2 of these Minutes.
Review of the Manual Workers Grading Structure - Appeals Panel
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted recalling Minute 5(iii) of 11th March, 1988 and reporting on
the reasons for a request now made by the Trade Union representatives for
the constitution of the Appeals Panel to be reduced from 4 Members of the
Authority and 4 Representatives of the Trades Unions to 2 Authority
Members and 2 Trades Unions Representatives.
RESOLVED - That the Committee reaffirm the policy set out in Minute
5(iii), 2 of 11th March, 1988, and that the constitution of the Appeals
Panel for the purposes of the Manual Workers Grading Structure Review
remain at 4 Police Authority Members and 4 Trade Union representatives.
Scenes of Crimes Officers
A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
was submitted on the need for 2 additional Scenes of Crimes Officers to
improve the Scenes of Crime Service in the Rotherham and Sheffield Central
Divisions by reducing individual case loads, enabling a more thorough
investigation of incidents to take place and better cover to be provided
during absences.
The 2 additional posts were included in the approved Development
Programme, and the terms of the Code of Practice approved by the Police
Authority on 12th May 1989 were also recalled.
RESOLVED - That the proposal to employ 2 additional Scenes of Crime
Officers (APT & C Grade Sca le 4) with effect from 1st November 1989 be
deferred and considered as part of the further report referred to in
Minute 3a.2 of these Minutes.
INTERNATIONAL MOTOR AND MOTORCYCLE SHOWS 1989
The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report recalling the
Authority's policy relating to visits to the International Motor and
Motorcycle Shows in previous years, and seeking the Committee's views as
to attendance at the 1989 Shows.
RESOLVED - That consideration of nominations to attend the 1989
International Motor and Motorcycle Shows be deferred, and considered as
part of the further report referred to in Minute 3a.2 of these Minutes.
POLICE VEHICLES - UNLEADED PETROL
In accordance with Minute 11 of 9th June 1989, the Chief Constable
submitted a report detailing both the technical background leading to the
introduction of unleaded petrol and the current suitability of the
existing South Yorkshire Police Vehicle Fleet to use such fuel.
Additionally, the existing South Yorkshire Police bulk fuel installations
would need to be converted.
RESOLVED -
1.    That the contents of the technical report now submitted be noted.
2.    The the Chief Constable be requested to report further to the next
      meeting of the Committee detailing how many of the existing South
       Yorkshire Police Vehicle Fleet:-
       (a) can use unleaded petrol without modification
       (b) can use unleaded petrol after adjustment
       (c) are unable to use unleaded petrol without major re-engineering
      and on the level of cost, together with any savings, which would be
      involved were the current Vehicle Fleet to be adjusted and/or
      converted to use unleaded petrol at the present time.
URBAN ACTION ACTIVITIES INVOLVING YOUNG PEOPLE
Project Application and Statement
A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
was submitted detailing a purchase requested by one of the Territorial
Divisions which would be of benefit to both male and female participants
in projects which met one or more of the required objectives.
The report also included (as requested by Minute 15.2 of 11th September
1987) details of the monies spent, committed and the balance remaining as
at 24th August 1989.
RESOLVED - That the purchase now detailed be approved at an estimated cost
of 1850 and met from the Urban Action Fund for specified Urban Action
Activities.
Possible Mobile Outdoor Pursuits Centre
In accordance with Minute 10.3 of 10th March 1989 the Chief Constable
submitted a report on the outcome of experiences at the Police Show after
using the hired "Operation Innervator" mobile outdoor pursuits centre.
Whilst such a vehicle had advantages, a substantial disadvantage was that
the lack of welfare and hygiene considerations limited its use and
effectiveness to sites where such facilities were available.
I   -5-
          Additionally, there were insufficient funds remaining in the Urban Action
          Activities fund to purchase a suitable vehicle, convert, equip, maintain,
          provision and run it. There were also further considerations of
          administration, training and staffing to consider.
          RESOLVED - That, after taking into account all of the details now
          reported, it be the decision of the Committee not to proceed with the
          purchase and conversion of a coach-based mobile outdoor pursuits centre.
    10.   LIST OF OUTSTANDING AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
          In accordance with Minute 1.2 of 9th June 1989, a joint report of the
          Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable was submitted on
          outstanding and/or requested reports.
          The Committee discussed in particular Minute 6 of 24th April 1987
          (Maintenance and Repair Work to Police Authority Premises) and Minute 6 of
          29th May 1987 (Doncaster Airport Development - Police Facilities).
          The Clerk and Financial Officer reported the reasons f o r the apparent
          delay in submitting further reports to the Committee, and pointed out that
          it was hoped that reports relating to both matters would be able to be
          submitted to the next meeting of the Committee.
          RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
    11.   ITEMS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE ABSENCE OF THE PUBLIC
          RESOLVED - That, under Section 100 (A)(4) of the Local Government Act
          1972, the public be excluded from the meeting for the following items of
          business on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure of exempt
          information as defined in paragraphs 1, 5, 9, 12 or 14 of Schedule 1ZA of
          the Act as appropriate.
    12.   CIVILIAN STAFF - 0 & M STAFF - WORK STUDY ASSISTANT
          In accordance with Police Authority Minute 22.2 of 24th June 1988, a joint
          report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable was
          submitted on the sole Work Study Assistant who continued on a protected
          grade and conditions of service basis.
          RESOLVED - That approval b<e given to the continuation of the protection of
          the existing Work Study Assistant in question, subject to a further report
          back to the Committee in twelve months' time.
    13.   HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
    a.    Claims for Compensation
          In accordance with Police Authority Minute 75.2 of 18th August 1989, the
          Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report recalling the views
          expressed by the Authority's Insurers at the deferred meeting of the
          Authority held on 18th August 1989 and referred to this meeting of the
          Committee for detailed consideration.
RESOLVED: That, in view of the potential expenditure which the Authority
may be involved in, and as agreed by the Municipal Mutual Insurance Co
Ltd, officers of the Authority be requested to "shadow" the Insurers in
the conduct of the claims for compensation and report back to the
Committee on developments as they arise.
Cost of the West Midlands Police Investigations
The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted copies of correspondence with
the Home Office dated 21st, 23rd and 31st August on the payment of the
costs of the various investigations undertaken/being undertaken by the
West Midlands Police.
A copy of a further letter from the Home Office dated 12th September
giving further clarification of the views of the Secretary of State was
circulated to each Member present.
RESOLVED - That the contents of the correspondence be noted.
Summary of Financial Situation
The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on the financing of the
currently identifiable costs of the various investigations
undertaken/being undertaken by the West Midlands Police.
Circulated to each Member present was a supplemental report of the Clerk
and Financial Officer on the outcome of a meeting held on 14th September
with officers of the West Midlands Police Authority and an official of the
Home Office.
RESOLVED - That as the terms of the Police Authority's Minute 75B of 18th
August 1989 (with the exception of interest payments) have now been met:-
(i)    the Authority agree to reimburse the West Midlands Police
        Authority for the costs of the police inquiries into the
        Hillsborough Stadium Disaster (excluding interest) subject to
        urgent agreement with West Midlands at Member level, and
(ii)   claims be made on the Home Office, together with a formal approach
        regarding future year consequential costs.
INVITATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF TENDERS
Joint reports of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
were submitted on the invitation and acceptance of tenders.
Barnsley Divisional and Sub-Divisional Headquarters - Improvements to
Security at the Rear of the Building
RESOLVED -
1.     That approval be given to a capital estimate of 18,302 in respect
        of improvements to security at the rear of the Barnsley Divisional
        and Sub-Divisional Headquarters.
2.     That the single tender submitted by the Director of Works of
        Barnsley MBC in the sum of 17,001.23 be accepted for the work
        following checking and evaluation by the Director of Architecture
        of Barnsley MBC.
Additional VHF Radio Channel
RESOLVED - That, in view of the necessity of being able to dedicate one
Forcewide channel entirely to the policing of some events, approval be
given to the invitation of tenders for the purchase and installation of an
additional VHF Radio Channel, subject to:-
(i)    the scheme being included within the Capital Programme for 1990/91
        when approved, and
(ii)   consideration of an application for a capital estimate before
       any tender is accepted.
Intergrated Voice and Data Communications Network
RESOLVED - That, following previous approvals given by the Committee and
consultations with and in accordance with recommendations made by the
Director of Finance and Economic Development of Doncaster MBC (as lead
Authority for Computers) after evaluation, the tender from British Telecom
with Option 2 now detailed be accepted for an Integrated Voice and Data
Communications Network for the South Yorkshire Police, and that a further
capital estimate of 1727,100 be approved in consequence.
Radio Installations at Football League Grounds
RESOLVED - That, in order to upgrade the Police communications facilities
at Football League Grounds in the Force area in accordance with the
Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor, a capital estimate of 125,000 be
approved to enable the purchase and installation of permanent base
stations at the Grounds, and that the necessary order be placed through
the Directorate of Communications with Phillips Radio Communications
Systems Ltd.
Vehicle Replacement Programme 1989/90 - Offer of Evaluation Vehicles
RESOLVED - That approval be given to the purchase, direct from the
respective manufacturers, of the following vehicles currently on extended
suitability trials at the discounted prices indicated:-
Renault 21 GTX             18,155.00
Montego 2.0i               17,221.68
Vauxhall Nova 1.2          14,810.92
Ford Sierra 2.9 4x4       111,975.00
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
The Chief Constable submitted a report recalling the contents of Home
Office Circular No 77/1987. This circular provided guidance to Police
Authorities on the exercise of their discretion in considering
-   8-

         applications, on behalf of police officers, for financial assistance
         towards the cost of legal advice and representation arising from
         involvement in legal proceedings which resulted from the pursuance, in
         good faith, of their duties or where the interests of the Force as a whole
         were involved.
         The Clerk and Financial Officer reported on recent discussions with the
         Authority's Insurers and confirmed in a letter received that morning.
         RESOLVED - That consideration of the report now submitted be deferred,
         pending the further discussions with the Authority's Insurers now
         reported.


CHAIRMAN




DOC781
