                                                                                    3
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
11 HAY 1990

PRESENT: Councillor G Gallimore (in the Chair)        Du           r m Walavat
         Councillors: D A Axe, R Fisher, D W George, R W Gillies, C M Walayat,
         R Whitfield.
         Magistrate Members: Mrs B R Bullivant, K Goodall, E A Hancock,
         H D Hepworth, Dr H H Smith, D E Wilburn.
209     p m TCE AUTHORITY CERTIFICATF OF COMMENDATION
         In accordance with Minute 199 of 30 March 1990, .the Chairman Presented
         the Police Authority's Certificate of Commendation to       . J ^ s t °f
         Sheffield in recognition of his determined and public spirited actions
         on 5 May 1989, which resulted in a perpetrator of crime having been
         brought to justice.
210     VISITORS FROM AUSTRALIA
         The Chairman reported and welcomed the attendance of visitors from
         Australia and their host from the Rockley Rotary Club as part of an
         exchange arrangement between British and Australian Rotary Clubs.
         They were in Barnsley for five days, and were visiting the Police
         Authority as part of a programme dealing with Local Government in the
         Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council and South Yorkshire areas.

 211    MR E A HANCOCK JP
          The Chairman reported that this meeting would be the last to be
          attended by Mr E A (Ted) Hancock JP, prior to his retirement from the
          Doncaster Bench. It was recalled that he had first been appointed as
          a Magistrate Member of the Police Committee of the former South
          Yorkshire County Council with effect from 27 April 1983 and had also
          served as the Magistrate Member on that Committee s Buildings Sub­
          committee. He had continued to serve as a Magistrate Member on the
          constitution and formation of the South Yorkshire Pol’9®
          with effect from 1 April 1986, and had also served as the Magistrate
          Member on the Authority's Finance and General Purposes Committee.
          Members and Officers paid tribute to Mr Hancock's many Personal
          qualities and to the valuable and effective contribution which he had
          made to the Authority's role and responsibilities.
          On behalf of the Authority best wishes for a long and happy retirement
          were unanimously expressed and recorded.
 212      CHIEF CONSTABLE (DESIGNATE)
          The Chairman welcomed Mr R Wells to t h e Authority's meeting (in a
          watching brief capacity at this particular time) and looked forward to
          welcoming him formally after taking up his appointment on 1 June 1990.
URGENT ITEM
The Chairman reported that he had agreed that an urgent item r® ^ t i n g
to an ajplicatibn by a serving police officer for special leave to
study for a Master of Business Administration Degree:shoulJ be
considered as Agenda Item No 20 at today's meeting of the Authority as
the officer's application had to be submitted to the University
Authorities by 1 June 1990.
MINUTES
A       30 March 1990
In reDlv to a query from the Authority as to the final cost for the
services of the South Yorkshire Police during *he Ambulance Dispute
and clarification of who would meet the costs (referred to in the
preamble to Minute 179A), the Clerk and financial Officer ^ P ort?J
that the final cost would be in the region of some £2,040,000. So    So as
not to delay or prejudice repayment t o the Authority, the question of
the Government accepting its responsibilities and          m l d ^ t o the
Treasury Funds would be taken up after repayment had been made to the
Authority.
So far as Minute 189 (Lay Visiting Scheme - Pos^ ] e aE£oDJSofnthe ^
Scheme) was concerned, the Authority requested that a copy of the
report referred to at the meeting be circulated to each Member of
Authority. The Clerk and Financial Officer undertook to do so.
RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of the Authority held on 30
March 1990 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
 B      n Anri 1 1990 Special Meeting
 RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the Special Meeting of the
 held on 13 April 1990 be signed by the Chairman as a correct recor .
    c    97 April 1990 Special Meeting
    RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the Special Meeting of the
    held on 27 April 1990 be signed by the Chairman as a correct recor .

    MINUTES OF COMMITTEES
    A    flrrnnntahi 1 it.v rnmnlaints and niscioline Coimit.tee - 6 April 199a
    nccni wen _That the Minutes of the meeting of the Accountability,
    Complaints a n d Discipline Committee held on 6 April 1990 (set out as
    Appendix "A" to these Minutes) be agreed and confirmed.
     B Finance and General Purposes Committee - 27 April 1990
     RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of the         Finance and General
     purposes Committee held on 27 April 1990 (set out         as Appendix B to
     these Minutes) be agreed and confirmed.
- 3 -




216     CHIEF CONSTABLE'S ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1989
        In accordance with Minute 182.2 of 30 March 1990, the Authority
        considered the Chief Constable's Annual Report for 1989.
        RESOLVED - That the Chief Constable's Annual Report for 1989 be
        received.
217     CHIEF CONSTABLE'S HALF-YEARLY ESTABLISHMENT REPORI
        A       Establishment and Strength
        The Acting Chief Constable reported on the authorised establishment
        and actual strength of the Force as at 31 March 1990 and on the
        changes which had occurred since 1 October 1989.
        B       Probationer Constables
        The Acting Chief Constable reported on the nu^ b®r .ofM f!ro5at11°2e^
        Constables as at 31 March 1990 and, as requested by Minute 109 of
        17 November 1989, on the monitoring and targetting of recruitmeinJ
        sex and race (bearing in mind the embargo on Dolice recruitment dur        g
        the second half of the 1989/90 Financial Year).
         In reply to queries from the Authority, details of the steps currently
         being undertaken to increase recruitment from minority groups were
         outlined, and it was reported that currently 21 officers from m m o n t y
         groups were serving in the South Yorkshire Police.
         C      Commendations
         The Acting Chief Constable reported on commendations by the Courts and
         himself during the period (including a summary of such commendations).

            D Retirements
            The Acting Chief Constable reported details of officers who had
            retired having completed 25 years or more of pensionable service or
            with ill health awards.
            E    Pension Matters
            The Acting Chief Constable reported details of pensions granted and
            the deaths of police pensioners.
            F    Promotions
            The Acting Chief Constable reported details of officers who had been
            promoted since 1 October 1989.
G     Complaints
The Acting Chief Constable reported that 362 complaints had been
received from 268 members of the public in the period, of which 2 had
been found to be unsubstantiated, 70 had been withdrawn and 42 had
been informally resolved.
H Letters of Appreciation
The Acting Chief Constable reported that 344 letters of appreciation
concerning the activities of the South Yorkshire Police had been
received in the period, and some examples were quoted.
RESOLVED
1 That the contents of the report be noted.
2 That, whilst welcoming the details of recruitment by sex, the Chief
Constable be requested to also include in future reports details of
recruitment by race.
CRIME SUMMARY AND STATISTICS
The Acting Chief Constable submitted the Crime Summary and Statistics
for the period 1 January to 31 March 1990.
Compared with January - March 1989, there had been an Increase of
13.59% in recorded crime, with a detection rate of 43.66^ (43.10-s over
the same period in 1989).
The Authority commented in particular on the disturbing increase in
the number of burglaries in the Doncaster Division and, whilst
welcoming the reduction in the number of burglaries in the B1 Sub-
Division of the Barnsley Division (accepting that these were in
comparison with the previous high peak), also expressed concern as to
the continuing unacceptably high figures in the B2 Sub-Division of the
Division.
    The Acting Chief Constable accepted and appreciated the concerns
    expressed, but stressed that it was essential that definite trends
    were identified before scarce resources were redeployed to firstly
    contain and then hopefully reduce the crime figures. He assured the
    Authority that there was no intention of reducing the additional
    manpower deployed in the Barnsley Division.
    It was also essential that the actual position was put in perspective.
    The South Yorkshire Police figures had been compared with seven other
    surrounding Police Forces. This showed the South Yorkshire increase
    to be second from the bottom and, on detection figure comparisons, to
    be 9th from the top of the 43 Police Forces nationally.
    The Authority also discussed the advantages to be gained from joint
    Local Authority/Police initiatives, with particular reference to such
    initiatives currently being undertaken in Barnsley. A statistical
    breakdown by Ward would undoubtedly assist in aiming resources more
    accurately.
RESOLVED
1 That the contents of the report and the assurances of the Acting
Chief Constable be noted.
2 That, whilst accepting that currently the crime figures are
compiled on a Sub-Divisional basis, the Acting Chief Constable be
requested to consider if it is feasible for the South Yorkshire Police
to assist the joint Barnsley MBC/Police initiative by supplying
information on a basis closer to that now discussed.
BUDGET REVIEW 1990/91
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Acting Chief
Constable was submitted recalling that the Authority's 1990/91 Budget
was strictly cash limited, but reporting details of commitments which
had arisen since the preparation and approval of the Budget by the
Authority.
The two most significant of the items (as previously reported to the
Authority) related to:-
(a)   the level of capital expenditure approved for grant by the Home
      Office in 1990/91, and
(b)   the Home Secretary's decision to amend the calculation of
      protected sums for Housing Allowance.
The report gave an assessment of these and other possible additions,
together with options for meeting such additional commitments.
For the reasons set out in the report, the precise position on some of
the options could not be clarified until early in June. As the
Authority would not be entering into any major new commitments between
now and then, the present situation would not materially worsen by
deferring a decision at today's meeting of the Authority.
However, one exception was in relation to the computer operating staff
to operate the already installed Voice and Data Network Scheme (to be
operational in November 1990). The appointment of the VDN Systems
Manager, together with at least two additional operators, was regarded
as an absolute essential in order to maintain the system.
RESOLVED:-
 1 That, in the circumstances now reported, approval be given to the
 appointment of a Voice and Data Network Systems Manager and two
 additional Operators at an estimated cost in 1990/91 of £28,000 on the
 understanding that in the current financial year such cost will have
 to be funded from savings made in the civilian staffing budget in view
 of the cash limited nature of this year's budget.
2 That, with this exception, a decision on the remainder of the items
detailed in the report now submitted be deferred pending the
availability of updated accurate information early in June and that,
if feasible and appropriate, a Special Meeting of the Authority be
convened by the Clerk and Financial Officer on a date to be agreed in
consultation with the Chairman.
CYCLE OF MEETINGS 1990/91
The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report recalling that the
Authority had approved a cycle of meetings up to and including today s
meeting, and setting out a possible cycle of meetings of the Authority
for the next twelve months.
The proposed cycle did not at this stage take account of changes in
Committee responsibilities which the Authority had approved in
principle only at this stage, and were to be the subject of further
reports to the Authority.

1 That the cycle of meetings of the Authority and its Standing
Committees up to and including 24 May 1991 be approved as now
submitted.
2 That ordinary meetings of the Authority/Committees continue to be
held at 11.00 am.
3 That the Annual Meeting of the Authority take place in conjunction
with the meeting of the Authority scheduled for 22 June 1990.
CIVILIAN ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS - MAGISTRATES 1 COURTS COMMITTEES
Further to Minute 142 of 10 February 1989, the Clerk and Financial
Officer submitted a report on the letter of update from the Home
Office (dated 20 April 1990), which stated that it had still not been
decided what form the monitoring exercise should take but that, once a
decision had been made, the Authority would be informed.
RESOLVED - That the contents of the latest letter from the Home Office
be noted, and that the Authority once again re-affirm their wish to be
supplied with details of the outcome of the monitoring exercise on
Civilian Enforcement Officers once the Home Office has made a decision
on the form which the feedback should take.
 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - FINAL TAYLOR REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS
 In accordance with Minute 81.2 of 29 September 1989, the Acting Chief
 Constable submitted a further progress j.eport on the implementation ot
 recommendations arising from the Final Report of Lord Justice Tayl°r
 (which encompassed the recommendations previously contained in the
 Interim Report) not previously reported;upon to the Authority.
RESOLVED - That the Authority note the progress made in implementing
the recommendations now reported of the Final Report of
Lord Justice Taylor.
NATIONAL CODE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT CONDUCT
The Authority considered a copy of a letter dated 25 April 1990 from
the Department of the Environment, together with a copy of the
National Code of Local Government Conduct issued by the Secretary of
State on 10 April 1990 under the provisions of Section 31 of the Local
Government and Housing Act 1989.
The Code, which had been accepted by the Local Authority Associations
and approved by both Houses of Parliament, was also intended to apply
to Local Authority Members in carrying out their Joint Authority
duties and, in the Government's view, was equally appropriate to non­
elected Members of Joint Authorities.
RESOLVED - That the National Code of Local Government Conduct, now
submitted, be accepted and implemented by both elected and non-elected
Members of the Police Authority.
RETIREMENT OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE SENIOR STAFF SURGEON
A joint report of the Acting Chief Constable and the Clerk and
Financial Officer was submitted reporting the retirement of
Professor Alan Usher, Senior Staff Surgeon to the South Yorkshire
Police, on 21 June 1990.
Professor Usher, who was also Head of the Sheffield University
Department of Forensic Pathology and Consultant Pathologist to the
Home Office for South Yorkshire and the East Midlands, had first been
appointed as Deputy Police Surgeon when he came to Sheffield in 1960,
and consequently would have served for 30 years with what was now the
South Yorkshire Police.
The Authority paid tribute to the outstanding service given by
Professor Usher over so many years, and to the many and excellent
ideas contributed.
RESOLVED - That the Clerk and Financial Officer in consultation with
the Chairman be requested how best to recognise the outstanding
service given by Professor Alan Usher.
URBAN ACTION ACTIVITIES INVOLVING YOUNG PEOPLE
A joint report of the Acting Chief Constable and the Clerk and
Financial Officer was submitted seeking approval to the financing of
Force-wide activities in accordance with the Authority's existing
policy from the allocation of the Headquarters Community Liaison
Department.
RESOLVED - That approval be given to total expenditure of £11,500 from
the Headquarters Community Liaison Department Fund for Urban Action
Activities involving Young People in South Yorkshire in respect of the
three Force-wide Schemes now detailed.
LIST OF OUTSTANDING AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
In accordance with Finance and General Purposes Committee Minute 1.2
of 9 June 1989, a joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and
the Chief Constable was submitted on outstanding and/or requested
reports.
RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
ITEMS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE ABSENCE OF THE PUBLIC
RESOLVED - That, under Section 100(A)(4) of the Local Government Act
1972, the public be excluded from the meeting for the following items
of business on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure of
exempt information as defined in paragraphs 1 or 14 of Part 1 of
Schedule 12A of the Act as appropriate.
APPLICATIONS FOR VOLUNTARY EARLY RETIREMENT
Joint reports of the Acting Chief Constable and the Clerk and
Financial Officer were submitted on the applications by a CID
Administrator at the Barnsley DHQ and a Clerk/Typist at the
Ecclesfield DHQ to retire under the Voluntary Early Retirement Scheme
approved by Police Authority Minute 154 of 8 April 1988.
RESOLVED
1 That the applications by the CID Administrator at the Barnsley DHQ
and a Clerk/Typist at the Ecclesfield DHQ now named to retire under
the agreed Voluntary Early Retirement Scheme be approved with effect
from 31 May 1990 and 14 May 1990 respectively, and that they be
awarded total lump sum allowances and annual pensions as detailed.
2 That, to enable the Authority to determine its future policy
relating to such applications, the Clerk and Financial Officer be
requested to include details of the number and financial implications
of the applications for Voluntary Early Retirement approved by the
Authority since 8 April 1988 in the requested further report on the
1990/91 Budget Review.
POSSIBLE AWARD OF FURTHER POLICE AUTHORITY CERTIFICATE OF COMMENDATION
The Acting Chief Constable submitted a report detailing the
circumstances whereby determined and public spirited actions by
members of the public on 10 February 19£0 had ensured that a
perpetrator of a crime had been brought to justice.
- 9 -




        RESOLVED - That, in the circumstances now reported, the Authority's
        Certificate of Commendation be awarded to the persons now named, and
        that arrangements be made for the Presentation of the Certificates at
        a future meeting of the Authority convenient to the recipients.

230         APPI TCATION FOR SPECIAL LEAVE
            In accordance with Minute 213 of this meeting, the Acting Chief
            Constable submitted a report (a copy of which          circulated to
            pach Member Dresent) on an application by a serving police officer
            special leave to study for a Master of Business Administration Degree
            (his application to the University Authorities having to be submitted
            by 1 June 1990).
            RESOLVED - That approval be given to the granting to the Inspector now
            named of unpaid special leave to cover the periods 1 October to
            8 December 1990, 7 January to 15 March 1991,- and 23 April to 28 Jun
            1991, to enable him to study at the University of Sheffield for a
            Master of Business Administration Degree.
 231        rnMPI AINTS AGAINST THE POLICE
            The Force Complaints Book was available for Members' inspection.




 CHAIRMAN
 WP000852
