                         Pouidc.    Avcnwfvy        n w iw s t>wvi
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY - 17 NOVEMBER 1989                       A
"COMPLAINT" MADE AGAINST THE CONDUCT OF THE CHIEF CO W O R      PUBLICATION a s i t
                                                      contains   exempt         information
Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer             within para. . . I .......... .        of
                                                      Sch.l2A to the Local Government
1     Matter for Consideration                        Act 1972 as amended.            ______
1.1   A letter of 19 October 1989 addressed to the Authority has been received
      from Mr Les Jones of                    “        in which he complains
      about the conduct of the Chief Constable in dealing with the Hillsborough
      Disaster. The letter is annexed to this report.
      A claim for compensation has been received concerning the death of a
      person from the same address and it is believed this is Mr Jones’ son.
2     The legal position
2.1    Section 86 (1) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE) 1985 places
       upon the Authority the duty to record complaints against officers for whom
       they constitute the appropriate authority: the Chief Constable is such an
       officer.
2.2   The Act defines a "complaint" as "... any complaint about the conduct of a
       police officer ..." but it does not include anything which relates to the
       direction or control of a police force by the Chief Constable.
2.3   The provisions of PACE dealing with complaints and discipline are aimed at
       the personal conduct of police officers and it follows that a complaint
       against the Chief Constable is only well founded when he has taken
       personal action to effect the incident which is the subject of complaint.
2.4   The Solicitor to the Authority is of the opinion that the allegations made
       by Mr Jones are not complaints within the meaning of PACE and therefore
       not capable of investigation under that Act.
2.5   As any complaint against the Chief Constable would properly have been
       supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, and in furtherance of the
       developing closer liaison between that Authority and Police Authorities,
       the Clerk asked them for their independent view on the matter. The
       Complaints Authority have now stated they agree with the opinion of the
       Solicitor to the Authority.
3     Recommendation
3.1   That no further action be taken to investigate the allegations and that
       the Clerk reply appropriately to Mr Jones.




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer
                                                   19 October 1989

South Yorkshire Police Authority
P.O. Box 37
Regent Street
SOUTH YORKSHIRE
S70 2PQ

For the attention of the Chairman


Dear Sir

Re:   Hillsborough Disaster

I wish to make complaint that the South Yorkshire Police Chief
Constable Mr Peter Wright failed in his duty to protect the safety
of fans attending the match at Hillsborough on 15 April.

    reasons illustrated on the attached schedule, it is my belief
that PeteJ Wright is guilty of "neglect of duty" and I wish you to
record and investigate my complaint in accordance with the "Police
and Criminal Evidence Act 1984".

Yours faithfully




Les 'S'ones
Chief Constable Peter Wright


     Failed to ensure the officers appointed to positions of
     responsibility had the necessary experience to c^rry out
     their duties efficiently and safely.

2.   Failed to   taks control of the situation alter the
     disaster happened, causing chaos and bewilderment to the
     parents, relatives and friends of the bereaved and
     injured by denying them information and thus causing
     further anguish and distress.

^•    Failed to ensure that the officers at the temporary
     mortuary had the necessary sensitive approach and that
     conditions in the mortuary were up to the standards at
     least, to avoid unnecessary suffering.

     At least one senior officer who took our statement (he
     never signed the statement) was openly aggressive to us
     and made several major errors on the statement, resulting
     in us having to go over this and correct his errors.

4.    Failed to   take  disciplinary  action against Chief
     Superintendent David Duckinfield at an early stage when
     Chief Superintendent Duckinfield admitted lying to the
     Assistant Chief Constable about events leading up to the
     disaster.
