SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
FINANCE AND GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE
NIAGARA, SHEFFIELD - 24 AUGUST 1990
PRESENT: Councillor G Gallimore (in the Chair)
         Councillors: J M Cromar, R Fisher C Swindell, and C M Walayat
         Magistrate Member: Mrs B R Bullivant
1   MINUTES
    RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Committee held on 13 July
    1990 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
2   CAPITAL MONITORING
    A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
    was submitted on the current forecasts of capital spending in 1990/91 as
    compared with the approved capital programme. The cost of schemes had
    increased by £365,00 and current year spending was expected to be £148,300
    in excess of the provision of £3,797,200. The capital grant and credit
    approvals issued by the Home Office were subject to cash limits and it would
    be necessary to monitor closely anticipated spending against the spending
    limit of £3,802,000 which, on the basis of current forecasts could be
    overspent by £143,500.
    RESOLVED - That the current forecast of capital payments in 1990/91 be noted
    and in particular the effect that unforeseen additional costs can have in
    affecting the ability to operate within the tight Home Office limits.
3   CAPITAL PROGRAMME 1990/91 - RESERVE SCHEMES
    A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
    was submitted on a list of schemes to be held in reserve for implementation
    in 1990/91 should funds become available thus avoiding any underspending of
    the Home Office expenditure limit. A schedule of schemes which had been
    included in the original capital programme but could not be accommodated
    within the expenditure limit was submitted.
    The Committee discussed the need for schemes to be capable of completion in
    the current financial year. The Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
    Constable pointed out that if it was possible to undertake any scheme from
    the list then a report would be submitted to the Committee.
    RESOLVED - That the schedule now submitted constitute the list of reserve
    schemes for 1990/91, to be considered for implementation should funding
    become available within the Home Office expenditure limit.
4   BUDGET VARIATIONS 1990/91
    A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
    was submitted on the current situation relating to the effects of inflation
    and other variations on the approved revenue estimates and the extent to
    which these could be financed from the contingencies provided. Details of
    the variations were submitted.
-   2   -




            RESOLVED - That approval be given to:-
            (i) the inflationary increases totalling £2,909,100 (£1,425,500 net of
                 Police Grant) being financed by means of a supplementary revenue
                 estimate;
            (ii) the excess costs of the police pay award, amounting to £105,000
                 (£51,400 net of Police Grant) being financed from within the existing
                 budget.
5           DEVOLVED BUDGETING
            A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial officer
            was submitted on devolved budgeting. The Chief Constable had identified a
            need to consider devolving budgeting arrangements to Divisional Commanders
            and a small team of officers had been formed to consider its feasibility.
            RESOLVED - That the report be noted and the Chief Constable and the Clerk
            and Financial Officer report to this Committee on the outcome at significant A
            stages including whether assistance could be obtained from District Council “
            Finance Departments.
6           EFFICIENCY SCRUTINY - VEHICLE UTILISATION
            A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
            was submitted in relation to an efficiency scrutiny of vehicle utilisation.
            The District Auditor's review of Vehicle Fleet Management policy and
            procedures operated by the Force included an examination of vehicle
            utilisation for which computerisation was a requisite as retrieving
            information manually was time consuming and involved a considerable amount
            of work. A computerised package had been created and included in the
            capital programme but in view of the government cash limits it was not
            possible to purchase. It was therefore felt that there should be no further
            delay and the scrutiny should be completed despite the fact that information
            would have to be collected manually. The scrutiny would determine the
            optimum size, mix and utilisation of the Force Vehicle Fleet and details of
            the scrutiny team and its terms of reference were submitted.
            RESOLVED - That the report be noted and the Chief Constable report the         ^
            outcome of the scrutiny to the Authority.
7           UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
                                                                         « «   * *


            A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
            was submitted on increased rate of uniform allowance payable consequent upon
            a determination of the Police Negotiating Board.
            RESOLVED - That the annual rate of uniform allowance payable under Police
            Regulations be increased with effect from 1 April 1990 from £231 to £243 for
            ranks up to Chief Superintendent and from £289 to £303 for Chief Officers.
8    PROVISION OF CLEANER FOR CUSWORTH POLICE STATION
     A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial officer
     was submitted on the provision of a cleaner at Cusworth Police Station by
     the redeployment of a surplus post elsewhere on the civilian establishment.
     RESOLVED:-
     1     That with effect from 24 August 1990 the surplus post of cleaner at the
           Force Driving School be transferred to the establishment of the
           Doncaster Division to provide a cleaner at Cusworth Police Station.
     2     That a report on the possibility of combining part-time cleaner posts
           to create full-time posts be submitted to a future meeting.
9    DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS COMPUTER EQUIPMENT
     A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
     was submitted seeking approval for the disposal of items of computer
     equipment which were obsolete and only of nominal scrap value.
     RESOLVED - That approval be given to the disposal of the eleven VDU
     terminals now detailed as scrap and surplus to requirements and to the
     deletion of such equipment from the Force Inventory.
10   COMMUNITY CONSULTATION - URBAN ACTION SCHEMES
     In accordance with minute 33.A.1 of the Police Authority of 3 August 1990,
     the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable submitted a joint
     report on the arrangements for the approval of Urban Action Schemes costing
     up to £500 per scheme, including the decision of the Accountability,
     Complaints and Discipline Committee of 6 July which had been referred to
     this Committee by the Police Authority.
     RESOLVED - That the current system for obtaining approval to Urban action
     Schemes costing up to £500 be continued, the following members being
     authorised to approve such schemes:-
     "A"   (Doncaster) Division - Councillor D A Axe
     "B"   (Barnsley) Division - Councillor R Fisher
     "C"   (Rotherham) Division - Councillor C Swindell
     "D"   (Sheffield Central) Division - Councillor C M Walayat
     "E"   (Sheffield South) Division - Councillor R Whitfield
     “F"   (Sheffield North) Division - Councillor J M Cromar
11   URBAN ACTION ACTIVITIES INVOLVING YOUNG PEOPLE
     A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
     was submitted detailing the monies spent, committed and the balance
     remaining as at 8 August 1990.
-    4   -




             RESOLVED:-
             1     That the contents of the report be noted.
             2That a report on the     army urban action activities and the role of the
                  Force in co-ordinating such matters be submitted to a future meeting.
12           LIST OF OUTSTANDING AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
             In accordance with minute 1.2 of 9 June 1989, a joint report of the Clerk
             and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable was submitted on outstanding
             and/or requested reports.
             RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
    13       ITEMS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE ABSENCE OF THE PUBLIC
             RESOLVED - That, under Section 100(A)(4) of the Local Government act 1972,     ^
             the public be excluded from the meeting.for the following items of business q p
             on the grounds that they involve the      likely disclosure of exempt information
             as defined in paragraphs 7 and 9 of Part 1 of Schedule      12A oftheActas
             appropriate.
    14       INVITATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF TENDERS
             Joint reports of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
             were submitted on the invitation and      acceptance of tenders.
             A    Garage Equipment
                  RESOLVED - That consideration of this report be deferred pending an
                  investigation of th© availability of similar facilities in th© District
                  Councils and the Fire Service.
             B    Doncaster DfiSDHO - Alterations to form new Telephonists Room
                  RESOLVED:-                                                      £
                   1      That approval be given to a capital estimate of £10,300 in respect
                          of alterations to form a new telephonists room at Doncaster
                          Divisional and Sub-Divisional Headquarters.
                   2      That competitive tenders be invited from Doncaster MBC Works
                          Department and three other suitable contractors to be recommended
                          by the Doncaster MBC Director of Design Services.
                   3      That the Clerk and Financial Officer, in consultation with the
                          Chairman, be authorised to accept the lowest satisfactory tender
                          received.
-    5



         C   Barnslev D&SDHQ - Alterations to form new Telephonists Room
             RESOLVED:-
             1      That approval be given to a capital estimate of £6,950 in respect
                    of alterations to form a new telephonists room at Barnsley
                    Divisional and Sub-Divisional Headquarters.
             2      That competitive tenders be invited from Barnsley MBC Works
                    Department and three other suitable contractors to be recommended
                    by the Barnsley MBC Director of Architecture.
              3     That the Clerk and Financial Officer, in consultation with the
                    Chairman, be authorised to accept the lowest satisfactory tender
                    received.
    15   PREMISES
         A    Police Driver Training School - Accommodation at Briohtside Lane.
              Sheffield
              A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
              Constable was submitted on the financial implications of the vacation
              of premises in Brightside Lane, Sheffield, formerly used by the Police
              Driver Training School, upon expiry of the lease.
              RESOLVED - That approval be given to the full and final settlement of
              the Authority's responsibilities under the terms of the lease by
              payment of £16,363 as negotiated with the Landlord.
         B    Ecclesfield D&SDHO Construction and Attercliffe SDHO Construction
              The Committee agreed that joint reports of the Clerk and Financial
              Officer and the Chief Constable in relation to the financial situation
              and additional costs relating to the construction of Ecclesfield D&SDHQ
              and Attercliffe SDHQ should be considered together.
              The Committee discussed the reasons for the additional costs and
              expressed concern at the monitoring procedures of the project
              architects.
              RESOLVED:-
              1     That, subject to approval by the Secretary of State, approval be
                    given to an additional capital estimate of £183,900 in respect of
                    additional expenditure on the construction of the Ecclesfield
                    D&SDHQ.
              2     That approval be given to an additional capital estimate of
                    £173,400 in respect of additional expenditure on the construction
                    of Attercliffe SDHQ.




                                        3
           3   That the Clerk and Financial Officer inform the architects
               managing the projects of the Committee's concern that monitoring
               procedures should be tightened so that earlier action on
               overspending can be taken.
16   WORLD STUDENT GAMES 1991
     In accordance with minute 16 of 2 February 1990 the Chief Constable and the
     Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a joint report giving an up-to-date
     assessment of the manpower implication, costs and charges arising from the
     policing of the World Student Games to be held in July 1991. Any changes
     would be reported to a future meeting of the Committee.
     RESOLVED - That the latest assessment of manpower implications and costs
     arising from the policing of the World Student Games be noted.
17   CHARGES FOR POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS
     In accordance with minute 44 of the Police Authority of 3 August 1990, the
     Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable submitted a joint report
     on the Authority's policy on charging for the policing of special events
     and, in particular, football matches.
     RESOLVED - That the report now discussed be referred to the PoliceAuthority
     with the recommendations now agreed.




CHAIRMAN
WP003864/AH
