                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                  POLICE AUTHORITY
R.C. Johnston, BA., I.P JA .                                                             Telephone Barnsley (0226) 733222
Clerk and Financial Officer                               Please reply to:                     Fax Barnsley (0226) 730442

                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                                P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, South Yorkshire, S70 2PQ

Our Ref         SW/                            YourRef.                              Data:       14   November 1990
This m atter is being doaJt with by    Mr S Walker                                   Telephone ext      620


       To:      Members of the Authority




       Dear Member
       APPLICATION BY POLICE OFFICERS FOR FINANCIAL SUPPORT IN CONNECTION WITH THE
       INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF PEOPLE AT THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
       Further to my letter of 12 November. I enclose a further document which                                I
       consider it would be appropriate for you to consider at the reconvened
       meeting to be held at 10 am on Friday.
       This is a note of a meeting called by the Coroner and held as you will see
       at the Medico Legal Centre Sheffield on 30 October to deal with procedural
       matters touching upon the inquests. The note which was taken by solicitors
       acting for the Chief Constable contains information about witnesses and
       generally the evidence to be adduced. This should be read in conjunction
       with the letter from Messrs Hepworth and Chadwick which accompanied my
       letter of 12 November and it ensures you have considered all available and
       relevant information upon which to reach a decision.
       Yours sincerely




        R C Johnston
        Clerk and Financial Officer
        Enc
                >90   11-01   11:03             {         r;5j54    Hnn n ■.>.f i iji'u h k i'




HILLBBOROUQH

NOTE OF PRE-IHQPE8T REVIEW - KEDICO-LBQAL CENTRE SHEFFIELD 30TH
OCTOBER i m

The Coroner outlined for the benefit of non-lawyers present that
;this   hearing was not part of the Inquests.   The purpose of the
meeting was to meet legal representatives and to deal Iwith
procedural matters.    It was to be treated as a private meeting
 between the Coroner and Lawyers, but a meeting at which either
 interested parties were free to attend. The Coroner then requested
 legal representatives to identify themselves.
Tim King of Counsel said he represented a number of the PR's of the
deceased.   He was unable to give definite numbers (although he had
been instructed by 26 families to date), and he hoped that within a
week a definitive list of those families being represented by him
could be available.    The maximum number was likely to be 42.   He
 said that there may be individuals who had not Instructed him, but
jwho may at the meeting be applying for representation,
i           i
    Christopher Russell of Counsel said he had been instructed                                          by
    Barlow Lloyd and Gilbert to represent Superintendent Greenwood.

Stuart Catchpole of Counsel said he had been instructed by Davies
^Arnold Cooper (Peter Doyle of that firm also being present) to
represent Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
                                                                                                    t
    Vincent Hale,             Solicitor,     said    he        represented          Superintendent
    Marshall.                                                                                       t

    Richard Hanning,            Solicitor,    said    he       represented          Superintendent
    Wrray.
    i                                                      I
    jPaul Issacs of Counsel said he was instructed by Hepworth &
    IChadwick (Chris Coughlin of that firm also being present) to
    ^represent Chief superintendent Duckenfield.
    Tony Gregory of Keeble Hawsons, Solicitor, said he represented the
     insurers of Sheffield City Council and was accompanied by a
    Solicitor
    i          from the Council.                            i
                                                                   •
    |At this point the Coroner established that one individual in <$ourt
    was a member of the press and he asked the person to leave on the
    basis that the meeting not a public meeting and not reportable.
                                                                                                    i
    Belinda Norcliffe, Solicitor, said she                         represented                The   clhief
    IConstable of the South Yorkshire Police.                                                        ,
    i                                                                                     !
                                                            -• ^ k fc' w p y   V 4




(


 Peter Jackson,    Solicitor,   said he represented The Football
 Supporters Association.      He stated it would be unlikely the
 Association would be unable to have a representative throughout the
'Inquest because of funding problems.   He made the comment that if
jhe could obtain undertakings regarding comments made on Liverpool
:supporters from some parties, then attendance may not be necessary
 in any event.
     The Coroner then invited Mrs. O'Brien to speak who confirmed she
    'was representing herself as the mother of the deceased John
     O'Brien.
     The Coroner then asked all representatives to write into him with
    jthe names of all those who would be representing or likely to
    :represent during the course of the hearing, as he would be
     providing name tags to help       both himself andthe Transcribers
     identify representatives.
     Tim Xing indicated that on some occasions he would be lead by Ben
    jHytner or indeed that Ben Kytner would be the sole representative.
    t

    iThe Coroner stated this would not present any problem at all and
    ithat he would be as reasonable as possible regarding changes of
    ;representatives so long as the party they were representing did
     have locus standi.
         The Coroner said the venue for the inquests would be the Sheffield
        'Council Chambers, this being the same venue as for the Public
        'inquiry.   He stated the venue may change depending on the numbers
        ’attending.
        i Atthis stage, Mr. Kolroyd arrived at the meeting and said he
        Represented the Police Federation.
        1
        'The Coroner B&id he had been asked whether there would be space to
        Istore papers and that there was a room in the Town Hall called the
        i"safeM which would be made available for this purpose.    Security
        !would be at the risk of the individual representatives and the key
        Iwould be in the custody of the City Council.    The room would be
        {opened for access at reasonable hours, e.g. 9 to 10 in the morning
        jand 4 to 5 in the afternoon.
        iThe Coroner anticipated thathe would sit from 10 in the morning
         till about 12.45, would thenrecommence at 1.45 or 2 o'clock and
         rise at about 4 p.m.    There would be a short break in the morning
         and afternoon. The reason he was not sitting longer hours was that
         he had to consider the Jury who were not as used to such
         proceedings as Lawyers.
         The Coroner said if points of law were raised he would deal^with
         them as and when necessary, but as he did not wish to waste 4jury
         time" then he would try to deal with these after 4 p.m. in the
        Iafternoon.
                   '90   11   01   12 i 06    S 0I"4 7Zlii*   HinnOht




                                             -3-
!



'with regard to the scope of the Inquests, the Coroner said he had
 already dealt with three questions being who, when and where and
 the remaining question to be considered was Nhow". This is what he
jwill be concentrating on. Clearly he was dealing with 95 separate
;Inquests but it would be impossible to recount the evidence 95
!times and the evidence would therefore be taken together on all of
Ithem. He was aware there were differences, for instance there were
|two enclosures involved, but he did not think that would affect the
 validity of dealing with the evidence in that way.         Specific
Jevidence, for instance in relation only to enclosure 4, would be
jdealt with appropriately.

     The Coroner said he wished to remind everyone that the Inquests
     /ere not the Public Inquiry.     They should not expect therefore,
     because there had already been an Inquiry, that there would be a
    !repeat of all that the Taylor Inquiry had done, although there
    'would be some duplication and replication.

    jThe Coroner then outlined that witnesses did have certain
     privileges especially the right not to answer incriminating
    |questions.  If any witnesses wished to exercise their right they
    would be entitled to do so.

    The Coroner said his present intention was to take evidence orally,
    jbut at least one witness had died and there may be others whp for
    medical or other reasons would be unable to come.          There was
    ^however a huge pool of witnesses to cover relevant points.
    j          I
    ;Tim King at this stage rose to say he had a number of submissions
    on the nature and ambit of the evidence, in particular the starting
    points of events and the cut off point.

     The Coroner said he took the view that the cut off point was the
    jarrival of the first ambulance on the pitch which was about 3.15
    jp.m.   This was a convenient marker, the time beyond this toeing
     outside the scope of the Inquest.         The beginning was more
    (difficult.  Clearly it would cover the events of the day and also
    previous occurrences in evaluating the situation. In principle it
    ■would start on the day with events outside, would work into the
    ground and more and more witnesses would be called as matters got
     closer to the event itself.   As an example he might for instance
     want a summary of traffic conditions but would not be calling a lot
    !of evidence on that point.
        j

        He said he intended calling a number of categories of witnesses,
        the first being supporters, but that he would be sympathetic if
        they refused to attend. A supporter covered relatives, friend# and
        other contacts of the deceased and indeed anyone who could shed
        light on the events of the day.    The second category was local
        residents, the third were shopkeepers etc., the fourth were other
        independents, for example those professionally present such       a
        media people, the fifth category were Club employees, for example
        turnstile operators and stewards and the sixth category wap of
        course the Police. With regard to these there were a few [Police]
        and at least one other person whose statements were CJA Statements
        under PACE. It was his normal practice at the moment if there was
                                  -4-

jsuch a statement, to have it read out or played on an audio tape.
'He said ha would do that her* and we would therefore hear those
'.statements on audio tapes.

'The Coroner then said he would not circulate a list of witnesses in
^advance because
    1) This was an inquisitorial inquiry conducted by the Coroner. The
       books available to him indicated that it was quite proper for
       him not to circulate them and he did not intend to do it.
    2) In relation to statements he certainly did not have the
j      administrative capacity to deal with the circulation of them.

>3) He had circulated summaries at the first hearings and felt that
| this had "bounced back" on him as representatives were not happy
! that evidence actually given always coincided with what appeared
i     on the summaries.
I
 jHe was therefore not prepared to circulate statements in advance
 Ibut would make available names of proposed witnesses f o r ; the
  |following 1 to 3 days to give representatives some idea as to jwhat
  jwas coming.    Also, witnesses would be allowed to refresh their
  -memories from statements on the day, but he would not expect
  Witnesses to take statements with them into the witness box.

    Regarding Lord Justice Taylor's Report, he did not intend to admit
    Ithat report as part of the evidence at the Inquest. To get it in
    las evidence he would have to read it in toto and this would not
    jserve any useful purpose and would cause problems.

    Similarly, the Transcripts would not be used. He was fully aware
    that all parties had and would have access to the Transcripts and
    be would fully expect parties to look at them. He did not tnind
    Questioning on them so long as that questioning was relevant.    He
    would not however permit a witness who wanted to exercise the right
    hot to answer questions to have quotations put to him from the
    {Transcript.   He wanted representatives to use their common slense
    knd they would be allowed to ask legitimate questions. There> may
    pe odd occasions when he would have to breach what he had said
    bbove and the Transcript would have to be used,     but he thought
    jthis would be a rarity.
    ifith regard to exhibits, he wished to restrict the number of
    documents put in as exhibits. He did not want hundreds of pages to
        put before the Jury if they could not absorb them. What he had
     Ln mind was for example the Green Guide, which could be introduced
     is an exhibit but he would not expect the Jury to read it from
     sover to cover.     It would however be appropriate perhaps for
     representatives to make reference to certain paragraphs.
                    11 01 l.iOJ         a   e» . ■» . ...i ;




                                       •5-

 Tim King said in relation to the ’'mini Inquests" he had a growing
 number of instructions on individual cases, particularly as to
 factual natters.  He wishes to have the liberty to rectify factual
 omissions and inaccuracies from the earlier hearings, and asked if
:the Coroner would consider how best to deal with these if they were
 listed for him in writing.

 The Coroner said that he did not intend re-opening all 95 on that
jbasis, although he himself had received correspondence on a number
jof individual cases.    If the matters Mr. King was talking about
jcould be put properly to him and if he could consider them and as a
!result felt a point was justified and legitimate and proper to deal
;with, he would consider it sympathetically.
i

 Tim King then said in relation to the cut off point, he wished to
 make a submission that that should be extended to 4 p.m. as a
!number of those represented felt the Inquests should go into the
 medical attention given to those crushed in relation to the
|allegation that there was an absence of proper medical care and
!facilities which may have lead to death or indeed quicken the death
|of those who had died.

iThe Coroner said this was getting into legal submissions. All had
iheard what he had to say and that he could not give a ruling
ibecause he was going beyond procedural aspects.    At the moment he
:was not pursuaded that he would want to go down that particular
jroad.
I
!Tim King said he was equally concerned at the decision not to
!circulate the names of those the Coroner intended to call. He said
•the great advantage to having a list was that it would give an
Iopportunity to ask for further witnesses to be called.
!

 The Coroner said he had already pre-empted this suggestion, as he
 had written to every represented body or individual asking if they
'had people to be considered as witnesses and had had only two or
 three replies.   The mere fact that a list was not circulated did
 not stop anyone suggesting someone should be called as a witness.
        Tim King said there were a vast number of statements available and
        he had been looking at it from the point of looking who would be
        called and seeing if there were any "omissions" and not visa versa.
        The Coroner said he would reconsider the point, but he did not know
        if he could oblige on it.

    ITim King said that in relation to the Taylor Report there should be
     certain paragraphs as to fact which could go before the Jury which
     would help them and save time. He outlined the underlining process
     that he understood had been done for the Contribution Hearing and
     suggested that that might be appropriate.



    i
    i
                                   6

The Coroner said one of the reasons why he was reluctant to do this
Was because putting a paragraph before the Jury did not mean that
it was necessarily accepted by everyone.
i
Tim King them asked whether the Taylor Transcript could be used in
icross examination.
i
;The Coroner said that was correct within certain limits.         His
'difficulty was, that the Public Inquiry had taken place on slightly
'different premises than his hearing and he was reluctant to use it
'for that reason.
!
jTim King then also queried whether video evidence would be used.
The Coroner said it was his intention      to use the Compilation Video
'and indeed one or two other videos,       for example the 1988 video.
{He also stressed he had no facilities      for providing copies of any
jvideos and would not distribute them.       If that was not acceptable
jhe would rather not use videos, but he    did wish to do so.

'stuart Catchpole stated that in relation to the Taylor Report, it
would be beneficial if the Jury could see certain agreed
 paragraphs.   He indicated that he would be more than willing to
 participate in an attempt to agree certain paragraphs to go before
 the Jury.
     The Coroner said that may be an answer to the question and he would
    jleave it up to the parties. If they could all agree on some of the
    {paragraphs going before the Jury then that would be acceptable, if
    !they could not agree then the Taylor Report would not go before
    ithem.
    |
    'Christopher Russell queried whether the categories outlined by the
    !Coroner was the order in which they would be called.
     The Coroner stated he was not intending that being the case, that
    jthe evidence would effectively be taken chronologically.
     Christopher Russell queried whether the new matters relating to the
    jearlier hearings mentioned by Tim King would be circulated to other
    jparties, as these were questions which should be made public.

    *The Coroner said he would consider the point.
    Christopher Russell made the point that providing the Jury with
    selected parts of the Taylor Report was not in his view
    satisfactory.
    The Coroner confirmed that if it could not be agreed between the
    parties then he would stick to what he had originally said.
                ’ 96   1 1- 0 1 1 2 ! 14          Z t.T4 73J8&4   Nt.nntti iUL IMrU'




                                            -7-


Vincent Hale said that Mr. Jackson for The Football Supporters
Association had raised the question of undertakings and that he
'would be happy to give such an undertaking but nay not be able to
 if other parties failed to go along with it.
I
1
iThe Coroner then asked for authority to circulate to all parties a
jlist of the legal representatives and all agreed.

jpaul Issacs then raised the following points:-

!l) Whether the video evidence was for instance to be shown at the
I   beginning of the Inquest or to be shown to clarify certain
     points.
!        The Coroner said he was           hoping that video could        be shown and
          that would be it as the          purpose was to give the        Jury an
          overview. It was to be           used in that respect as        an aid but
i         there may be times when          the video would have to        bere-examined.

    2)    If the Taylor Report could not be used at allunless certain
          facts could be agreed by all parties, how far was it to be
|        used at all.
b)       Could the Taylor Transcripts be used for cross-examination
         purposes.
 Paul Issacs specified that he wished to make legal submissions on
Ithie point.
 The Coroner did not answer the second question but in relation to
 question 3. he said once again he knew all parties had copies of
 the Transcripts but he would not allow the Transcript to be used to
 put witnesses in a position where they would say that they would
 not answer a question, i.e. he would not allow anyone to pursue a
Ipoint which would be oppressive. In certain other cases it may be
!easier to use the Transcript to put points to them and that ha
 wanted to be flexible and that he may indeed have to modify his
'.stance on the Transcript.
j                                                                                      1
iPaul Issacs specifically asked the question if a witness said a, b
iand c on giving evidence but had previously to the Taylor Inquiry
Isaid x, y and z would he be able to cross-examine on that basi*.
I
 The Coroner said it would depend entirely on what the a, b 4nd c
 and x, y and z was.    He then stated that on the point he would
|clearly have to have a session on legal submissions.

{Paul       Issacs thenraised thequestion of recalling witnesses after
{they       hadcompleted their evidence.
I                                                   I

    The Coroner said he may have to do this from time to time.
     N
I
'Belinda Norcliffe then asked whether the Coroner would permit
 documentation sent to him to be placed before the Jury, the
 intention not being  for the Jury to read Bundles from cover to
 cover, but for documents to be available for the Jury to "dip
jinto*.
^The Coroner said he was still considering this point.
 Christopher Russell then queried what the documents were and why
‘they had not been circulated to other parties.
iBelinda Norcliffe explained the documents were three volumes, the
{first two of which were volumes 1 and 2 of the South Yorkshire
!Police documents to the Inquiry, and that volume 3 was a selection
jof documents available at the Public Inquiry and the recent Civil
jCpntribution Hearing. There were no new documents as such.    They
 had not been sent to other parties but simply to the Coroner as it
 was his decision as to whether they were to go before the Jury or
 not.
 The Coroner again said he was still considering the matter and had
!not decided whether any party could put documentation in in the
jform of Bundles or whether he wished representatives to produce
Iindividual documents as and when they were referred to.      In any
jevent he said 20 copies of items would be in his view required.

\Peter Jackson said with regard to undertakings he would be happy to
|liaise with any party.
I
 The Coroner said he foresaw problems in anybody giving undertakings
Iand that the matter may not be resolved.
iPeter Jackson then queried further whether the witness list would
|be available three full days in advance.
|
|The Coroner said he wa6 hoping to do this showing at least those
!who had provisionally been called.

|Peter Jackson then queried whether a daily transcript would be
{available and the Coroner said he would refer to that point later.
        Mrs* O'Brien stated she was very concerned about the cut off point.
        The Coroner pointed out that she was attempting to make a legal
        submission and that would have to be reserved for later.

        The Coroner then established that no party had any other procedural
        points to raise and stated that he did intend to have Transcripts
        available on a next day basis.    He requested that any party who
        wanted daily transcripts should write         to  him before the
        commencement of the Inquests, but parties would of course be
        charged. He would also happily arrange for odd days to be provided
        on that basis but he would have to have sufficient notice of this
        for it be possible.



    t
              ' 90   1 10 1   1 2 M5     S   0274   TZi'ii*   HftnnC".;   r UC-C■hfi   0




                                       “9*

 With relation to the length of the Inquests, the Coroner said he
 was unable to specify how long they would last, but that the
 hearing would end for Christmas on the 18th or 19th December.    He
 Aid not think the Inquests would have finished by then and the plan
!was to resume on the 7th January and to continue until they were
|finished.   He pointed out that illness, for instance amongst the
iJury, may lead to adjournments.
I
IWith regard to witnesses, he is going to try and group them
 together and further he would be surprised if there were less
{witnesses to be called than at the Taylor Inquiry (174) and there
jcould possibly be more.
I
 On the 28th November, 6th December and 9th January it would not be
!possible to use the Council's Chamber as Council meetings were
Itaking place and      in relation to the 28th November, he was
 considering taking the Jury out for a further site visit to
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
i

 The Coroner said he did intend to call a few expert witnesses right
jat the end of the inquests but he wished to make it clear that
'their   evidence would be restricted to what is relevant to an
IInquest and would not therefore be the same as evidence which would
 be given at a Civil Trial.
 He then pointed out that the press would of course be entitled to
Ibe present throughout the Inquests themselves.

\In     relation to running order, he intended to ask questions first
    ;and the only other rule was that if any witness was the witness of
    ;a particular party then they would question the witness last.
    'Apart from that the representatives should agree amongst themselves
    (the order for questioning witnesses.
    IThe Coroner said it appeared there would be various legal
    'submissions made to him and these would have to be dealt with at a
    !further meeting which was set for the morning of the 19th November
    !and he would arrange for the Jury to attend only on the afternoon
    {of that day.
    i
    I
    ;Stuart Catchpole queried whether the list for the first three days
    iwitnesses    would be available   for Monday the 19thand the Coroner
    jconfirmed this would be sent through to representatives.

    !Tim King    asked the Coroner     to   consider againthe question of
     circulating a full witness list. The Coroner said if he decided to
     do this prior to the 19th, he would circulate it to parties, and if
     not representations should be made again on the 19th. The Coroner
     at this stage said another reason for him being reluctant to
     circulate the list was that it could be that once evidence, gets
     under waycertain witnesses on the list could effectively:cone
     superfluous and would be removed and he was wary of the parties
     relying on his original list as definitive.
    Tim King -said he appreciated the point the Coroner was making but
    it would still be easier for all if a list was available.
t
    The Coroner said he would give serious consideration to the point.
