            S W A j ^ l U E                                                  |    Q

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY             ^                      Jj       j| J
15_H»E£h .199$                            - f f u                   *t 2/0
                                                                       n
                                             •        n                      fv
Report Q tlte Cltrk »nrt Irsa?Mrer Q**'
                                   u*®- •            ^    •       c 0 a> ^
MUNICIPAL MUTUAL INSURANCE - INSURANCE LIABILITY v   ,        ^
     EMrposg Pf thi Repprt
To inform members of the potential liability which may fall to be met by the
Authority as a result of the Hillsborough stadium disaster.


          JfiSffnuendatjpn
          Members are recommended to:-
           (a) approve an Increase in the provision for the uninsured
               liability In respect of the Hillsborough Disaster from £1.5m
               to £2.0m
           (b) earmark £0.5m from revenue reserves, over and above the £2.0m
               provision, to provide for any further Increases In the
               Authority's liability.



I__ lac<aiMD.OoffiiialiaD
3.1 Members have asked to be kept informed ofthe latestposition in respect
     of the claims submitted as a result of theHillsborough Stadium
     Disaster.
     The former Police Authority's cover with Municipal Mutual Insurance
     (MMI) was limited to £8.5m which was insufficient to cover the
     Authority's total estimated liabilities as a result of the Hillsborough
     Disaster. Based on information supplied by Zurich Municipal Insurance
     (ZMI), who are acting on behalf of MMI, the sum of £1.5m was provided
     for in the 1994/95 accounts to reflect the Authority's potential
     liability over and above the insured sum.
4   Current Estimate of Liability
     Officers from the Joint Secretariat have recently met with ZMI as a
     result of which it would appear that the Authority's liability will
     increase significantly above the £1.5m provided for.
     The total number of claims received as at 20 February is 1567 of which
     51 are still outstanding. Recent awards made by the courts have caused
     the insurers to revise their estimates in respect of the outstanding
     claims. The uninsured liability is now estimated to be £2m., ie £0.5m
     greater than that provided for in the accounts.
     In addition ZMI consider that, in view of the uncertainty surrounding
     some of the outstanding claims, it would be prudent to earmark a further
     £0.5m although at this stage it is not clear whether that sum will be
     needed.
5    Financial Implications
     There is a provision within the Police Authority accounts to meet £1.5m
     uninsured liability.
     There is no provision in either the 1995/96 or 1996/97 estimates to meet
     the additional £0.5m additional liability. However, on current
     projections there is likely to be a significant revenue underspend of
     £1.442m in the current year. Moreover, revenue reserves at 31 March
     1996 are estimated to be £7.9m. Thus the additional liability can be
     met from either the underspend in 1995/96 or from revenue reserves. If
     the underspend for 1995/96 is at the level currently projected then it
     is recommended that the additional liability of £0.5m be met from this
     underspend.
     In line with the advice from ZMI it is also recommended that a further
     £0.5m be earmarked from reserves to provide for an increase in future
     liabilities. Thus the total sum set aside for uninsured liabilities in
     respect of the Hillsborough disaster will be £2.5m

W J Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer



Officer responsible: Geoff Cocking, Assistant Treasurer, South
                     Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
Background papers used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection within the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat




                          KOT FOR PUBLICATION      as 1t
                          contains exempt Information
                          within para. ...."J. . . . . 0f
                          Seh.l2A to the Local finvcrnm.nl
                          Act 1972 as amended._ _ _ _
