                                                                      p. <•** 1

                                                                .1

    STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY - 17 APRIL 1989

    He says he has asked for furtherfactual report from Police and other
    services. Need for a full and independent enquiry to identify the
    causes of the disaster    and to examine what needs to be done to
    prevent such an accident happening again. I therefore ask Lord
    Justice Taylor to carry out an enquiry with the following terms of
    reference.
    To enquire into the events and to make recommendations about the needs
    of crowd control and safety at sports grounds. Brian Johnson, Chief
    Constable of Lancashire has agreed to assist the enquiry as an
    assessor. Arrangements will be made as necessary for other qualified
    assessors to be appointed and for the enquiry to be provided with
    technical advice and support. I am asking that the enquiry should
    proceed with all possible speed.
    The work to be carried out by the Chief Constable of West Midlands
    will be at the service of Lord Justice Taylor and not cut across what
    he does.
    Provision for urgent interim report so that matters can be implemented
    before the start of the next football season.
     Slight delay on the football supporters' bill in the Lords but will
    then complete Lords' stages and come to the Commons for possible
    amendment there.
    Terms of reference are wide and will enable Lord   Justice Taylor to
    range over things he thinks are essential.




r
                                                                       fObt-O
                                      to J o //\   ^0

FILE NOTE
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

Meeting held at the offices of the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat on
Wednesday. 29 November 1989

PRESENT:     Mr R C Johnston - SYJS
             Mr S Walker     - SYJS
             Mr G A Wood     - SYJS
                             - MM I
                             - MM I
The meeting was called to discuss Bob Johnston recent letter to MMI regarding
the financial implications of claims arising from the Hillsborough disaster and
also to enable MMI representatives to bring the Authority up to date on those
claims.
           confirmed that to date 777 claims have been received and 244 of these
represent known casualties who either died or suffered physical injuries which
were treated at Sheffield hospitals immediately after the incident. There have
been some claims from people who suffered physical injury but attended hospitals
away from Sheffield some days after the incident took place.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ confirmed that it is the intention of the MMI to make certain
concessions in writing to the Hillsborough Steering Committee towards the end of
this week, probably Thursday. These concessions amount to an agreement without
any admissions of liability to pay on a 100% basis all claims for injuries
sustained by people in pens 3 and 4 and immediate environs. He went on to say
that the Hillsborough Steering Committee had established 17 categories of claims
for psychological injury. Categories 1 and 2 are from people in pens 3 and 4.
Categories 3 and 4 are from people who were so close to these pens as to make no
difference, such as people in the concourse or between the turnstiles and t h e
concourse and Category 15 is for claims from rescuers. All these claims,
together with deaths and physical injuries sustained in pens 3 and 4 are
included in the concessions to be made by the MMI.
On the question of percentage liability of the police,            confirmed that
Counsel’s opinion had been obtained which suggested a possible finding of 55%.
I asked the MMI representatives how serious they were in fighting the claims for
contribution against the other defendants so as to achieve the lowest possible
percentage liability of the police. They satisfied me about their seriousness
and pointed out to me that the insurance companies reinsurers were as keen as
the Police Authority to see this liability limited as far as possible because it
ultimately effects how much those reinsurers have to bear. The MMI
representatives also confirmed to me that it is conceded that Sheffield City
Council have a liability. They ultimately agreed that no settlement will be
made with representatives of any of the other dependants without seeking the
agreement of the Police Authority because of the implications of such a
decision on the financial responsibility of the Authority.
The MMI representatives also agreed that whatever the aggregate cost of claims
to be borne by the police, MMI will pay the full costs. This means they will
    costs on claims which take the aggregate responsibility of the police beyond
    insurance 1 imit of ,£8i m.
                                                      -2-


            produced to the meeting a document which deals with the financial
rtipercussibns of certain findings of liability on the part of the police. This
assumes the cost of claims on full liability to be £15 m and results in there
being no financial liability for the Authority in the event of police liability
being below circa 66%.




SW/MR
29 November 1989




                                                                                                                V   f


                                                       •          .S'--* -.
                                                  :                        fv.vi                            ^               W a y wiP
                                             ;f                            .f f e s p o n s i l ^ l l t y               '


      'iftsyr&fiCfe   r-.U'r-.-   or .::5;


                                                           ■        . ■.    ' -■
                                                  • . ■    '. V             }:!■);
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

                                             HILLSBOROUGH CLAIM



FULL LIABILITY                         Including     exists       £15,000,000

                                       cost 10%                       1.500.000


                                                                  £13,500,000

                                       Limit of Indemnity             8.500.000


                                       Insureds Liability         £ 5,000,000




POLICE 75% LIABLE                                                 £11,250,000

Limit of Indemnity    £8,500,000

Costs                   1,500,000

                      £ 10,000,00                                 £ 1 0 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0
                                           Insureds Liability     £ 1,250,000



POLICE 70% LIABLE
                                                                  £10,500,000
Limit of Indemnity    £8,500,000

Costs                   1,500,000


                     £ 1 0 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0                          £1 0 ,0 0 0 .0 0 0
                                           Insureds Liability     £      500,000



POLICE 66 & 2/3rds LIABLE                                         £ 1 0 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0
Limit of Indemnity    £8,500,000

Costs                 £1,500,000

                      £ 10,000,000                                £1 0 .0 0 0 ,0 0 0
                                           Insureds Liability        Nil
H am m ond Sudd a rd s
                       S O L I C I T O R S
ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY           PETER C. METCALF             RICHARD BURNS             CONSULTANTS:                  EMPIRE HOUSE
D. TREVOR LEWIS             CHRISTOPHER W. JONES         DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE      ROGER W. SUDDARDS c s e       10 PICCADILLY
MICHAEL E. GREGSON          ANDREW R. JORDAN             J. PATRICK MITCHELL           DESMOND HEAP
                                                                                   SIR D                         BRADFORD BD1 3LR
JOHN D. DE MAIN             SIMON R. B. STELL            CHRISTOPHER MARKS             W. WHITSON
                                                                                   IAN V\
MICHAEL L. SHEPHERD         SIMON R. INMAN               MICHAEL S. HENLEY                                       TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
PETER N. WILBRAHAM          RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH        ROSAMOND J. MARSHALL SMITH                              TELEX 517201
J. RICHARD ARCHER           JOHN G. BECKETT              PHILIP W. HARUNG
                                                                                                                 D.X. NO. 11720
BARBARA W. FRANCE           G. N. IAN GREENFIELD         WILLIAM N. DOWNS
C.   NOEL HUTTON            STEPHEN GALE                 LUCCI DAMMONE                                           FAX (0274) 737547
JOHN H. G. HELLER           MARK W. HILTON               ANDREW H. McDOUGALL
IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH         RONALD S. DRAKE



OUR REF           PCM/                       your re f       POLET12/SW/MR                       d a te    18 th December,           1989



Dear Steve,

Hillsborough

Here is a copy of the final version of the settlement letter signed
by way of acceptance by the four representatives of the Steering
Committee who were at our meeting.

There is to be an approval hearing on Wednesday, 20th December in
Manchester, which I hope will conclude the current phase of this
matter.

I will keep you informed of developments.


Yours sincerely,




Peter C. Metcalf




S. Walker Esq.,
Solicitor to the Authority,
South Yorkshire Police Authority,
P.O. Box 37,
Regent Street,
BARNSLEY S70 2PQ.
                                                                 •


LEEDS OFFICES:      BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                    JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868

                              THIS FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT O F INVESTMENT BUSINESS
;           miri11^;

    HAMMOND SUDDARDS
                                S O L I C I T O R S

    AUNLBOTTCMLEY                    PETER C. METCALF            R O M O BURNS              CONSULTANTS:                 EMPIRE HOUSE
    a   toevorlbwb                   OfifcTOPHWW JONES           owewicARMrrME              « x s t <*t axoAflos c»t     1 0 P1CCAM XY
                                     AMDREWft JORDAN             J. MfflCKMTCHEUf           aROESMCK>«AP                 BRADPOROBD1 SLR
    MKXAB. t i W U C N
    jo m a o E M M N                 SMON ft B STELL             CHRSTOPKSR MARKS           MNW BHTSON
                                                                                                                         TELEPHONE (0274) 73C7M
    u o m L se w c                   SMON ft tAMN                MK>«a&HB«£Y
    KTB* N. WURMUM                   RCMARO WLWADE-SMITH         ROSAMOND J. MARSHALL SMrtH                              TELEX 5" 720"

    J. K H M C A ID C R              jOHNaSeCKETT                PHL^W. HAflUNQ
                                                                                                                         O X NO. 11720
    BARBARA*. FfWNCE                 a N. IA N 0R ffi« L D       WULMtfKOOWNS
    C. NOB. HUTTON                   STEP! CN OLE                UCCJOAMMONE                                             FAX (0274) 737547
    JO M H . Q. X U JR               MAflKWHLTON                 AWREWHMcOOUGALL
    1AMft. SHUTOEWQfflH              RONALDS- DRAKE


    OUR HER                                          XXJRREF.                                            {VCE      15th December, 1989

                : sa®c-

                       >*r
        Dear Si£§

                                             Hillsborough
              Ch«r>f**»n and Rimaer -v- Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and Others

        We are writing on behalf of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and his
        insurers;

        It       been decided that, whatever the rights and wrongs of the Hillsborough
        stad lias disaster, it is inappropriate for persons who were injured at the
        ground to be kept waiting for compensation. Accordingly, without a decision
        as to liability and subject to the teras below, all bona fide claims for
        coapensation by those injured and the dependants of those who died at the
        ground irill be paid on a c o m o n law basis to be agreed if possible or, failing
        agreement, to be assessed by the Court.

        Compensation will be paid for nervous shock cases, if they would be entitled
        to damages by law. Our clients would include in this category, without
        further ado, the cases which fall into categories 1-4 and 15 put forward by
        yourselves, listed in Appendix 'A' to this letter. In all other categories
        cases will be defended on the basis of remoteness, proof of injury and quantum
        only.

        This offer applies to the deceased and those injured in, or escaping from,
        pens 3 and*4 at the ground. Our clients will also give consideration to the
        cases of persons injured elsewhere within the precincts of Hillsborough
        stadium on receipt of details.

        The Chief Constable will pursue action against the other Defendants to the
        test actions, with a view to recovering sums expended pursuant to this offer.



                                                                                                                             /...contd
    Hillsborough Steering Committee




) P e n s OFFICES            BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS IS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0632) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794,-42H90
                             J0S & H S WBX HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 !AB TELEPHONE (0632) 450645 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868

                                       1H 6     a RRjULATHJ BT TVC LAW SOCCTV * T ve C O M X C OF H G S & E H BUSINESS
    H am m o nd Suddards                                                       =W3£S0 2




      Our clients are willing to proceed upon the basis of an acceptance of this
      offer by the Hillsborough Steering Committee. The offer is aade to all
      claimants currently co-ordinated by the Committee. It will be the intention
      of our clients to sake the saae offer to any claiaants not currently
      represented by the Coaaittee and also to claiaants who have not yet coae
      forward, but who do so within twelve aonths from the date of this letter. Our
      clients would not rule out asking the saae offer to claiaants coning forward
      after the expiry of that deadline, but would not, at this stage, wish to give
      an indefinite comitaent for the future.

      Any unresolved questions as to the Beans of putting this offer into effect
      shall be decided by application to the Court under t e n 1. If jurisdiction is
      refused because no action has been coaaenced in a particular case, then the
      dispute shall be resolved by action.


      Terms

      1.      These actions will by consent, be stayed until further Order, with
              liberty to apply for the purpose of putting the teras of this offer
              into effect.

      2.      Vi thin six aonths of the acceptance of this proposal:

              (a)    Each claiaant shall, through his Solicitors, put forward a
                     stateaent of the factual basis of his claia, including the best
                     particulars he can give as to the following:

                     Time of arrival at ground.

                     Whereabouts when injured/deceased.

                     Cause of injury.

^                    Nature of injury.

                    * Confirmation whether Amended Stateaent of Claia in Chapaan (Pen 3)
                      or Riamer (Pen 4) adopted as statement of claimant's case.

              Our clients accept that the "best particulars” in this connection may
              be very limited in cases of bereavement and indeed in soae cases of
              injury.

              (b)    Each claimant shall put forward aedical evidence of injury and a
                     schedule of loss, with supporting documents.

                     In cases of continuing symptoms it will be sufficient if an
                     initial report briefly describing the nature of the injury is put
                     forward within the time indicated.




                                                                            /...contd.
:H A A L V i u . w   oLDDARDS




     3.        Each claimant shall co-operat« with any reasonable request by the
                First Defendant to provide further aedical or other evidence.

     4.        Each claimant will agree (subject to payment of expenses and costs) to
                respond to any reasonable request for further information fro* the
                First Defendant in connection with his proposed action against the
               other Defendants to the test actions.

     5.        The reasonable costs of each claimant trill be paid by the First
               Defendant.

     6.        Upon settlement of his claim, each claimant will assign to the First
               Defendant all his causes of action against each of the other Defendants
               to the test actions 1ini ted to those shifting out of the injuries in
               respect of which compensation is paid. 'T'

     In cases where agreement cannot cannot be reached on quantum Writs will be
£    issued pursuant to the terms of this letter and the First Defendant will agree
     to trial without pleadings pursuant to order 18'rule 21 subject to provision
     by thePlaintiff of details of injury and financial loss.

     We    are       happy for a copy of this letter to be produced to the court.

     Yours faithfully,




      We accept the offer on behalf of the Hillsborough Steering Committee.
                                       APPENDIX A

            CATEGORIES OF NERVOUS SHOCK CLAIMANTS : REMOTENESS OF DAMAGE

 1.     The Claimant was in pen 3 or 4 and suffered physical injury and
 nervous shock.

 2.     The Claimant was     in pen 3 or 4 and suffered no physical injury but
 suffered nervous shock.

 3.     The Claimant was in another part of the      ground and saw a spouse or
 child injured or killed.

 4.     The Claimant was in another part of the ground and knowing or believing
 a spouse or child to be in pen 3 or 4, later found them injured or dead.

 5.     The Claimant was in another part of the ground and knew or believed a
 arelative was in pen 3 or 4, or could be in those pens, but later found them
 not to have been physically injured or to have suffered nervous shock.

 6.     The      Claimant was in another part of the ground and knew or believed a
 friend was      in pen 3or 4 and later found that they had been killed or injured.

7.     The Claimant was in another part of the ground and knew or believed a
friend was in pens 3 or 4, or could be in those pens, and later found that
they had not been killed or injured.

8.^    The   Claimantwas in another part of the ground and no relative or
friend in or believed to be in pen 3 or 4.

9.   ^ The Claimant was not at the stadium but saw the events live on
television and/or described on radio and knew or believed a relative was in
pen 3 or 4 at the Leppings Lane end and same was injured or killed.

10.    The Claimant was at the stadium but saw the events live on television
and/or described on radio and knew or believed a relative was in pen 3 or 4 or
at the Leppings Lane end and same was not injured or killed.

11.    The Claimant was not at the stadium but saw the events live on
television and/or described on radio and knew or believed a friend was in pen
3 or 4 or at the Leppings Lane end and same was injured or killed.

12.  ^ The Claimant was not at the stadium but saw the events live on
television and/or described on radio and knew or believed a friend was in pen
3 or 4 or at the Leppings Lane end and same was not injured or killed.

13.    The Claimant saw recorded footage of the disaster and knew or believed
a relative was at the match and knew that person would be at Leppings Lane and
later found him/her to have been injured or killed.

                    was n°t    stadium but saw the events live on television
and/or described on radio and knew or believed a relative was in pen  3 or 4 or
at the Leppings Lane end and same was not injured or killed.

15.     Persons involved in rescue attempts who were not originally in pens 3
or 4.

16.    Attending to identify the body or to enquire in Sheffield as to
whereabouts of victims.
                                                              j
17.     Other:
                                                             p o b z .u




     Notes for Cllr.   Wood for the Police Federation reception

The 12 months since your last dinner have been very difficult ones
for the police service in South Yorkshire, and the next 12 are
likely to be ones full of change and difficulties.

HILLSBOROUGH

Within days of last year's dinner, the tragedy of Hillsborough
took place. It was a dreadful day for all those who are football
enthusiasts and for those of us who have a deep interest in the
police service.

Much has been said about Hillsborough, and I am sure that there is
much more to follow, and I don't want tonight to add unnecessarily
to that. What I will say is that there is a tremendous task to be
done to restore the morale of the South Yorkshire Force, and to
help those officers who themselves became vicitms of Hillsborough
- through the trauma they have suffered and through their
treatment by the press. I believe that the Force has, at the
highest level, set about this task with a great will, and I am
delighted at how well officers have come to terms with the tragedy
and its aftermath.

The financial consequences will be with us for a long time too,
but the Police Authority will do everything in its power to
minimise the effects and assist the process of recovery, so that
as far as is humanly possible, we return to the position we were
in prior to the tragedy.

CHIEF CONSTABLE

One man who has taken a great deal of flak throughout the past
year is our Chief Constable Peter Wright. It is very sad that his
last year with South Yorkshire should have turned out in this way,
in view of his outstanding past record here. Without doubt, Peter
Wright has been an excellent chief constable, who has given great
service to this county over the past 7 1/2 years.

Peter's professionalism and leadership qualities have always been
of the highest order, and respect for him is widespread throughout
the force, elected members and the general public. His retirement
is well deserved, and I know that we shall have an extremely
difficult job finding anyone of similar stature to replace him.

OVERVIEW

Policing has to respond to the many changes going on in our
society both nationally and locally. The actions of officers
individually and collectively are increasingly under public
scrutiny. Hillsborough showed that, and we have seen it in other
ways too.

National

Nationally we have in the last few days had the riots in London
over the poll tax and in Strangeways jail. There is a generally
increasing pattern of violent crime and more sophisiticated
criminals, which means that the police have to be more
sophisticated in the ways in which they respond.

There are changes in society - age-structure of the population /
drugs / unemployment / urban deprivation - which also put extra
pressures on the police role.

Central government is also an obstacle. For example, the ovex
ruling by the Home Secretary of many of the PNB's decisions on
housing allowance. He has been persuaded recently to reverse them
partially, but too late to prevent Police Authorities like South
Yorkshire from being financially embarrased.

Local

Central government controls on finance continue to mean that many
decisions concerning the Force are being made 180 miles away in
London. First among these is the poll tax - the effect on local
budgets and resources, including the latest problem, not directly
affecting the police, of the political decision yesterday to poll
tax cap authorities - three of them in South Yorkshire.

On capital expenditure, the Home Secretary's allocations for 1990
/I would not allow us to replace any vehicles. Many areas have
suffered, including building maintenance, vehicles and computer
developments. None of us wants to see this happening, but its
forced upon us by the government.

As if that were not enough, there are many other agencies always
looking over our shoulders - HMI / Home Office / Audit Commission
/ the courts / e t c . ..

Decisions and judgements on all sorts of issues, which should be
being made locally, are constantly being siphoned off to London -
how is the effectiveness and efficiency of the Force to be
assessed, for example. Something that we here in South Yorkshire
ought to be tackling, but more and more is being taken out of our
hands. The Police Authority has to be ever vigilant to prevent
this process gaining more and more ground, and to insist that
decisions which affect South Yorkshire and taken here.

PROGRESS

But its not all bad. In 1990/1 we have managed to squeeze extra
officers in the budget and we have made a bid to the Home
Secretary for another 50 officers in 1991/92. We want these extra
officers, but even if the Home Secretary agrees to them - and he
may not - whether we can afford them when we get there is another
question.

In other areas the Authority and the Force continue to offer the
public of South Yorkshire a first rate standard of policing,
despite all these difficulties. Our relations with the public are
good, and only last week the Authority agreed improvements to our
community consultation arrangements to make them even better than
they already are.

CONCLUSION

Policing has never been an easy task, and the present political
climate is not helpful to those of us who want a good, effective,
well-equipped force. But despite all these problems, and the
difficulties of the past year, together we continue to serve  the
public in the highest standards and traditions of the service, and
     «


                                                   P     O f o H - O



  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY


  5 JANUARY 1990
                                                                           11
 REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTART.r.



 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - IMPLEMENTATION OF
 THE TAYLOR INQUIRY REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS


 Matter for Consideration


               the action taken in relation to the Police Authority resolutions
  umbered four,   five a. to d. and six (minute 118 of the Police Authority
 meeting held on 17 November 1989 refers).


 Background Information


 1 7 6Nol!emLrO?QR0bi % S,??Titteu *       at th* P°liCe Authority meeting held on
          “     989 Retailing the action taken by the South Yorkshire Police both
                  ^ bsequent to the Publication of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim
 Report,     including     consultations with local authorities,     the criminal
 investigation, matters of complaint and discipline, the Coroner's Inquest, the
 the Force      nS    ^     6ffeCtS °f the disaster on the health and welfare   of


 Following this report the Authority resolved that a further report be
 prepared, inter alia, on a number of aspects of the resolution as follows:-


 Resolution 4

Jhat the Chief Constable be requested to consider and report on the suggestion
           - elevant information on the policing of football matches should be
p rovided— to both the relevant local authorities and the football clubs in the
-j^ erest— °I- increasing the effectiveness of liaison with other than just the
other emergency services.                           — ........         j

The suggestion,   that all relevant information on the policing of football
matches should be provided to both the local authorities and the football
clubs in the interest of increasing the effectiveness of'liaison with other
than just the emergency services has been considered.  The Chief Constable has
directed that a full police operational order for every football match shall
De available to each local authority and each football club.


Resolution 5a.

    comments and criticisms of the Taylor Inquiry with regard to the    polirlng
of the South Yorkshire Force on the day of the disaster.                 ------

The Chief Constable has noted with regret and concern the nature and the tenor
of the comments and criticisms about the actions of certain South Yorkshire
Police officers on the day of the disaster contained in Lord Justice Taylor's
report.
                                              - 2 -




  rsza z -s: ^ zt r ^ ' T z z x . sfisrZrJL'irss:
  decisis“ ; . !       „    f      Authority and the Chief Constable have              made    their



  fiin«nOBm!nt     °r criticisms contained in the Report were,           where      appropriate

  s e e . : zzzsrszjr* s .2222 th; —

 Resolution 5b.

       comments and criticisms of the Tavlnr inquir
                                                               with regard to the evidence
         a    the Inquil y by police officers of t^e siuth Y o r t S ^ e ' P o ^ £
 manner in which such evidence was given

 so         f tnesses’ who gave oral evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquirv
 59 of them (over 33%) were South Yorkshire Police officers? The Force
 the°d y ?f C°mp?;ete °Penness and helpfulness towards the Inquiry.        Following
 - to d i l T ’ the Cht6f Constable’* concerns were those of J h e ^ q u i r J
 conlH h     V6r ®xactly what happened and to make sure that nothing like it
 Constable*5"0      ±B ^     Yorkshire »r elsewhere.   To this      , th.Chi^f
     table set UP a liaison team which furnished the Inquiry with over 900
 statements and whatever additional information it required            Whilst tSe
 teamirallW of w h i c ^ 8 ’ ^ TreaSury Solicitors made constant requests to this
     '       5 which were met. Unsolicited, the South Yorkshire Police produced
 witnesses t h ^ were
  ltnesses that  e r f c a u Y gave
                       called  18” * their
                                     ^       by th6 In,lulry-
                                           testimony           Ea‘» °f the
                                                     fully and voluntarily.                  police


Individual*16 o f f S r f °‘><'nn<'®s adopted         the s° « h    Yorkshire    Police,      some
                officers     may   have   felt   under     severe    attack     from    the      10
toPquestion the         " h° had the °PP°rtunity with the benefit of                   hindsight
to question them about their actions and decisions.

t L i r ° rd ,H
              J usti- Ta? lor complimented certain officers for the way they gave
      J evidence but has not indicated which officers he has criticised       the
Chief Constable is of the view that it would serve no purpose to speculate.


Resolution 5c.


n'!:” ! , ! ! ? * - ! 1*6 .!!!5 tate" t 0 .reVle" and Chan,,e the             Procedures       .nH
Q£eration of the Force since the Hillsborough disaster                   in     n . u — ^7     th -
S t e r S18    C r l t l c ls m s o f th e T aPl o r inquiry, particularly those contained In


The planning procedures involved in the policing of football events have been
reviewed and supplemented as follows:-
                                                 - 3 -

     (i)
                   or i         t
                       the football     h a v e clubs
                                      league    r e r e in
                                                        dint o a "Countv
                                                           the     * « “ • » «The
                                                                               — «uritf.n
                                                                                     «±tb
             agreement covers such matters as club/police liaison before a n y elen*
             in    thePf !ni °f .COntingency Plans»‘ demarcation of responsibilities
                           ]■ ng 3nd monitoring of the terraces; provision and use of
                    ng equipment; plans for relieving overcrowding, etc.
    (ii)
             iHtend!da^ ° na\ f lanI!ing f°r 6aCh footba11 match in South Yorkshire is
             arrival      at " a ^ d   d           T COPe W±th    fo~ seea^
                                  departure from, the event by spectators.
                                                                                patterns in t L
                                                                                    The
                  lowing scenarios are each catered for by w a y of contingency plans

             a)   all ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches
             b)   early arrival of spectators
            d) indiUMrite?      3nC* ^°int arrival of large numbers of spectators
              ) individual            section of ground approaching capacity
            e; whole ground approaching capacity
            f) late arrival of spectators
            g)
                em« f e O y ? r niHg °f1external Sates, (or forcing of external
                  gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators
            h) early departure of spectators from ground
            i)    emergency evacuation


            raniHSeHV€\ °f offlcers is maintained at each ground to               enable     their
            the g j ' d          nt t0 a"y dltficult* » hlch        « i s e i-side or      outside


  (lll> services'at t h f t ^ r fP°|lce."°w liaise    « » fire
        services at the time of planning for a football event.
                                                                                and   ambulance

   (iv)    A 'model* South Yorkshire Police operational order for football events
           most Forces in°F         ^ °Perational orders have been obtained from
           most Forces in England and Wales - best practise has been adopted and
           the lessons learned from the Hillsborough disaster (highlighted at
           Paragraphs 273 and 274 of the Taylor Report) have been incorporated.

   (V)                      *°rkshire      Police have prepared a video    tape    film      which
           dynamics The%i?»                      Cr°Wd density’ crowd distress and crowd
           stew^dXJ ™ H                         US6d 38 3 trainin« aid for both police and
           stewards who monitor football crowds.

  (vi)     Furthermore,        the     police    Implementation    Team   has     produced      a
           taken n   V® PaCkage detailing the measures which have already been
           Son^h v       recommended for the future at each football ground in
           South Yorkshire to ensure crowd safety.    These packages have been
           prov e   to the local authorities who each have a responsibility for
                      certification at football grounds.   Extracts from these
           H u r l 1 , r rfappe?ded to the Chief Constable's last report                to    the
           Police Authority on 17 November 1989.

These steps are together intended to enhance the planning and operational
procedures involved in the policing of football events in South Yorkshire.
  Resolution 5d.

 g g.,.steps he has taken to review the change of management training appraisal
 ggd quality of officers of the Force since the Hillsborough disaster in light

 i i t a ^ e d Ci r ^ : ^ : n?KCrltiClSmS °f the Tarlog   In^   particularly    those


 Chapter 16 of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report states that      "...over    many
 t w S u   S°ut*\Y°rkshire Police have given excellent service to the public,
   ey have handled crowd problems sensitively and successfully at a large
            5°°J     games includin« major matches, during strikes in the coal
 industry and the steel industry, and in other contexts...".

 The  management training,  appraisal and selection processes that exist within
 the  Force are all targetted to achieve a continuation of that "excellent
      Ce     t 6 public of South Yorkshire.    Such matters are under constant
 review and any changes considered appropriate will be introduced.

 The policing of football matches has traditionally been regarded by the police
                 Wh°le 3S 3 Particular Public order problem.      Training has
 reflected this view - policing of football has been subsumed in general public
 order training.    In the light of the Hillsborough disaster there are clearly
 policing matters specific to football events that warrant a training input,
 eg   Safety Certification matters,   football crowd dynamics,  communications,
 intelligence gathering,  contingency planning, CCTV utilisation, membership
 schemes,   etc.    The Association of Chief Police Officers has already
 recommended that these matters be subject of a carousel course at the Police
 Staff College,   Bramshill.   When this course is arranged the Chief Constable
      ensure that South Yorkshire officers attend.

 Within Force,   the superintendents who have a responsibility for policing
 arrangements at the five football league grounds in South Yorkshire have been
 co-opted onto the Implementation Team which has been tasked with implementing
 the recommendations contained in the Taylor Interim Report




Resolution 6

I M l i — as— previously requested by minute 81.2 of 29 September 1989, progress
reports be submitted to each scheduled meeting of the Authority until further
notice.                              —                                        —

There is little by the way of further progress to report in addition to         that
already reported to the Authority on 17 November 1989.

As outlined at paragraph 3.3 of that report the Police Implementation Team
provided each local authority with a comprehensive report of what the police
have so far achieved.  The Authorities were each asked to convene a meeting to
discuss the report relative to their area and what still remains to be done
through the Local Authority Licensing Committees.

Item four dealt with the increased costs for policing football matches.  The
Chief Constable can now report that the Association of Chief Police Officers
Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events has undertaken to review
nationally and consider further the position of police costs       arising     from
football. They will report in due course.

The officer referred to at paragraph 9.3 has now been retired from the Force,
on the grounds of ill-health.

On 30 November 1989 it was announced that the Chief Constable and the South
Yorkshire Police Authority were offering an out-of-court settlement to the
bereaved and injured at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.   The purpose of this
was to ensure that those entitled to compensation receive it without further
delay.

The below press statement was released at 2.30 pm:-

"It has been decided by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and the South
Yorkshire Police Authority,   in conjunction with their insurers, Municipal
Mutual Insurance,   that those bereaved and injured in the tragic events at
Hillsborough stadium on 15 April should not have to await the outcome of a
further lengthy hearing in 1990 before receiving compensation.

In the circumstances,  the Chief Constable,  in conjunction with his insurers,
intends to open negotiations with the aim of resolving all bona fide claims
against him for compensation arising out of the Hillsborough disaster.

The other parties presently named as Defendants in the civil proceedings
arising out of the Hillsborough tragedy,  namely, Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club,  Eastwood & Partners,  and Sheffield City Council, have been offered the
opportunity of joining in the course of action now taken on behalf of the
South Yorkshire Police, but have refused to do so. It is the intention of the
Chief Constable and his insurers to pursue legal action against those parties
to recover moneys paid out to the claimants pursuant to today's offer."


Recommended

The Police Authority note the current position as     previously   requested    by
minute 81.2 of 29 September 1989.




P WRIGHT
CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                        D5




                          D R A F T



   STATEMENT OP CHIEF CONSTABLE OP SOUTH YORKSHIRE




It has been decided by the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire and the South Yorkshire Police Authority,
in conjunction with their insurers, Municipal Mutual
Insurance,    that those bereaved and injured in the
tragic events at Hillsborough stadium on 15th April
should not have to await the outcome of: a further
lennthy hearing in 1990 before receiving compensation,


In the circumstances,      the Chief Constable,   in
conjunction with his insurers,        intends to open
negotiations with the aim of resolving all bona fide
claims against him for compensation arising out of
the Hillsborough disaster.


The other parties presently named as Defendants in
the civil proceedings arising out of the Hillsborough
tragedy,    namely,   Sheffield Wednesday F.C.,   Eastwood
and Partners and Sheffield City Council,        have been
offered the opportunity of joining in the course of
action now taken on behalf of the South 'Yorkshire
Police,    but have refused to do so.      It is the
intention of the Chief Constable and his insurers to
pursue legal action against those parties to recover
moneys paid out to the claimants pursuant to today's
offer.
*


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY


17 NOVEMBER !§•§




REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE


ACTIONS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE FOLLOWING THE
PUBLICATION OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT


      Introduction

1.1   In the wake of the disaster which occurred at Hillsborough Stadium,
      Sheffield, on 15 April 1989, a Public Inquiry was commissioned to enquire
      into the events and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd
      control and safety at sports events.     The Inquiry was chaired by Lord
      Justice Taylor and it sat from 15 May until 14 July 1989.

1.2   L«ri Justice Taylor published his Interim Report on 4 August 1989, in
      which he made 43 interim recommendations.  He emphasised that these were
      designed to prevent overcrowding and crushing on terraced areas in the
      short term, and that long term recommendations fell to be considered in
      his Final Report. A copy of the recommendations is appended.


      Implementation of Recommendations

2.1   The recommendations contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report
      included many which were already identified as necessary in the light of
      the events at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.   The South Yorkshire Police
      were therefore well prepared to ensure that they were swiftly implemented
      at the five football league grounds in the County.

2.2   The Chief Constable nominated Mr P Hayes QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief
      Constable, to liaise personally with the management of each football club
      and with each local authority concerned in respect of future crowd
      safety.   Mr Hayes met with directors and secretaries of all five South
      Yorkshire   football   league   clubs on 24 August      1989   and   with
      representatives of the four local authorities on 18 September 1989.

2.3   To progress the recommendations of the Taylor. Report the Deputy Chief
      Constable appointed an 'Implementation Team' which included the local
      ground commanders who have a responsibility for policing each of the five
      football league clubs in the County,      and officers with specialist
      knowledge in such areas as communications, CCTV and training.    The team
      has met under the Deputy Chief Constable's chairmanship on seven
      occasions since 4 August 1989 and each of the recommendations which
      places a responsibility with the police has been implemented at all
      football league grounds.   Those recommendations which were asterisked by
      Lord Justice Taylor,     signifying their immediate need,      were each
      implemented by 18 August - just two weeks after the publication of the
      Taylor Report and before the start of the current league programme.
      Furthermore,  it is pleasing to be able to report that, with the positive
      co-operation   of   the football clubs,     signed   written   agreements
between   the clubs and the police,       setting out    their   respective
responsibilities for crowd safety, have been drawn up.

The   South   Yorkshire  Police have also addressed      the remaining
recommendations for which they are not directly responsible. A report
concerning these matters has been forwarded to each of the local
authorities who have a responsibility for safety certification at
football grounds.

A copy of each written agreement together with a summary of the action
taken on all relevant recommendations in relation to that football ground
is appended.


The Responsibilities of the Local Authorities for Safety at
Sports Grounds                                                      *

Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium
designated under the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as amended) is
responsible for the issue of a Safety Certificate in respect of that
stadium.   Each of the local authorities of Rotherham, Barnsley and
Doncaster have a responsibility for one football league ground, Sheffield
has a responsibility for two.

The certifying authorities are called upon by the Taylor Report to
immediately review each Safety Certificate,    ensure that the operative
conditions of the Certificate are complied with,  then add or substitute
any condition shown to be necessary by the findings and recommendations
of the Taylor Report.

The centrally directed police 'Implementation Team has achieved as much
as it can by independent action.       The local authorities in South
Yorkshire, which each have a responsibility under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act, have been provided with a comprehensive report of what the
police have so far achieved.     Where it has not been possible for the
South   Yorkshire   Police   to fully    implement   any   recommendation
unilaterally,   proposals are offered to the responsible certifying
authority of how the recommendation might be progressed.


 Increased Costs for Policing Football Matches

 Several of the recommendations in the Interim Report of Lord Justice
 Taylor impose additional duties upon the police at football matches. For
 example,  (i) the deployment of police officers, to each gate in a
 perimeter fence,  authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators
 through a gate to relieve overcrowding;      (ii) the deployment of a
 reserve of police officers to each match who are not committed to any
 specific duty and are therefore able to deal with any unforeseen
 difficulties which arise inside or outside the ground;   and,   (iii) the
 deployment of a sufficient number of skilled operators in the police
 control room to enable all radio transmissions to be received,   evaluated
 and answered and to enable all the results of CCTV recording outside and
 inside the ground to be monitored and interpreted.

 It is obvious from the implementation of these three recommendations
 alone that the cost of policing football matches will be greater than
 ever before.
      f
                                          -   3 -

4.3       Members will be aware that a proportion of policing costs is met by the
          football clubs themselves.      At present the financial contribution    s
          determined by reference to a sliding scale of charges agreed annually
          between the Police Authority,   the Chief Constable and each of the clubs,
          based upon a prior estimate of crowd size for a particular game.    In the
          two seasons    1987/88 and 1988/89 the total cost of policing the five
          football clubs in South Yorkshire,   both inside and outside the grounds,
          amounted to some £1.83 million and, of this figure, the clubs contributed
           £398,000 which amounts to 22% of the overall cost.

4 4       In the light of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations many Police
          Authorities are now reassessing the charges levied on football clubs for
          special police services.

4.5       The facility to charge for police officers in these ci^ ums*®*cef
          provided by Section 15 of the Police Act 1964, which enables the Chief
          Constable, at his discretion,   to provide,  on request, special Po1^
          services at any premises or in any locality in the police area.     The
          section further empowers the Police Authority to charge for these
           services.

 4 6      There is no precise definition of the term 'special police services'  but
          the case of Harris -v- Sheffield United Football Club 1986 held that the
          Chief Constable is not, as part of his normal policing responsibility,
          obliged to provide officers to react to potential breaches of the peace
          where the owner of private property creates such a risk on his proper y.

 4.7       It would seem, therefore, that officers provided to meet such a risk, as
           in the case of a football match, are within the meaning of special police
           services and can be charged for.     Indeed, PollcelrAutbo51^ * * ^ ave        3
           fiduciary duty to the ratepayers of their area to make such charges.

 4.8       The Harris case, however, does not fuiiy resolve - ^ ^ . ^ a ^ t h e ^ f a c t
           regarded as performing special police services.    It held that the fact
           that officers were deployed on private property was significant
           tending to show their provision amounted to special police ^ i c e s ,     *ut
           did not deal with the question of officers deployed to perform duties
           outside the ground - duties that arise directly from the event which is
           occurring inside the ground.   Legal opinion has,  therefore, been soug t
           for clarification as to which duties performed by police officers at
           football matches can properly be regarded as ’special police services

  4 9      notwithstanding the question of payment for police deployment outside
           football grounds it is submitted that the level of contribution from the
                ' r    S    falls significantly short of the actual cost of o fleer
           inside the ground, and that the shortfall is set to widen in the light of
           the Taylor recommendations which necessitate an increase in the number of
            police officers deployed at football matches.


            Criminal Investigation of South Yorkshire Police Officers

  5.1       During   the    course of the Hillsborough Inquiry
            manslaughter   by the criminal negligence of South                        Qc_
            officers was    raised by counsel for the bereaved, MrBenet Hytner        u

  5.2       Because this matter was not dealt with in the Report ol: the H U ^ o r o u g h
            Inquiry the Chief Constable,  on the morning of the Report s public
            referred it    to the Director of Public Prosecutions, asking       for his
                                     -   4 -                                      f

      decision on the question of criminal liability of any member of the South
      Yorkshire   Police.    It was considered appropriate, at that time, to
      suspend from duty the police commander of the Hillsborough event, Chief
      Superintendent David Duckenfield,   pending the outcome of the Director's
      deliberations.    Mr Duckenfield remains suspended.

5.3   On 15 August 1989, the Director wrote to the Chief Constable setting out
      his view    that the matter should be subject of a full          criminal
      investigation.    The West Midlands Police had already done considerable
      work in gathering evidence for Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.   It seemed
      sensible,   therefore,  to invite Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM DL LLB, Chief
      Constable   of the West Midlands Police Force,        to undertake   this
      investigation.    His report,  in due course, will be submitted to the
      Director of Public Prosecutions.


6.    Matters of Complaint and Discipline

6.1   Additionally, the Chief Constable has asked that if, during the course of
      their investigation,   the West Midlands Police officers discover any
      matters which might suggest that offences were committed against the
      Police (Discipline) Regulations, of a non-criminal nature, those offences
      should be brought to his attention and, where appropriate, be enquired
      into by the West Midlands Police on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police.
      This is agreed.

6.2   There are currently seven matters of public complaint about the actions
      of South Yorkshire Police officers,     arising from the Hillsborough
      incident.

6.3   Three of these matters have been raised by a single complainant.      Two
      relate to the actions of the senior officers in command of the policing
      operation at Hillsborough on the day and these are being supervised by
      Captain E Noel Taylor of the Police Complaints          Authority.    The
      investigation of these complaints is being conducted by Mr Geoffrey Dear,
      Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police, along with the criminal
      matters. The third complaint is of incivility and is being investigated,
      unsupervised by the Police Complaints Authority, by Superintendent Ashton
      of the South Yorkshire Police.

6.4   A fourth complaint is that an officer at the perimeter fence contributed
      to the death of the complainant's son by his failure to open the fence
      gate in good time.

6.5   A fifth complaint is that the failure by South Yorkshire Police officers
      to open perimeter fence gates caused the complainant to sustain injury.

6.6   A sixth complaint is made by a man who alleges that he was assaulted by a
      police officer whilst attending the football match.

6.7   These latter three cases are again to be investigated by Mr Dear's team
      and are likewise being supervised by Captain E Noel Taylor of the Police
      Complaints Authority.

6.8   There is a seventh complaint of corruption, namely of police officers
      offering to allow fans into the ground on payment.   This complaint is
      being investigated by Superintendent Carlisle of the Greater Manchester
      Police.
Coroner's Inquest Regarding the 95 Deaths Which Arose

The   gathering of evidence on behalf of HM Coroner,          Dr    Stefan
Popper LLB BMedSci BM BS MRCGP, in relation to the 95 deaths that
occurred at Hillsborough, is continuing by the West Midlands Police.

The Coroner opened the inquests on 19/20 April 1989, and adjourned them
to a date to be fixed.      He had set aside three months to hear the
inquests beginning in January 1990.    I understand, however,  that the
Director of Public Prosecutions has recently written to Dr Popper
requesting that the inquests be deferred until after the results of the
on-going criminal investigation are concluded.


Civil Actions

To date eight writs have been served upon the South      Yorkshire Police
alleging negligence by its officers on 15 April 1989,    leading to loss,
injury, damage and, in two cases, death.

The writs are to be defended by the Police Authority's insurers,
Municipal Mutual Insurance Company.  It is understood that three of these
actions will be representative actions.

The presiding Northern Circuit Judge, Mr Justice Rose, has taken personal
charge of the interlocutory proceedings.      At a Directions Hearing on
26 October 1989 at the High Court in Manchester Mr Justice Rose set the
date for commencement of the civil actions for 11 June 1990.     At that
hearing Mr Justice Rose expressed his satisfaction regarding the work
done by all parties to the claims to achieve a state of readiness for
trial.


The Effects of the Hillsborough Disaster on the Health
and Welfare of the Force

Twenty-three officers reported injuries sustained in the rescue of people
from the Leppings Lane terraces. These injuries were, in the main, minor
strains and bruising to backs and limbs.

A total of 58 officers subsequently took sick leave which was directly
attributable to the disaster in the weeks which followed the event,
mainly due to the effects of shock and stress. As a result, 356 working
days were lost.

Two officers remain on sick leave, suffering from stress, one of whom may
well retire from the Force on the grounds of ill-health in the near
future.

During week ending 23 April 1989 - the week immediately following the
disaster - only 92 officers had taken sick leave, compared with 101 in
the corresponding week in 1988.     The figure rose to a maximum of 143
officers taking sick leave during week ending 30 April    1989, compared
with- 107 in 1988.   By week ending 21 May 1989, however,   the number of
officers taking sick leave had fallen to 105 which corresponded,
identically, with the same period in 1988.

Any effects that the Hillsborough disaster had upon the health and
welfare of the Force appear, largely, to have been short lived. It is
                                    -   6 -

      thought that this is, to a significant extent, due to the efforts of the
      Force Welfare Officer and our Consultant Counsellor who started their
      work at the ground within hours of the tragedy occurring.   The memories
      of the disaster, and the emotions evoked by it, will remain with many
      officers for a long time.  The Force as a whole, however,   has adjusted
      well.


10.   Recommended

10.1 The   Police   Authority note the efforts made       to   implement   the
     recommendations of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor,  insofar as
     they relate to the police.

10.2 The Police Authority accept, in principle, the need to review in detail
     and, if necessary, re-negotiate the basis for recovering the costs of
     providing special police services to the football clubs in South
     Yorkshire.

10.3 The Police Authority note that the relevant local authorities are
     responsible for the implementation of any outstanding recommendations,
     and for the enforcement of new or existing conditions of the Safety
     Certificate issued in respect of each football stadium.

10.4 The Police Authority note the progress of the on-going         criminal
     investigation,  the civil litigation and the Coroner's Inquiry arising
     from the disaster at Hillsborough. Further reports will be submitted in
     due course.




P Wright
Chief Constable
        D O C U M E N T    (1)




COPY OF CHAPTER 24 OF THE TAYLOR REPORT

         THE RECOMMENDATIONS
                                C H A P T E R 24 - T H E R E C O M M E N D A T IO N S

   315. The reco m m en d atio n s which follow are the m in im u m necessary to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which i have heard at Sheffield and other
in torm atio n I have received. They com plem eni the recom m en dation s which Mr Justice Poppiewell set out
after his inquiry at Bradford.

  316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
started forthw ith an d com pleted as socn as possible.

M axim um Capacities for Terraces
*     1. W here a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
    should specify the maximum num ber of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

    A pen or area is to be deemed “ self-contained” notwithstanding th at it has a gate or gates affording access to
    a n oth er pen or a re a a n d w hether such gate or gates be open or shut.                                 * '

*    2. Each figure for m aximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with C hapter 16 of the Green
    Guide (‘"the G reen Guide figure^’) subject to the following quaiifications:-

    (a) in arriving at "th e G reen Guide figure", proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
        which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
        in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide:

    (b) after assessing " th e Green Guide figure", a deduction of 15% shouid be made to improve the safety
        margin.

*    3. Arrangem ents should be m ade:-

    (a) to limit the num ber of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
        figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
        ticketing arrangem ent, by counting or otherwise, and

    (b) to close off further access to sucii pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


Filling and Monitoring Terraces
*    4. T here should be a written agreem ent between the club and the police setting out their respective
    responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
    other terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
    variation of the agreem ent in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

*   " 5. At each match there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
    area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
    sole duty is to check crowd conditions in th at area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
    period the a re a is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed shouid be in addition to any other steward
    or police presence. H e shouid have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
    below, and by radio to the control room.


Fences and Gates
       6.    All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
    duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
    crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
    dem onstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
    different crowd densities.

*     7. All gates in radial or perim eter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
    different colour from the rest o f the fence and m arked "Em ergency Exit".



                                                        57
★            8. W here there are perimeter fences, all pates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
            when spectators are on the terrace.

★             9. T here should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
            a police officer authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowding.
            T h e officer so authorised in respect of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so by all
            stewards and police officers in that vicinity. H e should be able to make radio contact with the control room
            either him self or via an officer close at hand.

★            10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there
            are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
            necessary. Agreement should be reached as to w hether the equipment should be used by police, the fire
            brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. W hether to use it should be a decision of a
            nominated senior police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
★              11. All crush barriers should be visually in spected immediately for signs of corrosion. Anv barrier found
            to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

    ★         12. The lavout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
            compiies with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not. the assessment of the
            maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
            reflect the fact.


    Safety Certificates
              13. There should be an immediate review of each Safery Certificate by the responsible local authority
            which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
            ambulance serv ice and the building authoriry. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
            object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
            substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
            recommendations in this report.

              14. Any local authority within w hose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 19"5 Act for
            which no Safrty Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

              15. E ven Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
            Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


                16.    Each local authority should review its arrangem ents for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
             amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
             accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
             effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
             with the local authority's nules.

                IT. To assist the local authoriry in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
             of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services, of
             the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters' club. The Advisory Group's terms of
             reference should encompass all m atters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
             ground and attendance at matches. T he Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority,
             and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
             written reports for consideration by the local authority .


        Duties of each Football Club
        *      18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
             inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
             anticipated.
★      19. T he correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it shouid be such
     as to ensure that all the spectators intended to be aamirted to that viewing area can pass through the
     turnstiles within one hour. If th at cannot be done, the capacity of that viewing area shouid be reduced
     accordingly.

★      20. Turnstiles should be closed w hen the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be
     reached and arrangem ents should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
     operators for this purpose.

       21. Closed circuit television shouid be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
     concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

★      22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
     reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangem ents for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
     and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
     area.                 ,

yr     23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and ciear and should correlate absolutely with
     the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
     shouid contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

★      24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time shouid be reviewed
     by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the pianned arrangements for
     adm itting spectators to the ground.

       25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters' club as to the provision of pre-match
     entertainm ent aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


Police Planning
*      26. T he C hief C onstable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
     should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the m anagement of each football club and local authority
     concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

*       27. T h e O perational O rd er for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match brieflnq of all
     officers on dury there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrow ding and. if any
     is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

*      28. T h e O perational O rder for each match at a designated stadium should enable the police to cope with
     any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
     sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

*      29. T he option to postpone kick-off shouid be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
     Crowd safety should be the param ount consideration in deciding w hether to exercise it.

        30.     T h ere shouid be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television
     monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
     at turnstiles or of numbers admirted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room shouid be skilled
     in the interpretation and use of these data.


Communications
       31.     T h ere should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to he
     received, evaluated and answered. T he radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
     priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be
     used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
     sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.
      32. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines
    with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

      33. W ithin the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
    areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
    announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
    noise in the ground. This arrangem ent should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every
    match.

      34. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
    Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
    the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services
*      35. T he police, fire and ambulance services should m aintain through senior nominated officers regular
    liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

*     36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
    ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
    spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
    concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
    rooms of each of the emergency services.

*     37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
    services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
    within the ground itself.

*     38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
    the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why
    they are required.


First Aid, M edical Facilities and Ambulances
*      39. T here should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1.000 spectators. The
    club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

      40. T here should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
    equipment to be m aintained within them should be specified by the local authority after taking professional
    medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

*     41. T h e d u b should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each m atch and available to deal with
    any medical exigency at the ground. H e should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. H e should be
    present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
    match. H is whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
    contactable.

*      42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
    attendance at all m atches with an expected crowd of 5.000 or more.

      43. T he number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
    be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
    requirement of the Safety Certificate.
            ACTION TAKEN BY

       THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

RESPECT OF SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

    FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

           THE INTERIM REPORT

                   OF

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
   Tis document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

  referred to as    '?he Police') and Sheffield Wednesday Football   Club (hereafter

  referred to as    'The Club').




  This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

  recomnendation   four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by    ±he Rt Hon

  Lord Justice Taylor   into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15    April 1989.




  The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows




   Maximum Capacities for Terraces

  The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

   each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

   accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




   The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

   number of persons passing through each turnstile.




   The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

4 ^ approaching capacity.   The Club will be^responsible for closing off further

   access to a per. or area when its maxinrjs capacity is about to be reac..ec.       ±he

   Police accept The Club may'on occasions have difficulties in this regard,
                             *   *

   therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




   The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

   public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

   prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.




   Filling and Monitoring Terraces

   The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

   terraced area during such times that there are spectators m        that pen or
terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

,ny other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the per-mete.

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised

decide whether or not to allow spectators through .a gate to relieve

overcrowding.



 All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fdlly op

 at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be author-sed as above.

 Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contac. with pol-ce

 ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




 The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

 issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

  track will communicate to police ground control any relevant a c - e .      bro g.

  their attention by these stewards.




  Cutting Equipment

  The Club v i 11 provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

  cutting      equipment topermit the immediate removal of   enough fencing   to release

  numbers of spectators if    necessary.   This cutting equipment will be operated

  by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.        The us. of such

              •i s.     ,, th* discretion of the nominated   senior police    officer who
  equipment vxxl be     at tne aiscret-on

   will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
    B efore      each   m atch   both   p a rtie s   to   th is   agreement   w ill   lia is e   in   respect    of   the

    fo llo w in g    m a tte rs :-


           i)        the anticipated number of spectators expected having                          regard

                     to the separate supporter groups;




          ii)        the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended                           to be   used;




        iii)         any information in relation to crowd                     problems;




         .iv) '' the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

                      to each group;




            v)       an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

                      through the turnstiles;




          vi)        where tickets are used,              that the information on those tickets

                      corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

                      spectators to the ground.




^   Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion 01 the police officer in command

    at the ground.             It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link
                                          00
    between the referee's room and the police control room.'.




    The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

    being called to the ground.                  These include routes of access, rendezvous

    points,         accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.                             The Police will

    liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

    amended or as otherwise appropriate.
    Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

Mr peter Hayes QPJ1 LIB «A, as the Chief Officer vith responsibility for

liaison vith the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED ..                        . on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
                                   Football Club




SIGNED                          . on behalf of South Yorkshire Police




DATE
RBOCMMEMDftTICIN 1


It is noted by the police that the current Safety Certificate for

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club has been amended to reflect the new

capacities of all standing areas as followss—


Spion Kop                                         16'800

North West Terrace- Upper Level                     2,300
                                                                                  *

North West Terrace- Lower Level                       680

 (It is further noted that the Safety Certificate prohibits spectators

 from standing on the West Stand, Leppings Lane, terraces.)



 RECOMMENDATION 2

 The    calculation         for    maximum        capacities,   proposed     by       this

 reconmendation, has been followed in determining the figure for each

 terraced area recorded above.



 REOCMMEMDATICM 3

  (a) An electronic counting system is in place at Sheffield Wednesday s

       ground   whereby      the   number    of    spectators   entering each         self-

       contained area is contemporaneously recorded.



       The club has undertaken           (see written agreement) to monitor this

       counter and to limit the number of spectators entering any self-

       contained     area    to    the   maximum      capacity figure      assessed     in

       accordance with Recarmendation 2 above.



  (b) The club will achieve this by closing off the relevant turnstiles

       to prevent further access to such an area when its maximum capacity

       is about to be reached.           The police have agreed to assist the club

       in this regard, if requested so to do.
K ia u u r rita x u f tx iu ri   **


A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities for crowd
safety and control, has been approved and signed by representatives of South
Yorkshire Police and Sheffield Wednesday PC.

A copy of that agreement is attached at document (6).


 RBCQMEMDftTION 5



 At each match at Sheffield Wednesday's ground there are stewards

 situated on the perimeter track at the Spion Kop end of the ground

 whose sole duty is to check crcwd conditions in that area for pqssible

 overcrowding or distress.                           The stewards regularly perform the same

 duties, as do the police officers authorised under Reccnmendation 9

 below.              The parties are therefore familiar to each other, and the

 stewards have ready access to these police officers who each have a

 radio giving them contact with the police control rocm.



 RECOM ENDATION 6




 All police                 officers       and stewards       (not    just those authorised under

  Recommendations                     5   and   9)   are    fully    briefed     with   regard   to   the

  recognition of crow3 densities and to the recognition of signs of

  distress.                 All officers and stewards have been issued, as an aide

  memoire, with a laminated card which identifies the signs of distress.



  Stewards are each issued with a copy of written instructions, by the

  club, which detail their duties.                          The senior stewards are        briefed by a

  police            inspector,            before     each   match,    on   the    responsibilities     of

   stewards for crowd safety and control and their duties in case of

   emergency evacuation.                        The senior stewards are expected to brief the

  more junior stewards.



   Police officers cure briefed by a Senior police officer before each
match on their complementary responsibilities and duties. The carmander

of each sector of the ground is responsible for further briefing his or

her officers on their specific duties within that sector.



The    South   Yorkshire   Police   are   presently   preparing   visual   aids,

designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crowd

densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a little

more about crowd dynamics.          The aids will consist of a) Albums of

photographs depicting the various sections of Sheffield Wednesday's

ground with different numbers of spectators therein, and b) A video

tape     film which highlights crowd densities,       distress and dynamics.

When completed these photographs and film will be shown to the Safety

of Sports Ground Advisory Group.



The Certifying Authority are asked to ensure that the club undertakes

and continues to undertake its own reponsibilities for staff training

as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'

- paras, 26, 177, 195 and Annex B to the Guide.



RECCMSENDATION 7



All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Sheffield Wednesday PC

are painted    white   which is a different colour frcm the rest of the

fence.    Each is clearly identified by a sign which proclaims 'Bnergency

Exit'.



REOOMENDATION 8



All the gates in the perimeter fence at Sheffield Wednesday's ground
remain open while ever spectators are on the terrace.



RECOMMENDATION 9



There is, in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fences, at least one

officer whose sole duty, whenever spectators are on the terraces, is to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through that gateway to relieve

overcrowding.    Such police officers are to be identified by means of a lime
                                                                  4»

green tabard.    The officer is familiar to all stewards in that area (see

Recommendation 5 above), is known by them to be authorised to relieve

overcrowding, and is able to make radio contact with the police control

room.



RBOOWENDATION 10



Two sets of metal cutting equipment have been provided by Sheffield

Wednesday FC and are stored in boxes, adjacent to the fence, at either end

of the ground.    It has been agreed that, in case of need, employees of the

club trained in its use will be readily available to operate the equipment.



All stewards have been trained in its use and will respond to instruction

from police control (many of the stewards are in radio contact via the

club's radio system).



KBOOWBTCfeTIONS 11 and 12



It is understood that City Council representatives on the Safety of Sports

Ground Advisory Group have carried out an inspection of all crush barriers.
RBOCWEHDATIOHS 13 - 17



Safety Certification is obviously a matter for Sheffield City

Council.      In respect of Reconrrendation 17, the South Yorkshire

Police await notification of the constitution of the Advisory

Group.      It is the Police view, however, that this group should

supplement, and not replace, the existing Officer working Group.



RBCCMMEMDATIONS 18 AND 19



It is understood that each turnstile has been inspected and its

potential rate of flow measured and that the maximum capacities

of   each    viewing      area   can     be   admitted      via   the   respective

turnstiles in less than one hour.



RECOMMENDATION 20




(See Recommendation 3b).             When the capacity of any viewing area

is   15% below the maximum permitted, the figures displayed on the

electronic monitor in the Club Secretary's office begin to flashuThe

secretary, or his agent, will immediately pass a message via the

club     radio   system    to    a     steward   at   the    relevant    bank   of

turnstiles.      The turnstiles will be closed off and the police

informed by club radio or telephone to police control.



 RB0Qt*4EH»TI0N 21



Sheffield Wednesday PC currently have five CC TV cameras
installed around the ground.           A survey of the installation was

carried out    by      a   trained   police   CC TV operator   (no expert

knowledge   is professed) and his report is attached at document

(3).



For your further information the General Purposes Committee of

the Association cf Chief Ftiliae Officers has convened a working group

to consider,   nationally,         the use of CC TV to promote public

safety at football grounds.          The group anticipate that it may be

possible to provide a 'package' of equipment for use as a test

for a common minimum standard of performance.           They will report

back in due course.



RBCOMBCftTION     22


Signposting for spectators both inside and outside the ground has

been   reviewed     by     the   City Council   Safety of Sports Grounds

Advisory Group.            The police are generally satisfied with the

signposting.      Signposting at the West, Leppings Lane, end of the

ground will require revision in the light of any new turnstiling

arrangements which are proposed^ by Sheffield Wednesday PC, at

this end of the ground.



 REOCmEEPATIONS     23 AND 24


 The South Yorkshire Police have had liaison with the club on the

 question of ticketed matches.          The police are satisfied with the

 arrangements and will ensure that the information on any ticket

 corresponds with their plans for admitting spectators to the

 ground.
RBOOMENDATION 25



There is no regular pre match entertainment at football matches

at Sheffield Wednesday.        Police have no knowledge of whether the

club has held discussions with the recognised supporters club on

this matter.



 RBCOWEMDBTION 26



The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes, QPM, LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of

each football club and local authority concerned in respect of

the   safety   and   control    of   crowds.   Mr   Hayes has met   with

Directors or    Secretaries of all five football league clubs in

the county, including Mr Mackrell of Sheffield Wednesday PC, on

24 August 1989.      He met with representatives of the four relevant

local authorities, including Messrs Ward and Bownes of Sheffield

City Council on 18 September 1989.        A copy of the minutes of that

meeting are attached at document (7).



RBOOMEMDKTION 27



Both the Operational Order and the pre match briefing of all

officers on duty at each match at Sheffield Wednesday PC alert

officers to the dangers of overcrowding, and if any should be

detected, of taking immediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.
The     p ro p o s e d       tr a in in g   by      w ay   o f    p h o to g ra p h s    and     v id e o   (see

R e c o r m e n d a t io n   6   above)     w ill    fu rth e r   e m p h a s is e   th e s e   messages.



RBCOMEMDftTION 28



The operational planning for each match at Sheffield Wednesday PC

is intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns

in the arrival at, and departure frcm, any match by spectators.



The following scenarios are each catered for by way of police

contingency plans at Sheffield Wednesday PC:-



a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

b) Early arrival of spectators.

c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

 f) Late arrival of spectators.

 g) Emergency opening of external gates (or forcing of external

       gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

 h) Early departure of spectators frcm ground.

  i) Emergency evacuation.



 The police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable

  rapid deployment to any difficulty which may arise inside or

  outside the ground.
The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves

that    the   club     have      made    contingency       plans    to    deal   with   a

situation where the available entrances might prove insufficient

to stop unduly large crowds gathering outside the ground.                            Such

contingency plans are required by paragraph                        46of    the Guide to

Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'. .



REXXMMENDftTION 29



The police officer in ccrmand at Sheffield Wednesday PC is aware

of the     option to delay kick-off, and discusses this matter,

before each game, with the match officials.                              The option was

utilised      on     the      30    August       1989,    when     the    police     chief

superintendent         asked       for   the     kick-off» at      the match       between

Sheffield Wednesday and Evertor> to be delayed for 15 minutes to

ensure the safety of the crowd still trying to                             get   into the

ground at 7.15 pi'-              The crowd was notified            ofthe delay by the

public address system.



To enable instant contact with the match referee when considering

kick-off      delay,       the     police   request       that    the    club install a

telephone link between the police control rocm and the player's

tunnel. (See also Recaimendation 32 below).



RBCCM4ENDATION 30



There    is available            in the     police       control   rocm at Sheffield

Wednesday      PC,     the       results    of    the    closed    circuit    television
monitoring conducted by the police both outside and inside the

ground.    There are, however, fifteen other CC TV cameras belonging

to the club which monitor turnstiles and areas behind turnstiles

throughout the ground.     These are currently monitored in the club

control roan and the results of this filming are not available in

the police control rocm. The certifying authority are asked to

ensure that this reccmnendation      is ccrrplied with.   There is a

corputer    terminal in the club control rocm which displays;the

record of the electronic counting of spectators into the ground.

The police have requested that the club make this same information

available in the police Control Room.     The certifying authority are

asked to ensure that this recommendation is ccrtplied with.



Police officers who perform duty in the control roan are skilled in

the use and interpretation of the results of CC TV filming.       Each

of these officers is to attend a CC TV operator's course which is

run by the Greater Manchester Police.




 RBCCM4EMATI0N 31



 There are sufficient operators errployed in the police control roan

 to deal with radio communications.         New police camrunications

 equipment    has recently been   installed at Sheffield Wednesday's

 ground.     The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare

 station in case of radio failure on the primary station.       It also

 has battery back-up in case of power failure.        This system also

 gives operators in the control room priority over, and the capacity

 to override, others using the same channel.



 The police ground corrmander has the option of utilising, when

  he feels its necessary, an additional radio channel which provides
exclusive     corrnunication     between   himself      and    other     sector

cannanders.      This   executive   channel     would   be    utilised    in an

emergency when the primary channel may become overcrowded.



The police control roan at Sheffield Wednesday PC                  is inadequate

in terms of size and facilities.       The club have-been made aware of

the police dissatisfaction with the present acccnrnodation.                  TSie

certifying    authority    are    asked    to   oversee      the    design   and

construction of a new control roan at the ground.



RBGCMMENDRTIOW 32



A survey of Sheffield Wednesday's ground has identified twenty key

points where the police would wish to see dedicated telephone

points    to enable direct communication with the police control

rocm.



Attached, at document (4), is a plan showing the location of those

points, together with an equipment specification prepared by the

South Yorkshire Police Communications Department.              The Certifying

Authority are asked to oversee its installation.



RECOMMENDATION 33



There is in existence at Sheffield Wednesday FC               a public address

system.       The police survey of the system has identified the

requirements for at least five further loud speakers as follows:-
a) A speaker outside turnstiles 77 to 88.

b) A speaker at the rear of the North Stand near to the police

   roan.

c) A speaker adjacent to Gate B.

d) A speaker adjacent to Gate C.

e) A speaker on the North West elevated section to service the

   Leppings Lane terraces.



The plans at (5) show the existing system and the proposed siting

The Certifying Authority are asked to oversee the installation of

an adequate public address system to ensure that it complies with

effective.     In so doing, the Certifying Authority will wish to pay

regard, also, to paragraph 194 (iii) of the Guide to Safety at

 Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide' -     which lists the requirements

 of an effective public address system.



 The police have asked the club to ensure that the use of a loud

 signal to precede important messages be advertised in the club's

 programmes.




 RBDCMMEMDftTION 34


  The illuminated advertising board at Sheffield Wednesday's ground

  is presently out of carrmission and there are no plans to repair

  it.
A    series     of   hand     signals   for   use   by    police   officers   in an

emergency is presently being, formulated, nationally, by a working

group of the Association of Chief Police Officers.                      The results

are awaited.



RBCCMMEMDATION 35



The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the Soifth

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the South Yorkshire

Fire       Service   concerning crcwd safety             at   Sheffield Wednesday's

stadium.

At     a    force    level,    the    Chief   Superintendent       (Operations)   has

regular meetings with senior officers frcm the other services.                     At

a local level the police match commander meets with the ambulance

liaison officer at most if not every match.                    The fire service have

also had a liaison officer at at least one match this season where

he met with the police match comnander.



RBCCmEMDATION 36



    In advance of each match at Sheffield Wednesday's ground, the

    South Yorkshire Police forward to the South Yorkshire Fire and

    Ambulance Services full details about the forthcoming event.



    RBCOMEMPftTION 37



    Contingency plans for the arrival of emergency police, fire and

    ambulance    vehicles      at    Sheffield   Wednesday's       ground have    been

    reviewed and prepared.           The contingency plan forms part of the
police operational order.



The Certifying Authority will wish to consider whether the club

have taken adequate account of paragraph 29(v) of the Guide to

Safety    at   Sports   Grounds   -   'The Green      Guide'    - which   tasks

management     with     the   responsibility    for     preparing      emergency

contingency     plans    in   consultation     with    the     three   emergency

services.



RB0CMMEN3ATI0N 38



The police operational order for any event held at                     Sheffield

Wednesday's ground contairs information, for officers deployed to

entrances to the ground,          as to the contingency plans for the

arrival of the emergency services.



RECOMMENDATION 39 - 43



 These recommendations concern First Aid and Medical facilities

 and, as such, are outside any police remit.             Under Reccrrrnendation

 41, however, the police control at Sheffield Wednesday's ground is

 told the identity and whereabouts of the 'club' doctor before each

 match.    He is readily contactable.
           ACTION TAKEN BY

     THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

RESPECT OF SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

   FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

          THE INTERIM REPORT

                  OF

         1.QRD JUSTICE TAYLOR
This document is a          V T itten    agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

referred to as ’The Police’) and Sheffiela United Football Club (hereafter

referred to as 'The Club ).



This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The *t Hon

Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.




 The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follovs:-




^ R x im u in _ C ao acities_ _ fo r_ T er£ aces

 The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

 each self-contained pep. or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

 accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




 The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

  number of persons passing through each turnstile. > The Spion Kop is divided

  into two pens.          One pen is entered via turnstiles in John Street, the other by

  turnstiles in Shoreham Street.                   The Club will provide stewards to prevent a

Across      flow of spectators from one pen to the other.



  The Club will inform the.police control room when a particular pen or area is

   approaching capacity.                The Club will be responsible for closing off f a t h e r

   access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.

   Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

   therefore. The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




   The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

   public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

   prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such tines that there are spectators in that pen or

terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.



All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

 ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive colourec tabard.




 The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress wil* not be

 issued with police radios but the police officers on the ga..es and pe.imeter

 track will communicate to police ground control any rele\ant mat^e. brough

 their attention by these stewards.




 Cutting Equipment

 The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

 cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fenc-ng to

 numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

 by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

 equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer

 will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Liaison

Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respcct ol the


following matters

      i)      the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

              to the separate supporter groups;



                       thod of crowd segregation (if any) Intended to be used;
      ii)     the me



     iii)     any information in relation to crowd problems;




      iv)     ' the number and location of turnstiles to be «ade available


               to each group;



        V ,    an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

               through the turnstiles.



       vi)    where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

               corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

                spectators to the ground.

»
    Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

    at the ground.       It is therefor, essential The Club provide a telephone link

    between the referee's room and the police control room.



                                               ,   _ fnT ►>,» event of emergency services
    The Police have prepared contingency p

    being called to the ground.       These include routes of access, rendezvous

    poincs. accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.        The Police will

    liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are


    amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Pclice has nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




              A




SIGNED                           on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club




SIGNED                       . ... on behalf of South Yorkshire Police




DATE
                  W
                           APPENDIX ’A ’ - AMENDMENTS



CURRENT PROVISION                                  AMENDED PROVISION

Under the heading                                  The amended provision
Maximum Capacities for Terraces                    Maximum Capacities
                                                   for Terraces
The Club will do this by means of the
computerised system which records the              The Club will do this by means
number of persons passing through each             of the computerised system which
turnstile.  The Spion Kop is divided into          records the number of persons
two pens.  One pen is entered via turnstiles       passing through each turnstile.
in John Street, the other by turnstiles in
Shoreham Street.  The Club will provide
stewards to prevent a cross flow of spectators
from one pen to the other.
RECCMMENDftTION 1



It is noted by the police that the current Safety Certificate for

Sheffield United Football Club has been amended to reflect the new

capacities of all standing areas as follows



Spion Kop                           14,550

Bramall lane end                    5,660

John Street Terraces West           '1,340

John Street Terraces East            2.050



However, following an Inspection Meeting              at the ground, involving

the     South   Yorkshire   Fire   Brigade, it    is    recommended that      the

capacity for the Spion Kop terrace be revised downwards from 14,550

to 11,040.        If this recommendation        is agreed by the         licensing

authority then the Safety Certificate requires further amendment.



RBCCM^EyiDftnON 2


 The     calculation    for   maximum    capacities,        proposed     by   this

 recarmendat ion, has been followed in determining the figure for each

 terraced area recorded above.



 RBDOMEMDftTIOK 3



 a) An     electronic   counting    mechanism    is    in   place   at   Sheffield

       United's ground whereby the number of spectators entering each self

       contained area is contemporaneously recorded.
   The club has undertaken (see written agreement) to monitor this

   counter and to limit the number of spectators entering any self-

   contained      area   to   the    maximum   capacity    figure     assessed    in

   accordance with Recaimendation 2 above.



b) The club will achieve this by closing off the relevant turnstiles

   to prevent      further access to such an area when                its maximum

   capacity is about to be reached.               The police have agreed to

   assist the club in this regard, if requested so to do.



RECXJMENDftTIOW 4



   A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities

   for crowd safety and control, has been approved and signed by

   representatives of South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield United

   Football Club.        A copy of that agreement is attached as document (6J



RECCMMBCftTIOW 5



At each match at Sheffield United's ground there are six stewards

(two   to   the     Spion     Kop,   John   Street   and    Bramall     Lane     ends

respectively) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in those

areas for possible overcrowding or distress.              The stewards regularly

perform the same duties, as do the police officers authorised under

Reccmendation 9 below.          The parties are therefore familiar to each

other, and the stewards have . ready access to these police officers

who each have a radio giving them contact with the police control
RBOCM4BOATION 6



All police officers and stewards (not just those authorised under

Reccrrmendations     5 and 9)       are   fully briefed with regard to the

recognition of crowd densities and to the recognition of signs of

distress.     All officers and stewards have been issued, as an aide

memoire,    with    a   laminated    card    which   identifies   the   sigps. of

distress.



Stewards are each issued with a copy of written instructions, by the

club, which detail their duties.              The stewards are briefed by a

police inspector, before each match, on their responsibilities for

crowd safety and control and their duties in case of emergency

evacuation.



Similarly, police officers are briefed by a Senior police officer

before     each    match   on   their     complementary   responsibilities    and

duties.



The   South Yorkshire Police are presently preparing visual aids,

designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different

crowd densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a

little more about crowd dynamics.               The aids will consist of a)

albums of photographs depicting the various sections of Sheffield

United's ground with different numbers of spectators therein, and b)

a video tape film which highlights crowd densities, distress and

dynamics.     When completed these photographs and film will be shewn

to the Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group.
The     certifying    authority   are   asked   to   ensure    that     the   club

undertakes and continues to undertake its own responsibilities for

staff training as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds -

'The Green Guide' - paras 26, 177, 195 - 199 and Annex B to the

Guide.



RECOMMENDATION 7



All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Sheffield United are

painted in the international safety colour -white               - which is a

different    colour   fran the rest of the fence.             Each is clearly

identified by a sign which proclaims 'Emergency Exit'.                Furthermore,

a notice is displayed on the electronic scoreboard, beforeeach game

caimences, asking all spectators to identify their nearest emergency

exit.



RBOOMEMDATION 8



All the gates in perimeter fences have been removed at Sheffield

United's ground.



KBCXMMEHDATION 9



There i$ in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fences, at

least one police officer whose sole duty whenever spectators are on

the terraces,    is to decide whether or not to allow spectators

through that gateway to relieve overcrowding.          Such police officers

are to be identified by means of a lime green tabard. The officer
is familiar to all stewards in that area                   (see Recommendation 5

above),     is    known   by    them to      be   authorised to       relieve    over-

crowding, and       is able to make radio contact with the police

control room.



RBCXEMBPKnOH 10



Four sets    of     metal      cutting     equipment    have   been    provided     by

Sheffield United Football Club.              It has been agreed that, in case

of need, employees of the club trained in its use will be readily

available to operate the equipment.                Two operatives are deployed

to either end of the ground and are in radio contact, via the

club's radio system, with both the club safety officer and the

police control roan.



A test of the ability of the operatives to muster and make the

equipment    ready       for   use   was    performed    by    the    police    ground

ccrmander    at    the    Sheffield      United   vs    Hull   City match on       23

September 1989.      He was satisfied with the response.



RBCCM4ENDATIONS 11 AMD 12



It is understood that City Council representatives of the Safety

of Sports Ground Advisory Group have carried out an inspection of

all crush barriers.



KBOOMBDKTKMS 13 - 17



Safety Certification is obviously a matter for Sheffield City Council.

In respect of Reccrrmendation 17, the South Yorkshire Police await
notification of the constitution ofthe Advisory Group.           It is the

police view, however, that this Group should supplement, and not

replace, the existing Officer Working Group.



RECOMMENDATIONS 18 AND 19



It   is   understood   that   each turnstile   has    been   inspected,   its

potential rate of flew measured and that the maximum capacities of

each viewing area can be admitted via the respective turnstiles in

less than one hour.



RBCXM4ENDATI0N 20



(See Reccmnendation 3b ) When the capacity of any viewing area is 10%

below the maximum permitted,        an alarm sounds at the electronic

monitor in the Club Secretary's office.              The secretary, or his

agent, will immediately pass a message via the Club radio system to

 a steward at the relevant bank of turnstiles.          The turnstiles will

 be closed off and the police informed by club radio or telephone to

 police control.



 RBOOMaPKnON 21



 Sheffield United Football Club currently have four CC TV cameras

 installed around the ground.         A survey of the installation was

 carried out by a trained police CC TV operator (no expert, knowledge

 is professed) and his report is attached at document (3).
Since    that       survey was       completed,             the   club     have      applied      to

the    Football      Ground       Improvements Trust                for funds         to expand

the CC TV system,            to ensure compliance with this particular

recommendation.              However,          the    Trust       have    declined       to     fund

such     expansion          until        the    final        Report       of     Lord     Justice

Taylor    is published.



For yo ur. further          information the General Purposes Committee

of    the Association          of Chief          Police Officers               has convened        a

working       group to consider,                nationally,         the use of CC TV to

promote       public        safety        at     football          grounds.           The      group

anticipates          that    it may       be possible             to provide a          'package'

of equipment          to use as a test for a common minimum standard

of performance.             They will report back in due course.



RECOMMENDATION 22



 Signposting          for    spectators              both     inside       and       outside      the

 ground       has    been     reviewed          by    the     City       Council        Safety     of

 Sports       Grounds        Ad vis ory        Group.             The    police         have     made

 certain      suggestions           to    t h e 'club which             they have       agreed     to

 implement           and       thus            ensure         compliance             with        this

 Recommendation.



 RECOMMENDATIONS 23 and 24



 The    South       Yorkshire       Police       have       had    liaison with           the    club

 on     the     question       of        ticketed       matches.               The    police      are

 satisfied          with    the     arrangements            and     will       ensure     that    the

 information          on any ticket             corresponds with their plans                      for

 admitting spectators to the ground.
RBCXYME3TOTI0N 25



Following      discussions       with      Sheffield      UnitedFootball       Club    it    is

understood         that    the   club      will   make     provision     for    pre     match

entertainment after consulting with the recognised Supporter's Clut*

at those matches which are considered appropriate.

REOGWENDftTION 26
                                                                                        *




The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable nominated his Deputy, Mr

Peter Hayes, QPM, LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of each

football club and local authority concerned in respect of the safety

and    control      of     crowds.    Mr    Hayes       has met with Directors              and

Secretaries         of all    five    football         league   clubs   in     the    county,

including Messrs Dooley and Capper of Sheffield United PC, on 24

August 1989.        He met with representatives of the four relevant local

authorities,        including Messrs Ward and Bownes of Sheffield City

Council,      on    18 September      1989.       A    copy of the minutes of that

meeting are attached at document (7 ).



R B O O M B P a n O N 27



Both    the    Operational       Order      and   the     pre-match     briefing      of    all

officers on duty at each match at Sheffield United PC alert officers

to the dangers of overcrowding and, if any should be detected, of

taking inmediate and appropriate step>s to remedy it.



The    proposed       training       by    way    of    photographs     and     video       (see

Reccrrmendation 6 above) will further emphasise these messages.
RBCOWEUDATION 28



The operational planning for each match at Sheffield United PC is

intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns in

the arrival at, and departure fret) any match by spectators.



The    following scenarios sure each catered for by way of police

contingency plans at Sheffield United PC:-



a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

b) Early arrival of spectators.

c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of a ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

f) Late arrival of spectators.

g) Emergency opening     of   external   gates   (or forcing of external

     gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

h)    Early departure of spectators fran ground.

i) Emergency evacuation.



The police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable

rapid deployment to any difficulty which may arise inside or outside

the ground.



The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves

that the club have made contingency plans to deal with a situation

where the available entrances might prove insufficient to stop unduly

large crowds gathering outside the ground.         Such contingency plans

are required by paragraph 46 of the Guide to Safety at Sports

Grounds - The 'Green Guide'.
RBCXM4EMDATI0N 29



The police officer in command at Sheffield United PC is aware of the

option to delay kick-off    and discusses this matter, before each

game, with the match officials.      The option was utilised on 12

August 1989, when the police superintendent asked for the kick-off

at the match between Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday to be

delayed for fifteen minutes to ensure the safety of the crowd still

trying to get into the ground at 2.45 pm.   The crowd was notified of

the delay by the public address system.



To enable instant contact with the match referee when considering

kick-off delay, the police request that the club install a telephone

link between the police control room and the referee's roan.     (See

also Reccrmnendation 32 below).



KBCOMEMDftTIOH 30



There is available in the police control roan at Sheffield United

the results of all closed circuit television, monitoring outside and

inside the ground.   There is also a computer terminal which displays

the record of the electronic counting of spectators into the ground.



Police officers who perform duty in the control roan have attended a

CC TV Operator's Course run by the Greater Manchester Police.    They

are therefore skilled in the use and interpretation of the results

of CC TV filming.
REXXMMEtDKTTOW 31



There are sufficient operators employed in the police control roan

to deal with radio camtunications.             New police carrnunications

equipment has been ccmnissioned, and is about to be installed at

Sheffield United's ground.



The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare station

in case of radio failure on the primary station.                It also* has

battery back-up in case of power failure.          This system also gives

operators in the control roan priority over, and the capacity to

override, others using the same channel.


The police ground corrmander has the option of utilising, when he

feels it necessary, an additional radio channel vdiich provides

exclusive     ccnrnunication    between   himself      and    other     sector

carmanders.      This    executive   channel   would   be    utilised   in an

emergency when the primary channel may become overcrowded.



The police control roan is to be replaced by Sheffield United PC

in the near future      The club is aware of the requirements of sound­

proofing etc.     The certifying authority are asked to oversee the

construction of this new control roan.



RBCXfMEMDRTIOK 32


A survey of Sheffield United's ground has identified twenty eight

key points where the police would wish to see dedicated telephone

points to enable direct ccmnunication with the police control roan.



Attached, at document (4), is a plan showing the location of those

 points, together with an equipment specification prepared by the

 South Yorkshire Police Corrmunications Department.
Sheffield United    PC have subsequently agreed to fund, using a

Football Trust grant, a network of telephones.        The certifying

authority are asked to oversee its installation.



RECOMMENDATION 33



There is in existence at Sheffield United PC a public address

system.   However, at a meeting between the police and the club on
                                                                 *

5 August 1989, it was agreed that there was a need for a more

efficient system to enable effective caimunication with individual

areas both inside and outside the ground.



Sheffield United PC have ccmnissioned a new public address system

and work is progressing.     The plan at document     (5) shows the

existing system and site of new loudspeakers.         The certifying

authority are asked to oversee the installation of this public

address system to ensure that it complies with this reccmendation

and that it is effective.    In so doing, the certifying authority

will wish to pay regard, also, to paragraph 194 (iii) of the Guide

to Safety at Sports Grounds - The 'Green Guide' - vdiich lists the

requirements of an effective public address system.



The police have asked the club to ensure that the use of a loud

signal to precede important messages be advertised in the club's

prograirmes.



RBCOMENDATION 34



The illuminated advertising/score board at Sheffield United's grand
is utilised by the police to broadcast safety messages to the crowd.

An   example        is     'Identify your    nearest   emergency exit' which   is

displayed before the start of each game.                   The advertising/score

board cannot be seen by every spectator in the ground and so it is

treated very much as a secondary medium for ccmnunication.



A series of hand signals for use by police officers in an emergency

is presently being formulated, nationally, by a working group of the

Association of Chief Police Officers.              The results are awaited.




R B O C m E N D f t n O M 35


The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the South Yorkshire

Fire Service concerning crowd safety at Sheffield United's stadium.



At a force level               the Chief Superintendent (Operations) has regular

meeting with senior officers from the other services.                 At a local

level the police match ccrmander meets with the ambulance liaison

officer at most if not every match.               The fire service have also had

a liaison officer at at least one match this season vdiere he met

with the police match canmander.



K B O O M B P a n O K 36


In advance of each match at Sheffield United's ground, the South

Yorkshire Police forward to the South Yorkshire Fire and Ambulance

Services full details about the forthcoming event.
KBOOMENDftTION 37
                                   %




Contingency plans for the arrival of emergency police,                       fire and

ambulance vehicles at Sheffield United's ground, have been reviewed

and prepared.        The    contingency plan       forms part       of    the   police

operational order.         On 20 August 1989 the three services held a

practise exercise.        The contingency plans worked well.



The certifying authority will wish to consider whether the club have

taken adequate account of paragraph 29 (v) of the Guide to Safety at

Sports Grounds - The 'Green Guide' - which tasks management with the

responsibility      for    preparing   emergency         contingency       plans    in

consultation with the three emergency services.



RBCCMMEyDATION 38



The   police   operational     order   for   any    event    held    at     Sheffield

United's   ground    contain    information,       for   officers        deployed   to

entrances to the ground, as to the contingency plans for the arrival

of the emergency services.



KBOQMBPftTIONS 39 - 43



These reccnmendations concern First Aid and Medical facilities and,

as such, are outside of any police remit.            Under Reccnmendation 41,

however, the police control at Sheffield United's ground is told the

identity and whereabouts of the 'club' doctor before each match.                    He

is readily contactable.
              ACTION TAKEN BY

        THE SOOTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

IN RESPECT OF DONCASTER ROVERS FOOTBALL CLUB

      FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

             THE INTERIM REPORT

                     OF

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
 This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

 referred to as 'The     Police’)and Doncaster Rovers Football Club       (hereafter

 referred to as 'The     Club').




 This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

 recommendation four     of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by     The Rt Hon

 Lord Justice Taylor     into the Hillsborough   Stadium Disaster of 15   April 1989.




 The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows




^ s x i m u m Capacities for Terraces

 The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

 each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

 accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




 The Club will do this by means of a ticketing arrangement which will record

 the number of persons passing through each turnstile.        Each of the four banks

 of turnstiles will be monitored by a steward aware of the maximum capacities

 for each of the individual areas.




 The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

 approaching capacity.     The Club will be responsible for closing off further

 access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.             The

 Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

 therefore. The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such tines that there are spectators in that pen or

terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

eh® pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.




All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

track will eoaounicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.




Cutting Equipment

Ths Club will provide and sake readily available suitable and sufficient

custisag equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.    This cutting equipment will be operated

by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Before each natch both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following natters:-

     i)    the anticipated nunber of spectators expected having regard

           to the separate supporter groups;




    ii)    the aethod of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




   iii)    any information in relation to crowd problens;




    iv)    -the nunber and location of turnstiles to be nade available

            to each group;



      v)    an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

            through the turnstiles;




     vi)    where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

            corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

            spectators to the ground.



 Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

 at the ground.    It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link
                             t

 between the referee's room and the police control room.



 The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

 beiag called to the ground.     These include routes of access, rendezvous

 poin;s» accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.     The Police will

  liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

  aoended or as otherwise appropriate.
w   Th« Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

    Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

    liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

    concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




    Aay variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

    agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




    SIGNED .                          on behalf of Doncaster Rovers Football Club




    SIGNED                            on behalf of South Yorkshire Police



             Its   Qu.c^VT   \°lV\
    DATS




f
RECOMMENDATION 1




Doncaster Rovers Football Club has several viewing terraces at its ground

which are each self-contained with fixed capacities.    The existing safety

certificate does not, at this time, reflect the maximum capacities.

KBOOMMSNDftTION 2



The calculation for maximum capacities, proposed by this recommendation, has

been followed in determining a figure for each self-contained terraced area

as follows

Main Stand Terrace       2125        Ross ington End Terrace   1700

Popular Stand Terrace    1700        Town End Terrace            510

KECOM END M’ICN 3



(a) There are currently two systems of counting spectators into the various

    sections of Doncaster Rovers' ground.   At the Rossington Road End (the

    visitors end) a physical counting system exists whereby the number of

    spectators entering that section is contemporaneously recorded by a

    steward.   This system is experimental and may replace the system that

    pertains throughout the remainder of the ground whereby spectators are

    issued with a ticket upon entering an individual turnstile.       The number

    of tickets issued is collated by a steward from all the turnstiles at

    intervals to monitor the total number of spectators entering any

    particular section   of the ground.

     (When the club decide on a standard counting method, the written

    agreement - document (6) will be amended to reflect this).    In any event,

    the club has undertaken to limit the nunber of spectators entering any

    self-contained area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance

    with Recommendation 2 above.
 b) The   club     will   achieve   this     by    the   steward,   who   is   counting

    spectators into the ground, causing the relevant turnstiles to be

    closed thereby preventing further access to such an area when its

    maximum capacity is about to be reached.              The police have agreed to

    assist the club in this regard, if requested so to do.                     The club

    will inform the police by means of the club radio system when the

    turnstiles are tc     be closed.




RBOCMMEMDftTIOW 4



A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities for

crowd     safety    and    control,    has        been   approved   and    signed   by

representatives of South Yorkshire Police and Doncaster Rovers PC.                   A

copy of that agreement is attached at document              (61

RBOPMBPftTIOH 5



At each match at Doncaster Rovers ground there are eight stewards (four

to the Rossington End Terrace, two to the Popular Stand Terrace and one

each to the Main Stand Terrace and Town End Terrace respectively) whose

sole duty is to check crowd conditions in those areas for possible

overcrowding or distress.           The stewards regularly perform the same

duties, as do the police officers authorised under Recarrmendation 9

below.     The parties are therefore familiar to each other, and the

stewards have ready access to these police officers who each have a

radio giving them contact with the police control room.                   Four of the

stewards, being senior stewards, are also equipped with a club radio

giving them direct ccranunication with the club control roan and the

police control rocin.
RBOCMMEMDftTlOW 6



All   police officers and stewards             (not    justthose authorised          under

Recommendations     5   and    9)    are   fully      briefed   with       regard   to    the

recognition of crowd densities and to the recognition of signs of

distress.      All officers and stewards have been issued, as an aide

nemoire, with a laminated card vrtvich identifies the signs of distress.



Stewards are each issued with a copy of written instructions, by the

club, which detail their duties.              The chief stewards are each briefed

by a police inspector, before each match, on the responsibilities of

stewards for crowd safety and control and their duties in case of

emergency evacuation.         The chief steward is expected to brief the other

stewards.



Police officers are briefed by a Senior police officer before each

match on their complementary responsibilities and duties.



The    South   Yorkshire      Police    are    . presently      preparing visual         aids,

 designed to enable stewards ana officers to recognise different crcwd

 densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a little

 more about crowd dynamics.            The     aids will consist of a) Albums of

 photographs depicting the various             sections of Doncaster Rovers ground

 with different markers of spectators therein, and b)                  A   video tape film

 which   highlights     crowd       densities,     distress     and    dynamics.          When

 caxpleted these photographs and film will be shown to the Safety of

 Sports Ground Advisory Group.
The Certifying Authority are asked to ensure that the club undertakes

and continues to undertake its own reponsibilities for staff training

as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'

- paras, 26, 177, 195 and Annex B to the Guide.



RBOCMHaCftTIOW 7



All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Doncaster Rovers PC are

painted white which is a different colour fran the rest of the fence.

Each is clearly identified by a sign which proclaims 'Emergency Exit'.




RHXMMENDftTION 8



All perimeter fence gates to the pitch are kept fully open during the

period when spectators are on the terraces.



RECOMEMaftTIOM 9



There is, in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fence, or group

of gates   where they core close together and where there is only a small

number of spectators occupying the terrace behind the gates, at least

one police officer^ whose sole duty, whenever spectators are on the

terraces, is to decide whether or not to allow spectators through the

gateway to relieve overcrowding.       Such police officers are to be

identified by means of a lime green tabard.   Ihe officer is familiar to

all stewards in that area (see Recommendation 5 above), is known by

them to be authorised to relieve overcrowding, and is able to make
  r a d io c o n t a c t w ith t h e p o l i c e c o n t r o l r o a n .



RBCXMOOftTIOW 10



Metal cutting equipment has been provided by Doncaster Rovers PC.                            It

has been agreed that, in case of need, employees of the club trained in

its   vise will        be readily available to operate the equipment.                        An

operative is deployed to the Rossington Road End of the ground and is

in radio contact, via the club's radio system, with both the club

safety officer and the police control roan.



KBOOfrfrffiEOftTIOBE 11 AND 12



It is understood that Doncaster Borough Council representatives on the

Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group have carried out an inspection

of all crush barriers.



RBS3#8EM»TIONS 13 - 17



 Safety     Certification           is     obviously         a   matter    for Doncaster Borough

 Council.       In respect of Recommendation 17, the South Yorkshire Police

 await notification of the constitution of the Advisory Group.                             It is

 the Police view, however, that this group should supplement, and not

 replace, the existing Officer Working Group.
KBOCMMaPKnONS 18 M D 19



It is understood that each turnstile has been inspected and its

potential rate of flow measured and that the maximum capacities

of each viewing area can be admitted via the representative

turnstiles in less than one hour.



RBOOMMEtDftTION 20



(See Recommendation 3b above).        When the capacity of any viewing

area is about to be reached, the club have an arrangement to

close down the relevant turnstiles that service that viewing

area.   The Police will be informed at this time by club radio or

by telephone to police control.



RBCCMWENDATION 21



Doncaster Rovers PC currently have two CC TV cameras installed at

the ground.    A survey of the installation was carried out by a

trained police   CC   TV operator( no expert knowledge is professed),

and his report is attached at document           (33 .



Ftor your further information the General Purposes Ccmnittee of

the Association of Chief Police QEfioershas convened a working group

to consider,     nationally, the     u se   of   CC   TV to promote public

safety at football grounds.      I fo e   group anticipate that it may be

possible to provide a 'package' of equipment for use as a test

for a canmon minimum standard of performance.              They will report
back in due course.



RBOOMENDRTIOM 22



Signposting for spectators both inside and outside the ground has

been reviewed by the Doncaster          Borough Council Safety of Sports

Grounds   Advisory    Group.      The    police   are   satisfied with the

signposting.



R B cxju ap ftn cw s 23 a id 24



The South Yorkshire Police have had liaison with the club on the

question of ticketed matches.           The police are satisfied with the

arrangements and will ensure that the information on any ticket

corresponds     with their plans for admitting spectators to the

ground.



RBCSMMHCATION 25



At Doncaster Rovers PC there is no pre match entertainment.            The

police have no knowledge of any discussions between the club and

 a recognised supporters club on this matter.



  KBOO§<B«aTION 26



 The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable nominated his Deputy,

 Mr Peter Hayes, QPM, LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of

 each football club and local authority concerned in respect of

 the   safety   and   control     of   crcwis.    Mr Hayes has met     with
Directors and Secretaries of all five football league clubs in

the county, including Mr Chappell and Mrs                                   Oldale of Doncaster

Rovers PC, on 24 August 1989.                     He met with representatives of the

four     relevant           local        authorities,        including Messrs Paxton and

Harvey of Doncaster Borough Council on 18 September 1989.                                         A copy

of the minutes of that meeting are attached at document                                               .



KBOOMEHMTIOM 27



Both the Operational Order and the pre match briefing of all

officers on duty at each match at Doncaster Rovers PC alert

officers to the dangers of overcrowding, and if any should be

detected, of taking immediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.



The     p ro p o se d      tra in in g     by way of          p h o to g ra p h s   and    v id e o       (se e


R e c a rm e n d a tio n   6   above) will      fu rth e r    e m p h a s is e   these    m essag es.




K E T O M E H D K n O N 28


The operational planning for each match at Doncaster Rovers PC is

intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns in

the arrival at, and departure frcm, any match by spectators.



The following scenarios are each catered for by way of police

contingency plans at Doncaster Rovers FC:~



a) All ticket * or otherwise restricted, matches.

 b) Early arrival of spectators.
c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

f) Late arrival of spectators.

g) Emergency opening of external gates (or forcing of external

   gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

h) Early departure of spectators fran ground.

i) Emergency evacuation.



The police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable

rapid deployment to any difficulty which may arise inside or

outside the ground.



The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves

that   the   club   have   made   contingency    plans   to   deal   with   a

situation where the available entrances might prove insufficient

to stop unduly large crowds gathering outside the ground.              Such

contingency plans are required by paragraph 46 of the Guide to

Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'.



RBOQMMEMDflTIOM 29



The police officer in command at Doncaster Rovers PC is aware of

the option to delay kick-off, and discusses this matter, before

each game, with the match officials.            To enable instant contact

with the match referee when considering kick-off delay, the club

have installed a direct telephone link between the police control

room and the referee's roan.
  REmWENOATION 30



  There is available in the police control roan at Doncaster Rovers

  FC,    the   results of     all closed circuit television monitoring

  outside and inside the ground. Hie stewards also pass, by means

  of    club   radio,   regular updates             on the numbers of spectators

  entering the ground.        Police officers who perform duty in the
                                                                                           ♦

  control roan are skilled in the use and interpretation of the

  results      of   CC TV filming,          and     are due to attend a                  CC TV

  operators course which is run by the Greater Manchester Police.



HE0CM4ENDRTICli 31



There are sufficient operators employed in the police control roan

to deal     with radio canmunications.                   New police cannunications

equipment has been carmissioned, and is about to be installed at

Doncaster Rovers's ground.



The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare station

in case of radio failure on the primary station.                               It also has

battery back-up in case of pcwer failure.                        This system also gives

operators in the control roan priority over, and the capacity to

override, others using the same channel.



The police     ground   caranander    has    th e    o p tio n    of utilising, when           he


feels it necessary, an          a d d itio n a l    r a d io     channel   w h ic h   provides

exclusive       communication        b etw een       himself        and     other       sector

carmanders.         Ttds executive        channel would             be utilised in an

emergency when the primary channel nay became overcrowded.
The    police   control   rocm at Doncaster Rovers PC is adequately

sound-proof.



RBOOfiaCflTIOH 32



A   survey of Doncaster      Rovers's ground has identified six key

points where the police would wish to see dedicated telephone

points to enable direct carmunication with the police control

roan.



Attached, at document (4) , is a plan showing the location of those

points, together with an equipment specification prepared by the

South Yorkshire Police Carmunicat ions Department.    The Certifying

Authority are asked to oversee its installation.



KBCCMflBCftTION 33



There is in existence at Doncaster Rovers PC a public address

system of six loud speakers.         The police survey of the system

identifies the need for at least four additional speakers in the

following locat ions s-



a) Popular Side/Town End Corner

b) Popular Side/Rossington End Corner

c) Between Gates 2 and 3 facing out of the ground towards the car

      park.

d) Between Gates 5 and 6 facing out of the ground towards the car
The    public      address    system at       Doncaster   Rovers    ground is not

adequately zoned.             There     is no facility to precede important

messages with a loud signal.              (Eventually, when this facility is
available, the club should be asked to advertise the fact in the clifc's program

The Certifying Authority are asked to oversee the installation of

an adequate public address system to ensure that it complies with

this recorrmendation and that it is effective.                 In so doing, the

Certifying Authority will wish to pay regard, also, to paragraph

194 (iii) of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'Hie Green

Guide' - which list             the     requirements of    an effective public

address system.                                                                         ^



RBCXMffiaCflTICM 34

There is no illuminated advertising board at Doncaster Rovers.


A     series    of   hand     signals    for use   by police       officers   in an

emergency is presently being forumulated, nationally, by a working

group of the Association of Chief Police Officers.                      The results

are awaited.


RB0QMBM3RTI0K 35                                                                            £

The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the South Yorkshire

Fire Service concerning crowd safety at Doncaster Rovers stadium.



At     a   force     level,    the    Chief   Superintendent       (Operations)   has

regular meetings with senior officers frcnrt the other services.                  At

a     local level the police match catmander has met with the local

ambulance liaison officer.



The attendance figures at Doncaster Rovers PC have not been
sufficient, so far this season, to warrant the attendance of an

ambulance.



RBCXMfiaPftTIOK 36



In advance of each match at Doncaster Rovers ground, the South

Yorkshire Police forward to the South Yorkshire Fire and Ambulance

Services full details about the forthcoming event.



RHXMffiWDftTICM 37



Contingency plans for the arrival of emergency police, fire and

ambulance vehicles at Doncaster Rovers ground have been reviewed

and prepared.         The contingency plan forms part of the police

operational order.



The Certifying Authority will wish to consider whether the club

have taken adequate account of paragraph 29(v) of the Guide to

 Safety   at   Sports   Grounds   -   'The Green Guide'      - which    tasks

management     with     the   responsibility    for   preparing     emergency

 contingency    plans    in   consultation     with   the   three   emergency

 services.



 KHOQMMENDftTION 38



 <2he   police operational order      for any event held at Doncaster

 Rovers's      ground contains information,      for officers deployed to

 entrances to the ground, as to the contingency plans for the
arrival of the emergency services.



RBCOMMENDftTIOK 39 - 43



ttiese recarmendations concern First Aid and Medical facilities

and, as such, are outside any police remit.   Under Recexrmendation

41, however, the police control at Doncaster Rovers's ground is

told the identity and whereabouts of the 'club' doctor before each,

match.   He is readily contactable.
              ACTION TAKEN BY

        THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

IN RESPECT OF ROTHERHAM UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

      FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

             THE INTERIM REPORT

                     OF

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
    This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

    referred to as 'The Police') and Rotherham United Football Club (hereafter


    referred to as 'The Club').



    This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

    recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Bon

    Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.




     The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows:-




     Maximum Capacities for Terraces

     The Club   w i ll   be   r e s p o n s ib le   for limiting the number of spectators entering

     each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

     accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.



      The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

      number of persons passing through each turnstile.



      The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

•     approaching capacity.               The Club will be responsible for closing off further

      access to a pen or area when its maxiium capacity is about to be reached.                      The

      Police accept The Club may-on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

       therefore. The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




       public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Polic

       prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.




       Filling and Monitoring Terraces

       The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

       terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or
terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.




All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.


                             *
Cutting Equipment

The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

by #aploy®«s of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Liaison

Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following matters

        i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

             to the separate supporter groups;




       ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended   to be   used;




      iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;




^      iv)    the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

              to each group;



        v)    an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

              through the turnstiles;

                               *


       vi)    where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

              corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

              spectators to the ground.



    Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

    at the ground.   It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

    between the referee's room and the police control room.




    The Policfe have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

    belag eallsd to the ground.    These include routes of access, rendezvous

    points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egTess.    The Police will

    liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

    amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED                       ^   on behalf of Rotherham United Football Club



SIGNED                           )n behalf of South Yorkshire Police
RBOOMENDATIGN 1



It is noted by the police that the existing Safety Certificate for

Rotherham       United    Football    Club   was    issued   in    1984    by    the   South

Yorkshire County Council.            Capacity figures for the various sections of

the    ground    are     therefore out of date.            New capacities have been

calculated and the certificate requires updating.



RBCOMENDftTION 2



The     calculation        for    maxiimsn        capacities,     proposed       by     this

recommendation,        has been followed in determining a figure for each

terraced area at Rotherham United's ground.                The maximum capacities are

as follows:-



Tivoli End                                         5,129

Railway End                                        4,508

South West Corner                                    394

Grandstand Terrace                                 2,298



KBOCWEKDftTION 3



(a) An electronic counting mechanism is in place at Rotherham United's

      ground    whereby     the   number     of    spectators     entering      each   self-

      contained area is contemporaneously recorded.



      The club has undertaken           (see written agreement) to monitor this

      counter and to limit the number of spectators entering any self-

      contained     area    to    the    maximum     capacity     figure     assessed    in

      accordance with Recommendation 2 above.
 (b )    The      c lu b      w ill        a c h ie v e         th is          by     c lo s in g          o ff     th e        r e le v a n t      tu r n s tile s


         to     prevent            fu rth er            a ccess         to         su ch     an     area          w hen        it s    r a a x im u m     c a p a c ity


         is     about         to     be     reached.                    The         p o lic e       have          agreed          to     a s s is t       th e    c lu b


         in     th is       regard,              i f     r eq u ested               so     to      do.       It     is         c o n sid e r e d        th a t th e


         c lu b     w o u ld        be     b etter             a b le         to     u n d erta k e           th is        ta sk        i f     th e      stew a rd s


         w ith       th e      r e s p o n s ib ility                   fo r        c lo s in g       o ff         access             were       issu e d         w ith


         r a d io s        p r o v id in g d i r e c t             co n ta ct              w ith      th e        c lu b        co n tro l        roan.             The


         p o lic e      have        ask ed         th e        c lu b     to        c o n sid e r        th is       s u g g e s tio n .




RECCM4ENDATI0N 4




A    w r itte n       a g reem en t,              s e ttin g            out        th e ir        r e s p e c tiv e            r e s p o n s ib ilitie s            fcr


crow d           sa fety            and            c o n tr o l,               has           been           approved                   and         sig n e d         by


r e p r e se n ta tiv e s           of      S o u th         Y o r k sh ir e             P o lic e       and       R o th erh a m             U n ite d      PC.       A


copy      o f     th a t     agreem ent                 is     a tta ch ed           at     docum ent              (6 )    .




R B C C M 1 E N D A T IC N 5




At      each      m a tch      at     R o th erh a m            U n ite d 's              ground         th ere         are       fo u r       stew a rd s         (tw o


to      th e      T iv o li         end,         and         one        a t        th e     R a ilw a y           end      and         in      fro n t      o f     th e


G ra n d sta n d        r e s p e c tiv e ly )               v d io se        so le        d u ty     is      to        check          crow d      c o n d itio n s


in      th o se       areas         fo r         p o s sib le           o v e r c r o w d in g           or        d istr e ss.                The        stew a rd s


r e g u la r ly       p erfo rm           th e         sam e    d u tie s ,           as    do      th e      p o lic e          o ffic e r s      a u th o r ise d


under          R e c o r r m e n d a tio n         9      b e lo w .           The         p a r tie s        are         th erefo re             fa m ilia r        to


each      o th er       and        th e     stew a rd s            have            ready          access           to      th ese        p o lic e        o ffic e r s


v d io e a c h      have       a    r a d io           g iv in g    th em           c o n ta ct       w ith        th e        p o lic e       c o n tro l       roam .
r e c o m m e n d a t io n         6



A ll       p o lic e        o ffic e r s             and        stew a rd s            (n o t     ju st         th o se          a u th o r ise d               under


R e c o m m e n d a tio n s              5      and        9)      are         fu lly           b r ie fe d         w ith              regard              to        th e


r e c o a r .itic n           of       crow d         d e n s itie s           ana       to      th e        r e c o g n itio n               o f        sig r * s    of


d istr e ss.                A ll         o ffic e r s           and      stew a rd s            have        been         issu e d ,                as      an      a id e


r r e m o ir e ,    w ith        a     la m in a te d         card       w h ic h      id e n tifie s            th e       s ig n s         o f     d istr e ss.




Tbs     c lu b      has       been           ask ed     to      issu e        each       stew a rd          w ith       a    copy            of     w r itte n

in str u c tio n s            w h ic h         d e ta il      th e ir     d u ie s .T h e         c h ie f s t a c r d s              are      each         b r ie fe d


 bv    a     p o lic e         in s o e c to r f         b efo re         each         m a tch ,        on       th e       r e s p o n s ib ilitie s                  of


 stew a rd s           fc r        crcw d          sa fe ty        and         co n tro l         and        th e ir         d u tie s              in     case        of


 em ergency             e v a c u a tio n .            The       c h ie f      stew a rd         is     ex p ected               to        b r ie f      th e      o th er


 stew a rd s.




 P o lic e         o ffic e r s              are     b r ie fe c        by      a      S e n io r       p o lic e           o ffic e r             b e io r e        each


 m a tc h     on     th e ir           c o m p le m e n ta r y        r e s p o n s ib ilitie s               and       d u tie s .




 The         S o u th         Y o r k sh ir e          P o lic e          are          p r e se n tly            p r e p a r in g             v isu a l            a id s,


 d e sig n e d         tc      e n a b le          stew a rd s         and     o ffic e r s           to     r e c o g n ise               d iffe r e n t          crow d


  d e n s itie s ,          to       r e c o g n ise         sig n s      of        d istr e s s ,         and     to        u n d ersta n d               a    lit t le


  m ore       about           crow d           d y n a m ic s .          The         a id s      w ill        c o n sist              o f      a)        A lb u m s     of


  p h o to g ra p h s         d e p ic tin g          th e      v a r io u s        s e c tio n s     o f     R o th erh a m               U n ite d 's         ground


  w ith      d iffe r e n t            num bers         o f      sp ecta to rs            th e r e in ,         and         b)    A v id e o              ta p e     fix m


  w h ic h         h ig h lig h ts                 crow d        d e n s itie s ,             d istr e ss           and           d y n a m ic s .                   W hen


  c o m p le te d        th ese              p h o to g ra p h s       and      film          w ill        be     sh ow n             to      th e       S a fety       of


  S p o rts        G round           A d v is o r y     G roup.




  The       C e r tify in g             A u th o r ity          are     ask ed         to       en su re        th a t       th e          c lu b        u n d erta k es


  and       c o n tin u e s            to      u n d erta k e         its .    ow n     r e p o n s ib ilitie s                  fo r        s ta ff        tr a in in g
as     se t     out        in     th e      G u id e         to    S a fety         at     S p o rts        G rounds          -     'T h e      G reen           G u id e '


-    p aras,          26,        177,       195       and         A nnex       B to        th e     G u id e .




RECOMMENDATION 7



A ll     g a tew a y s            in      r a d ia l          or      p e r im e te r           fen ces          at        R o th erh a m            U n ite d          are


p a in te d          y e llo w ,       w h ic h       is      a    d iffe r e n t          c o lo u r       frcm       th e       r e st       o f    th e        fen ce.


E ach      is        c le a r ly       id e n tifie d              by    a     sig n      w h ic h      p r o c la im s           'B n e r g e n c y         E x it'.




RECCMffiNDATiaN 8



A ll     p e r im e te r              g a tes      to        th e       p itc h ,         at      R o th erh a m           U n ite d 's          ground,                are


kept       fu lly          open        at     any        tim e       w hen      sp ecta to rs               are       on    th e     te rr a ce s.




RECOMMENDATION 9



T here        is ,      in       resp ect          o f       each        g a tew a y        in      th e     p e r im e te r         fen ces            (o r       group


of     g a te s        w here          th ese         are         c lo s e     to g e th e r          and     w here          o n ly       a    s m a ll         num ber


of     sp ecta to rs               are      o c c u p y in g            th e    te rr a ce          b e h in d        th e se       g a t e s ),           a t     le a s t


one      p o lic e           o ffic e r         w h ose             so le       d u ty ,        w henever             sp ecta to rs                  are         on     th e


terra ces,              is       to     d e c id e       w h eth er            or     not      to     a llo w         sp ecta to rs             th ro u g h            th a t


g a tew a y           to        r e lie v e        o v e r c r o w d in g .                 Such           p o lic e        o ffic e r s             are          to      be


id e n tifie d             by     m eans        o f      a    lim e       green          ta b a rd .         The       o ffic e r          is        fa m ilia r          to


a ll     stew a rd s              in      th a t        area          (see          R e c o m m e n d a tio n          5    a b o v e ),         is        know n         by


th em         to      be        a u th o r ise d             to     r e lie v e          o v e r c r o w d in g ,          and       is        a b le        to        m ake


r a d io      co n ta ct          w ith       th e       P o lic e        C o n tro l          R oan.




RBCCMMENDATION 10



A    set        of     m eta l         c a ttin g          e q u ip m e n t         has        been     p r o v id e d        by       R o th erh a m             U n ite d
       PC.              It      has         been        agreed           th a t,     in          case           o f    need,          an         e m p lo y e e      o f    th e


c lu b        tr a in e d              in       it s         u se      w ill        be       r e a d ily               a v a ila b le          to         o p era te        th e


e q u ip m e n t.                  An         o p e r a tiv e          is      d e p lo y e d              to         R a ilw a y       end         of      th e     ground


ir m e d ia te iy               a d ja cen t            to     th e      p o lic e       c o n tro l              room .           He i s        r e a d ily        to     hand


sh o u ld          th e      need           a r is e .


REOJ-MSNDATIONS 11 AND 12



It      is     u n d ersto o d                 th a t        R o th erh a m        B orough                C o u n c il         r e p r e se n ta tiv e s            on     th e


S a fety           of        S p o rts         G round            A d v is o r y      G roup               have         c a r r ie d        out      an      in s p e c tio n


o f     a ll        cru sh            b a r r ie r s .              The      c a p a c ity               fo r     th e        terra ce         in        fr o n t    o f    th e


m a in         g r a n d sta n d                  has             been        reduced                     to          it s        p resen t              fig u r e         (S ee


R e c o m m e n d a tio n                2)     as      a    r e s u lt       of    th is            in sp e c tio n .




R B C C M ^ E N D ftT IC N S 1 3                  -     17




S a fety            C e r tific a tio n                      is       o b v io u sly                 a     m a tter             fo r       R o th erh a m           B orough


C o u n c il.           The        C o u n c il         are       r e m in d e d ,       how ever,                    th a t     th e      S a fety         C e r tific a te


issu e d           in     1984          by      S o u th       Y o r k s h ir e       C o u n ty            C o u n c il,          does       need         u p d a tin g      at


a     very         e a r ly        sta g e.




In       resp ect               o f         R 'e c c m m e n d a tio n             17,       th e           S o u th           Y o r k s h ir e       P o lic e          a w a it


n o tific a tio n                  o f        th e          c o n stitu tio n              o f           th e     A d v is o r y           G roup         r eferred           to


th e r e in .                 It         is       th e        p o lic e        v ie w ,          how ever,                   th a t        th is     G roup          sh o u ld


su p p le m e n t,              and         not       r e p la c e ,        th e    e x is tin g                O ffic e r        W o r k in g       G roup.




RECO*«ENDATIONS 18 AND 19



It     is      u n d ersto o d                th a t        each       tu r n s tile             has            been         in s p e c te d ,       it s     p o te n tia l


ra te        o f        flo w       m easu red               and,         even       a t         a       ra te        o f      o n ly      500      per       hour,         th e
m a x im u m               c a p a c itie s           of     each          v ie w in g         area          can    be      a d m itte d             v ia        th e


 r e s p e c tiv e               tu r n s tile s             in      le s s     th a n       one         hour.




 REC0WEK1DATICN 20



    (See        R e c o m m e n d a tio n               3b ).          W hen        th e      c a p a c ity         of    any         v ie w in g              area


 is         10%            b e lo w       th e        m a x im u m           p e r m itte d ,             an     a la r m          sou n d s         a t         th e


e le c tr o n ic                  m o n ito r               in        th e          C lu b          S e c r e ta r y 's            o ffic e .                    The
                                                                                                                                                           ♦

secreta ry ,                     or      h is        a g en t,        w ill        im m e d ia te ly           p ass      a        m essage           to         th e


stew a rd              at        th e     r e le v a n t           bank       of      tu r n s tile s .             The           tu r n s tile s              w ill


be      c lo s e d              o ff      and        th e        p o lic e         in fo r m e d         by    te le p h o n e            cr        p erson al


m essen ger                  to        p o lic e       c o n tr o l.            The        c lu b        are   encouraged                   to       a c q u ir e


a      r a d io             sy stem             to      e n a b le           im m e d ia te           c o n ta ct        w ith           a ll        p a r tie s


sh o u ld            c a p a c itie s            be     about           tc     be      reached.


RBCCM-ENDMTON 21



R o th erh a m               U n ite d          FC     c u r r e n tly         have          th r e e       CC T V c a m e r a s                in s ta lle d


around               th e       ground.                A    su rvey           of     th e      in s ta lla tio n              w as        c a r r ie d          cut


by      a           tr a in e d          p o lic e          CC        TV      o p era to r            (n o     expert              k n o w le d g e               is


p ro fessed )                   and      h is        report           is     a tta ch ed            at    docum ent               (3).




For         your            fu rth er            in fo r m a tio n              th e         G eneral          P u rp oses           C a n m itte e               of


th e        A s s o c ia tio n             c f C h ie f P o l i c e C f f ic n r s h a s                 convened             a     w o r k in g         group


to      c o n sid e r ,                 n a tio n a lly ,              th e        use        o f      CC      TV    to           p ro m o te         p u b lic


sa fe ty             a t     fo o tb a ll            grou n d s.              The      group           a n tic ip a te            th a t       it     m ay b e


p o s sib le               to     p r o v id e         a         'p a c k a g e '      o f     e q u ip m e n t      fo r          u se     as       a         te st


fo r       a        com m on           m in im u m         sta n d a rd         of       p erfo rm a n ce.                T hey          w ill        report


back           in     due         cou rse.
RECOMMENDATION 22



S ig n p o stin g           fo r      sp ecta to rs             b o th        in sid e        and     o u ts id e        th e        ground              has       been


r e v ie w e d       by       th e      R o th erh a m            B orough             C o u n c il        S a fety       o f            S p o rts         G rounds


A d v is o r y      G roup.            The      p o lic e         are         s a tisfie d       w ith       th e      sig n p o stin g .                   W o rth y


o f     p a r tic u la r           m e n tio n         is      th e       c o lo u r       c o d in g      of      sig n s           -      red          fo r      hom e


su p p o rters,             b lu e     fo r     aw ay        su p p o rters            -    th is     is     e y e -c a tc h in g ,                sim p le           and


c le a r .




RECCmENDATICMS 23 AND 24



The       S o u th         Y o r k s h ir e       P o lic e           have           had      lia is o n          w ith         th e            c lu b      on        th e


q u e s tio n        o f         tic k e te d          m a tch es.               The        p o lic e        are         s a tis fie d                   w ith        th e


a rra n g em en ts               and       w ill             en su re th a t           th e         in fo r m a tio n            on             any             tic k e t


correspon ds                w ith       th e ir        p la n s       fo r     a d m ittin g         sp ecta to rs              to        th e      ground.




RECOM M ENDATION 2 5




T here        has     b e e r ., t c       c ? r e ,         no     p r e m a tch               e n te r ta in m e n t            at            R o th erh a m U n it e c


PC      apart         fro m           records                p la y e d o v e r        th e      p u b lic         ad d ress               sy stem .                  The


p o lic e         have           no     k n o w le d g e           o f        any      lia is o n           b etw een            th e            c lu b         and      a


r e c o g n ise d       su p p o rters            c lu b .




RBCXM4ENDATION 26



The      S o u th      Y o r k sh ir e          P o lic e          C h ie f         C o n sta b le         n o m in a te d               h is      D ep u ty ,         Mr


P eter        H ayes,             Q PM ,      LLB,           MA,         to     lia is e        w ith           th e     m anagem ent                     o f      each


fo o tb a ll        c lu b        and      lo c a l         a u th o r ity           concerned             in     resp ect                o f      th e     sa fe ty


and     co n tro l         o f     crow d s.            Mr H a y e s           has     m et    w ith       D ir e c to r s           and          S e c r e ta r ie s


of     a ll   fiv e        fo o tb a ll        le a g u e         c lu b s      in     th e    co u n ty ,        in c lu d in g                Mr D a r n i l l o f


R o th erh a m       U n ite d         PC,     on       24     A u gu st        1989.          He m et           w ith     r e p r e se n ta tiv e s                   of


th e     fo u r      r e le v a n t        lo c a l         a u th o r itie s ,            in c lu d in g        M essrs          C rosb y               and      D a le y
c f   R o th erh a m          B orough               C o u n c il         on       18     S ep tem b er               1989.          A      copy        of     th e


m in u te s      o f     th a t       m e e tin g         are     a tta ch ed           at     docum ent              (“ ) .




RECOM M ENDATION 2 7




B o th    th e     O p e r a tio n a l           O rder           and      th e         pre     m a tch          b r ie fin g       c f     a ll      o ffic e r s


on    d u ty       a t     each          m a tch          a t     R o th erh a m          U n ite d            PC     a le r t      o ffic e r s        to     th e


dangers           o f      o v e r c r o w d in g ,               and i f          any         sh o u ld         be      d etected ,           of        ta k in g


im m e d ia te         and    a p p r o p r ia te               step s       to    rem edy            it .




The       prop osed                   tr a in in g              by        w ay          of       p h o to g ra p h s               and       v id e c          (see


R e c o m m e n d a tio n         6    above)             w ill       fu r th e r       e m p h a s is e         th e se       m essages.




RECOM M ENDATION 2 8




The      c D e r a tio n a l            p la n n in g              fc r each             n a tch         a t     R o th erh a m           U n ite d       FC     is


in te n d e d      to      e n a b le         th e        p o lic e       to       cope        w ith          fo r s e e a b le      p a ttern s         in     th e


a r r iv a l     a t,     and         d ep a rtu re             fro m ,      a n y m a tch            by      sp ecta to rs.




The       fo llo w in g               s c e n a r io s             are each              ca tered                fo r         by    w ay       o f       p o lic e


c o n tin g e n c y        p la n s .a t        R o th erh a m            U n ite d          F C :-




a)    A ll     tic k e t,         or        o th e r w ise           r e s tr ic te d ,         m a tch es.


b)    E a r ly     a r r iv a l         o f    sp ecta to rs.


c)    U n ex p ected          and           jo in t       a r r iv a l       of     la r g e      num bers              o f   sp ecta to rs.


d)    In d iv id u a l        s e c tio n            of     ground           a p p r o a c h in g            c a p a c ity .


e)    W h o le     ground             a p p r o a c h in g           c a p a c ity .


f)    L a te     a r r iv a l         o f     sp ec ta to rs.


g)    E m ergency            o p e n in g        of        ex tern a l            g a tes       (o r       fo r c in g        of    ex tern a l         g a tes),


      th e r eb y        a llo w in g          an     in flu x          of        sp ecta to rs.
h)     Early departure of spectators from ground.

i)     Emergency evacuation



Ths police retain a reserve of officers at the ground to enable rapid

deployment           to any difficulty which may arise                             inside or outside the

ground.



The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves that

the club have made contingency plans to deal with a situation where the

available entrances might prove insufficient to step unduly large crowds

gathering outside the ground.                          Such contingency plans are required by

paragraph 46 of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - ‘The Green

G u id e ' .




 REPCWEMATION 29



 The     p o lic e    o ffic e r     in   com m and    a t   R o th erh a m    U n ite d   PC     is   aw are     of   th e


 o p tio n     to    d e la y   k ic k -o ff,   and   d isc u s se s   th is    m a tter,       b efo re   each    gam e,


 w ith    m a tch    o f f ic ia ls .




 To enable instant contact with the match referee when considering kick-

 off delay, ths police request that the club install a telephone link

 between the police control room and the referee's room.                                                    (See also

 Recommendation 32 belcw).
RECOMMENDATION 30



T here       is     a v a ila b le             in    th e        p o lic e      co n tro l              roan        at     R o th erh a m        U n ite d       th e


r e s u lts       of     a ll      c lo s e d        c ir c u it        te le v is io n             m o n ito r in g            o u ts id e      and     in sid e


th e    ground.




The     c c m p u te r iss d            tu r n s tile            c o u n tin g         sy stem           c u r r e n tly         te r m in a te s        in      th e


S e c r e ta r y 's          o ffic e        at      R o th erh a m          U n ite d .             A       lin k ,       fro m     th is       s y s te m ,,    to


th e    p o lic e       co n tro l           rocrr,      is       so u g h t.          The         a p p r o x im a te          co st     of     in s ta llin g


su ch    a    lin k          w o u ld     be      £“00.




P o lic e     o ffic e r s          who        p erfo rm           d u ty     in       th e      co n tro l            roan       are     s k ille d       in      th e


use     and       in te r p r e ta tio n               of     th e      r e s u lts           of        CC     TV      film in g .          O ffic e r s         w ill


a tten d      a   CC T V O p e r a t o r ' s                C ou rse         run       by      th e      G rea ter           M a n ch ester          P o lic e .




 RECOM M ENDATION 3 1




 T here       are       s u ffic ie n t             o p era to rs         e m p lo y e d           in    th e       p o lic e      co n tro l       room


 to      d eal         w ith        r a d io         c o m m u n ic a tio n s .                  N ew         p o lic e         c a n n u n ic a tio n s


 e q u ip m e n t        has      been          c a n m issio n e d ,           ana         is       about          to      be     in s ta lle d        at


 R o th erh a m         U n ite d 's           ground.




 The     e q u ip m e n t         c o n sists          of     a     tw o -b a y        r a d io         se t       w ith    a    sp are        sta tio n


 in     case           o f     r a d io        fa ilu r e         on     th e      p r im a r y              sta tio n .            It     a lso       has


 b a ttery        b a ck -u p           in     case         of     pow er        fa ilu r e .                T h is      sy stem         a lso     g iv e s


 o p era to rs           in      th e     co n tr o l         room        p r io r ity             over,           and      th e     c a p a c ity       to


 o v e r r id e ,        o th ers         u s in g     th e       sam e      c h a n n e l.




 The     p o lic e           ground          ccm rander                has      th e     c p tic n            of      u tilis in g ,           w hen    he
fe e ls      it        n ecessa ry,            an       a d d itio n a l           r a d io     channel             w h ic h     p r o v id e s


e x c lu s iv e           c o m m u n ic a tio n                b etw een            h im se lf          and         o th er         secto r


com m an d ers.                 T h is        e x e c u tiv e          channel           w o u ld        be     u tilis e d           in       an


em ergency             w hen     th e      p r im a r y         channel          m ay b eco m e         cvercrow ced.




The       p o lic e           co n tro l       rocm             a t    R o th erh a m         U n ite d        PC     is       a d e q u a te ly


 so u n d -p r o o fe d .            The      c lu b     prop ose           to     e x ten d     th e     p o lic e        co n tro l      room


 and      th is        p roposal         is    w e lc o m e d          by   th e     S o u th    Y o r k s h ir e      P o lic e .




 RECOMMENDATION 32



 A     su rvey          o f    R o th erh a m          U n ite d 's         ground        has       id e n tifie d           fifte e n         .< e y


 p o in ts         w here        th e       p o lic e           w o u ld     w ish      to      see       d e d ic a te d         te le p h o n e


  p o in ts       to     e n a b le     d ir e c t      c o m m u n ic a tio n          w ith     th e     p o .ic e        co n tro l         rocm




  A tta ch ed ,          at     docum ent (4 )              ,     is   a    p la n    sh o w in g       th e    lo c a tio n        o f    th o se


  p o in ts ,          to g e th e r     w ith         an       e q u ip m e n t      s p e c ific a tio n           prepared             by    th e


  S o u th        Y o r k s h ir e      P o lic e       C o m m u n ic a tio n s         D ep a rtm en t.              The       C e r ti,^ n g


  A u th o r ity          are     ask ed        to      oversee             th e     in s ta lla tio n          cf      th is      te le p h o n e


  sy stem .




     RBCCMMENDATION 33



     There is in existence at Rotherham United PC a public address

     system.              The police have carried out a survey of this system and

     have         identified                the         requirements                   for at            least two additional

     speakers, both of which could be utilised to address spectators

     awaiting                 admission           to the                ground.                The       police recaimend one

     additional speaker to address spectators in Masbrough Street and
one       a d d itio n a l           sp eak er        to       ad d ress             sp ecta to rs                in        M iliin c c r           L ane.


{S ee      p la n     a tta ch ed         at    docum ent            (5).




 The       C e r tify in g           A u th o r ity        are     ask ed           to      oversee           th e          in s ta lla tio n             cf


an    a d eq u a te          p u b lic     ad d ress           sy stem         to        en su re        th a t        it     c o m p lie s          w ith


th is      r e c o m m e n d a tio n           and      th a t      it        is        e ffe c tiv e .                In     so        d o in g ,       th e


C e r tify in g         A u th o r ity          w ill       w ish        to        pay       regard,           a lso ,          tc        paragraph


194       ( i ii )     o f     th e      G u id e     to       S a fety            at     S p o rts          G rounds          -        'T h e      G reen


G u id e '      -       w h ic h         lis t s        th e      r e q u ir e m e n ts           o f        an        e ffe c tiv e             p u b lic


ad d ress           sy stem .




The       p o lic e     have         ask ed        th e    c lu b        tc        in s ta ll      th e        fa c ility               tc     precede


P .A .     m essages           w ith      a    lo u d      sig n a l          and,        w hen        in s ta lle d ,             tc     a d v e r tis e


th is      fa c ility           in    th e     c l u b ’s      p rogram m es.




RECOMMENDATION 34

T here         is       no       illu m in a te d              a d v e r tis in g            score            beard            at         R cth erh a m


U n ite d 's         ground.




A     s e r ie s        of       hand          sig n a ls         fo r         use          by     p o lic e            o ffic e r s                in     an


em ergency             is      p r e se n tly        b e in g       fo r m u la te d ,            n a tio n a lly ,                by     a     w o r k in g


group         of      th e      A s s o c ia tio n         o f     C h ie f          P o lic e         O ffic e r s .               The          r e s u lts


are       a w a ite d .




RECOMMENDATION 35



The       S o u th     Y o r k sh ir e         P o lic e       m a in ta in             r e g u la r     lia is o n           w ith          th e    S o u th


Y o r k s h ir e       M e tr o p o lita n           A m b u la n c e          S e r v ic e        and         th e         S o u th         Y o r k s h ir e


 F ir e       S e r v ic e           c o n c e r n in g          crow d            sa fe ty            a t     R o th erh a m                 U n i t e d 1s


 fo o tb a ll         ground.
At      a      fo rce             le v e l,         th e         C h ie f            S u p e r in te n d e n t             (O p e r a tio n s )             has


r e g u la r       m e e tin g s           w ith     se n io r            o ffic e r s            frcm         eth er       s e r v ic e s .              At        a

 lo c a l      le v e l          th e     p o lic e        m a tch             c c r n r a r .d e r     m eets        w ith         th e    a m b u la n c e


 lia is o n       o ffic e r            at   m ost        i f     not          every        m arch.             The       fir e       s e r v ic e        have


a lso       had       a    lia is o n         o ffic e r          a t     at        le a s ,     one         m a tch      th is       season          w here


he    m et     w ith         th e       p o lic e        m a tch         com m ander.




RBCOMENDATION 36



In    advance               cf      each       m a tch          at       R o th erh a m           U n i-r e d 's         ground,            th e         S o u th


Y o r k s h ir e          P o lic e       fo r w a rd       tc       th e        S o u th       Y o r k s h ir e        F ir e      and     A m b u la n c e


S e r v ic e s      fu ll         d e ta ils         about           th e        fo r th c o m in g           e v en t.




R E C O -M E N D A T IO N 3 7




C o n tin g e n c y          p la n s        fo r        th e      a r r iv a l           cf     em ergency               p o lic e ,         fir e         and


a m b u la n c e           v e h ic le s            at          R o th erh a m              U n ite d 's           ground,                 have           been


r e v ie w e d        and         prepared.                     The       c o n tin g e n c y             p la n        fo rm s       p art        o f      th e


p o lic e      o p e r a tio n a l           order.




The     C e r tify in g                 A u th o r ity          w ill          w ish       to         c o n sid e r       w h eth er         th e         c lu b


have        ta k en         a d eq u a te           account              o f      paragraph                  2 9 (v )     o f       th e    G u id e           to


S a fety         at         S p o rts         G rounds               -         'T h e      G reen            G u id e '         -    w h ic h        ta sk s


m anagem ent                 w ith           th e         r e s p o n s ib ility                      fo r      p r e p a r in g           em ergency


c o n tin g e n c y           p la n s         in         c o n s u lta tio n                   w ith          th e       th ree           em ergency


s e r v ic e s .
                                                                                                                                                    t




 RECOMMENDATION 38



 The      p o lic e     o p e r a tio n a l     order        fc r     a r .y    event       h e ld    at        R cth erh a m        U n ite d ’s


 ground        c c n ta ir S    in fo r m a tio n ,         fcr     o ffic e r s        d e p lo y e d     to     en tra n ces         to    th e


 ground,          as     tc    th e    c o n tin g e n c y        p la n s     fcr      th e    a r r iv a l      o f   th e        em ergency

 s e r v ic e s .




RECOMMENDATIONS 39 - 43



T h ese     r e c c r n r e n d a tio n s     concern        F ir s t        A id    and    M e d ic a l    f a c ilit ie s          and,     as


su ch ,     are       o u ts id e     any     p o lic e     r e m it.          U nder      R e c o m m e n d a tio n     41,        how ever,


th e    p o lic e       co n tro l      at     R o th erh a m       U n i t e d '=      ground        is        to ld   th e        id e n titv


and    w h erea b o u ts        c f    th e     'c lu b '    d o cto r         b efo re     each     m a tch .          He     is    r e a d : 1"


c o n ta c ta b le .




                                                                                                                                                    «
          ACTION TAKEN BY

    THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

IN RESPECT OP BARNSLEY FOOTBALL CLUB

 FOLLOWING THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF

        THE INTERIM REPORT

                 OF

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
      This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereaft

      referred to as 'The Police’) and Barnsley Football Club (hereafter referred
      as 'The Club’).




      this agreement signed „„ b.half of bot„                                ^                   ^               ^

      recommendation four of th.            In te rim     Report 0 f the In,ulry held by                 ^       ^

      Lord Justice   T a y lo r   lnt0   ch «   „ 1 U s b o ro u g „   s„ dlum   D is a j[ e r   ^   ^       ^




     Th, agreement between The Police and Th. Club Is as follows



 fmaximum
     •    Capacities for Terrar »

     n» ciUb win b. responsible f#r lialUBg the nuBber of spectators enterins

        h se.f contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed In

     accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




 The Club will do this by means of a mechanical .umber recorder fitted to e.e,

 turnstile.     Th,                  recorded will b, carried by a runner to a central

 Point where they will be collated by an employe, „f Th. c l u b .




 •       Club will inform th, polic, control room when a particular pen or ar.a is

 approaching capacity.             Th, Club will b, responsible for closing off furth.r

access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about'to be reached.                                        The

Polio, accept Th. Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

therefore, Th. Police will provide assistance if necessary.




Public order problems In respect of spectators so excluded and Th. Polic. will

prepare contingency plans to d.al with such situations.
Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perineter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any othar sttwards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police vill provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through £ gate to relieve

overcrowding.



All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




The stewards checking the crows for overcrowding or distress will not be

 issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

 trick will communicate to police ground control any relevant matte, brought to

 their attention by these stewards.




 Catting, Equipment

 The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

 cutting equipment to permit the iasediate removal of enough fencing to release

 numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

 by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

 equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

 will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following matters:-

        i)    the anticipated number of spectators expected having     regard

              to the separate supporter groups;




       ii)    the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended      to be used;




      iii)    any information in relation to crowd      problems;



i
       iv)    the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

              to each group;




         v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

              through the turnstiles;




        iv)   where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

              corresponds with the planned arrangeaents for admitting

              spectators to the ground.

)


    Postponeaent of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command
                                  *
    at the ground.   It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

    between the referee's room and the police control room.




    The Polic® have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

    being called to the ground.       These include routes of access, rendezvous

    points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.       The Police will

    liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

    amended or as otherwise appropriate.
Tna C h i e f Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




                                  >4. /*/vO
SIGNED .                          on behalf of Barnsley Football Club




SIGNED                          .. on behalf of South Yorkshire Police
RBCX3M4ENDATION 1



Barnsley Football Club has several viewing terraces at its ground which

are each self-contained with fixed capacities.           The existing safety

certificate does not, at this time, reflect the maximum capacities.




RBOCmEMDftTIOM 2



The    calculation     for     maximum     capacities,   proposed   by   this

recorrmendation, has   been     followed in determining a figure for each

terraced area as follows:-



Pontefract Road End                         8,670

Brewery Stand                               7,500

Main Stand Terrace     North                3,315

Main Stand Terrace     South                3,145

Spion Kop                                   5,250

(Pre Taylor, the capacity of the Spion Kop was 7,500, calculated upon a

density factor of 54 persons per 10 square metres.           In reducing that

figure by 15%, as reccxtmended by Taylor, the Spion Kop area can safely

hold 6,375.     However, on the basis of the correlation between this

viewing area and the turnstiles serving it, only 5,250 spectators can

be accamvodated on the Spion Kop within one hour - calculated at 750

per turnstile per hour.        (See Recorrmendation 19). )

The certifying authority are asked to re-examine the capacity of

Main Stand Terrace North.             On 17 October 1989 before the match between

3arnsley and Sheffield United, the club secretary at Barnsley PC closed off

access to the Terrace in the interests of the safety of those spectators

occupying the terrace.       The collated count fran the turnstiles in that area

 indicated that only 2402 spectators had entered - seme 913 below permitted cep
KBOOMENDftTION 3



(a) Barnsley FC has a mechanical counting system in respect of each

    turnstile.   The club undertook to check the counting mechanism of each

    turnstile at 15 minute intervals and to relay that information to the

    police control rocm at the ground.   To date, however, the club have not

    performed such checks in relation to the whole of the ground.    The club

    state that they are not in a position to do so, in the whole of the

    ground, because of the inadequate mechanical counting system on the

    turnstiles and insufficiency of staff.   The club did in fact experiment

    at one game with the Brewery Stand but the trial was unsuccessful.



    It is the police view that, unless the club meet the responsibility to

   count the spectators entering the ground, there is a real danger of

   this reccmrendation being breached.   It is noted, that at a meeting of

   the Officer Working Party held on the 10 August 1989, the club

   undertook in the long term to install an electronic monitoring system.

   Notwithstanding this commitment, the Certifying Authority are asked to

   ensure immediate compliance with this reccrrmendation.



(b) In the written agreement between South Yorkshire Police and Barnsley |

   PC, (see Recommendation 4), the club undertook to close off the

   relevant turnstiles to prevent further access to any viewing area when

   its maximum capacity is about to be reached.   The Certifying Authority

   are asked to ensure that the club continue to meet their

   responsibilities in this regard.
RBCOWENDATION 4



A written agreement, setting out their respective responsibilities for

crowd     safety    and    control,    has    been     approved      and   signed   by

representatives of South Yorkshire Police and Barnsley PC.                  A copy of

that agreement is attached at document (6) . Whilst there have been no

variations to this agreement since it was signed by the club on the 22

August 1989, it is clear that the club are failing to comply with the

agreement. (See Reccmmendation 3 above).



RBOCtMBJDfiTICH 5



Barnsley PC claim that there are a number of stewards, deployed to each

side of the ground, whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in

those areas for possible overcrowding or distress.              However, despite an

undertaking in the written agreement with the South Yorkshire Police,

and numerous subsequent requests made to the club secretary, the club

have    not   yet   provided a plan of the           ground   indicating where the

stewards, who have this responsibility, will be situated.



There are at each match, a number of stewards who appear to be under­

taking these responsibilities and the stewards have ready access to

police officers, authorised under Recaimendation 9 below, who each have

a radio giving them contact with the police control roan.

RB0QMMaa»now 6


All     police officers     and stewards     (not    just those authorised under

Recemendations       5    and   9)   are   fully    briefed   with    regard   to   the

recognition of crowd densities and to the recognition of signs of
distress.     All officers and stewards have been issued, as an aide

memoire, with a laminated card which identifies the signs of distress.



Stewards are each issued with a copy of written instructions, by the

club, which detail their duties.         The chief stewards are each briefed

by a police inspector, before each match, on the responsibilities of

stewards for crcwd safety and control and their duties in case of

emergency evacuation.     The chief steward is expected to brief the other

stewards.



Police officers are briefed by a Senior police officer before each

match on their complementary responsibilities and duties.



The   South   Yorkshire   Police   are   presently   preparing    visual   aids,

designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crowd

densities, to recognise signs of distress, and to understand a little

more about crcwd dynamics.         The aids will consist of a) Albums of

photographs depicting the various sections of Barnsley's ground with

different msnbers of spectators therein, and b) A video tape film which

highlights    crowd densities,     distress and dynamics.        When completed

these photographs and film will be shown to the Safety of Sports Ground

Advisory Group.




The Certifying Authority are asked to ensure that the club undertakes

and continues to undertake its own reponsibilities for staff training

as set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide'

- paras, 26, 177, 195 and Annex B to the Guide.
 RBOOMMEHDftTION 7



All gateways in radial or perimeter fences at Barnsley PC are painted

in the international safety colour — green - which is a different

colour fran the rest of the fence.        Each is clearly identified by a

sign which proclaims 'Bnergency Exit'.



RECOMMENDATION 8



Only the Spion Kop end of the ground has a perirreter fence.       The three

gates in this perimeter fence have been removed and easily-broken tape

has     been placed across the openings    in the   fence.     This tape is

respected by the spectators, who have not made any attempts to invade

the pitch, but would be no barrier in case of emergency.

RBCCWENDATICM 9



There is, in respect of each gateway in the perimeter fence, a police

officer    whose sole duty, whenever spectators are on the terrace, is to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through the gateway to

relieve overcrowding.     Such police officers are to be identified by

means of a lime green tabard.     Hie officers are regularly deployed to

such duties and are therefore familiar to all stewards in that area,

(See Reccrimendation 5 above), are known by them to be authorised to

relieve overcrowding,    and are able to make radio contact with the

police control roan.




  RBOCMMEMDftTIOW 10



  A set of metal cutting equipment has been provided by Barnsley

  PC.      It has been agreed that, in case of need, an      employee of
the club trained in its use will be readily available to operate the

equipment.     An operative is deployed irrmediately adjacent to the police

control rocm.     He is readily to hand should the need arise.



RBO M iaClftTICtB 11 AMD 12



It is understood that Barnsley Borough Council representatives on the

Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group, have carried out an inspection

of all crush barriers.



RECOMMENDATIONS 13 - 17



Safety     Certification   is   obviously    a   matter   for   Barnsley   Borough

Council.     At a meeting of the Officer Working Party on the 9 August

1989, it was decided to review the Safety Certificate in due course and

thereafter conduct an annual review of the certificate.



In respect of Recommendation        17,     the South Yorkshire Police await

notification of the constitution of the Advisory Group at Barnsley.             It

is the police view, however, that this Group should supplement, and not

replace, the existing Officer Working Group.



^ECOMEM»TICMS 18 m > 19



It is understood that each turnstile has been inspected and its

potential rate of flew measured.       The correlation between each

viewing area of the stadium and the turnstiles serving it

has been calculated and, as a result, the capacity of the
Spion Cop terrace has been reduced to 5250 because there are only

seven turnstiles to service this part of the ground.

Similarly the. capacity of the Brewery Stand terrace has been reduced

to 7500 because there are only 10 turnstiles to service that part of

the ground.

 RBCXM4BBMFI0N 20



 This   recommendation   is linked directly with Reccitmendation .3

 above.    It is suggested that Barnsley PC do not have adequate

 arrangements for monitoring the number of spectators entering the

 ground and for limiting further access when capacities have been

 ajJ are about to be reached.     The Certifying Authority are asked

 to ensure compliance with this reccmnendation

 RBCCMMEMDATION 21



 Barnsley PC currently have two CC TV cameras installed at the

 ground and proposals to install a further two cameras.        A survey

 of the installation has been carried out by a trained police CC

 TV operator (no expert knowledge is professed) and his report is

  attached at document (3X
  For   your further information the General Purposes Committee of

  the Association cf Chief M i o e Officers has convened a working group

  to consider,   nationally,   the use of CC -TV to promote public

  safety at football grounds.    The group anticipate that it may be

  possible to provide a 'package' of equipment for use as a test

  for a cortmon minimum standard of performance.      They will report

  back in due course.
RBCChMEJCATICIN 22



Signposting for spectators both inside and outside the ground has

been reviewed by the Barnsley            Borough Council Safety of Sports

Grounds     Advisory    Group.     The    police   are    satisfied with the

signposting.



RBOaMENDftTIONS 23 AND 24



The South Yorkshire Police have had liaison with the club on the

question of ticketed matches.            The police are satisfied with the

arrangements and will ensure that the information on any ticket

corresponds with        their plans for admitting spectators to the

ground.



RECCM^EMWnON 25



At Barnsley PC there is no pre match entertainment and the club

do    not   recognise     any    supporters     club     as   representing   the

interests of the spectators in general.

RBOOmaCftTION 26



The South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes, QPM, LLB, MA, to liaise with the management of

each football club and local authority concerned in respect of

the   safety   and     control   of   crowds.      Mr    Hayes   has met with

Directors and Secretaries of all five football league clubs in

the county, including Messrs Dennis and Spinks of Barnsley PC, on

24 August 1989.        He met with representatives of the four relevant
local     authorities,   including     Messrs    Harper      and   Jackson    of

Barnsley Borough Council on 18 September 1989.                 A copy of the

minutes of that meeting are attached at document (7).



RBOOMElPftTION 27



Both the Operational Order and the pre match briefing of all

officers on duty at each match at Barnsley PC alert officers to

the dangers of overcrowding, and, if any should be detected, of

taking immediate and appropriate steps to remedy it.



The     proposed   training   by way   of     photographs     and video      (see

Recommendation 6 above) will further emphasise these messages.



RECCFMENDATION 28



The     operational   planning   for   each     match   at   Barnsley   PC    is

intended to enable the police to cope with forseeable patterns in

the arrival at, and departure from, any match by spectators.



The following scenarios are each catered for by way of police

contingency plans at Barnsley PC:-



a) All ticket, or otherwise restricted, matches.

b) Early arrival of spectators.

c) Unexpected and joint arrival of large numbers of spectators.

d) Individual section of ground approaching capacity.

e) Whole ground approaching capacity.

f) Late arrival of spectators.
g) Emergency opening of external gates (or forcing of external

   gates), thereby allowing an influx of spectators.

h) Early departure of spectators frcm ground.

i) Emergency evacuation.



The police retain a reserve of         officers at the groundto enable

rapid deployment to any difficulty which may             arise inside or

outside the ground.



The certifying authority may, however, wish to satisfy themselves

that   the   club   have   made   contingency   plans   to   deal   with   a

situation where the available entrances might prove insufficient

to stop unduly large crowds gathering outside the ground.              Such

contingency plans are required        by paragraph 46 of the Guide to

Safety at Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide1.



RBCXM4ENDATI0N 29



The police officer in ccmmand at Barnsley PC is aware of the

option to delay kick-off, and discusses this matter, before each

game, with the match officials.         To enable instant contact with

the match referee when considering kick-off delay, the club have

installed a telephone link between the police control roan and

the referee's roan.



RBCOWEMDaTICU 30



There is available in the police control rocm at Barnsley PC, the

results of all closed circuit television monitoring outside and
inside the ground.        Police officers who perform duty in the

control rocm are skilled in the use and interpretation of the

results of CC TV filming, and are to attend a CC TV operators

course which is run by the Greater Manchester Police.



REXXMMEM»TION 31



There   are   sufficient    operators    employed in the police

control roan to deal with radio cannunications.               New police

comrunications     equipment     has    recently    been   installed   at

Barnsley PC's ground.



The equipment consists of a two-bay radio set with a spare

station in case of radio failure on the primary station.               It

 also has battery back-up in case of power failure.           This system

 also gives operators in the control roan priority over, and the

 capacity to override, others using the same channel.



 The police ground ccmmander has the option of utilising, when

 he   feels   it   necessary,   an     additional   radio channel    which

 provides     exclusive    carmunication    between himself    and   other

 sector contenders.       This executive channel would be utilised in

 an emergency when the primary channel may became overcrowded.



 The police control rocm is purpose built and was only recently

 completed. The sound-proofing is adequate.



 RBOOMBtOATION 32



 A survey of Barnsley PC's ground has identified sixteen key points
where the police would wish to see dedicated telephone points to

enable direct camiunication with the police control roan.



Attached, at document (4) , is a plan showing the location of those

points, together with an equipment specification prepared by the

South Yorkshire Police Cctnnunications Department.        The Certifying

Authority are asked to oversee the installation of this telephone

system.




RECXXMEHDATION 33



There is in existence at Barnsley PC a public address system.

However, a survey of the system has identified the requirement for

six additional speakers, all of which vrould be utilised to address

spectators waiting     to   gain   admission   to the   ground.      It   is

recamended at the speakers be positioned as follows



a) Adjacent to Gate 12.

b) Adjacent to Gate 9.

c) Adjacent to Gate 8.

d) Adjacent to Gate 5.

e) Adjacent to Gate 3.

f) Adjacent to Gate 2.



The plan at (5)     shows the existing system and the proposed site

for new loud speakers.        The Certifying Authority are asked to

oversee the installation of any public address system to ensure

that   it   complies   with   this   reccrmendat ion    and   that   it   is
effective.     In so doing, the Certifying Authority will wish to pay

regard, also, to paragraph 194 (iii) of the Guide to Safety at

Sports Grounds - 'The Green Guide1 -               which lists the requirements

of an effective public address system.



It is noted that the club have equipped the public address system

with the facility to precede any messages with a.loud signal.                     The

police     have     asked the     club    to ensure that     this     facility     is

advertised in the club's programmes.



RBOCl|MEMDftTION 34



There is no illuminated advertising/score board               at   Barnsley PC.



A     series   of    hand     signals    for use    by police      officers   in an

emergency is presently being formulated, nationally, by a vrorking

 group of the Association of Chief Police Officers.                     The results

 are awaited.



 RB0CM4EKDATI0N 35



 The South Yorkshire Police maintain regular liaison with the South

 Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and; the South Yorkshire

 Fire Service concerning crcw3 safety at Barnsley PC's stadium.

 At    a   force     level,    the   Chief   Superintendent        (Operations)    has

 regular meetings with senior officers from the other services.                     At

 a local level the police match comnander meets with the ambulance

 liaison officer at football matches lieId at Barnsley FC.
RECOMENQATION 36



In advance of each match at Barnsley's ground, the South Yorkshire

Police forward to the South Yorkshire Fire and Ambulance Services

full details about the forthcoming event.



REXXMffiHDftTION 37



Contingency plans for the arrival of emergency police, fire and

ambulance vehicles at Barnsley's ground         have been reviewed at a

meeting held at Barnsley Police Station on the 14 August 1989,

with the other emergency services.        The contingency plan prepared

as a result of that meeting forms part of the police operational

order.

The Certifying Authority will wish to consider whether the club

have taken adequate account of paragraph 29(v) of the Guide to

Safety   at   Sports   Grounds   -   'The Green      Guide'    - which   tasks

management    with     the   responsibility    for     preparing      emergency

contingency    plans    in   consultation     with    the     three   emergency

services.



KEXXMMENCflTION 38



The police operatioral order for any event held at Barnsley PC's

ground contairs information, for officers deployed to entrances to

the ground, as to the contingency plans for the arrival of the

emergency services.
RBQOMBPftnON 39 - 43



These recarmendations concern First Aid and Medical facilities

and, as such, are outside any police remit.   Under Recommendation

41, however, the police control at Barnsley PC's ground is told

the identity and whereabouts of the    'club' doctor before each

match.   He is readily contactable.
                   N O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as it
                   contains     exempt         information
                   within para.     ... ....... .
                                         14             of
                                                                      H O M E OFFICE
                                                             Queen Anne's Gate London S W 1 H 9 A T
                   Sch.l2A to the Local Government                  Direct line: 01 -273 3 7 4 3
                                                                   Switchboard: 01-273 3000
                   Act 1972 as amended.

.Our reference:- POL/89 850/4/30
Your reference : RC J/VS




    R C Johnston Esq BA IPFA
    Clerk and Financial Officer
    South Yorkshire Police Authority
    PO Box37
    Regent Street
    Barnsley
    South Yorkshire
    S7 0 2PQ                                                         6 November 1989




     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER : COMPENSATION CLAIMS

     Thank you for your letter of 27 October asking under what
     circumstances and to what extent the Home Office will consider
     giving   further special assistance  to  South Yorkshire Police
     Authority in connection with uninsured compensation liabilities
     which might arise from impending civil actions against the Chief
     Constable.

     I am afraid that it is not possible for me to give any very helpful
     guidance at this stage.  We would of course consider a request for
     special payment in addition to the normal police grant at any time.
     But since the level of grant was raised to 51% only one such
     payment — that already agreed for South Yorkshire following
     Hillsborough - has been made.   I can therefore give no indication
     whether a further application would be successful or not.

     The two criteria which loom largest when we consider requests for
     special payment are (a) whether the size of the expenditure is such
     that to meet it would involve the police authority in such huge
     costs that the viability of the police force would be put at risk
     and (b) whether the commitment could have been foreseen (and so
     budgeted for).

     The problem with compensation liability following Hillsborough is
     of course that, although the size and timing of the commitment are
     uncertain, the likelihood of the commitment arising is foreseeable.
We would therefore expect the police authority to make provision
for it in its precept and budget, and if the timescale were
extended the impact of this might well be spread over m o r e than one
year.  I appreciate that there are difficult and complex issues to
be taken into account here but they cannot be avoided and, apart
from their being the police       authority's responsibility,      the
authority are in a better position than we are here to answer them.

While, therefore, I do not wish to close the door in advance on any
future application from your authority, I have to say that our
expectation would be that it would have taken steps to cover this
contingency from its own resources (including the grant it receives
from the Government).

I have taken your references to the precept and to the budget for
the coming year as meaning that the authority do not for.es.ee any
payments arising in this financial year.       If, however, there were
any question of costs arising during this financial year on a scale
which  seemed      to the authority to call       for further central
government h e l p , we would require an estimate of the costs involved
and of how much would be recoverable from your insurers in order to
consider any application for a special payment.            However, no
guarantee can be given as to the outcome of such an application.

I am sorry that I cannot be more helpful at this stage.




                                            M J ADDISON
(
 19                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                      17   APRIL 1989             Hillsborough Stadium Disaster              20

           Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                                         Lord Justice Taylor will visit Sheffield tom orrow to begin
                                                                                his investigation. I am grateful to him for agreeing to
3.30 pm                                                                         undertake this task.
                                                                                    However, we need also to take a wider view. The
    The Secretary of S tate for the Home Department (M r.
                                                                                Governm ent believe th at the future o f football in this
 Douglas Hurd): W ith permission, Mr. Speaker, I should
                                                                                country lies in a national membership scheme in
 like to make a statem ent about the disaster a t the Sheffield
                                                                                designated grounds— [In te r r u p tio n .]—and now, it seems,
W ednesday football club ground a t Hillsborough on
                                                                                also in providing all-seated accom m odation at m ajor
 Saturday. Everyone has been horrified by this incredible
                                                                                football clubs. This would involve the disappearance o f
 tragedy in which 94 lost their lives and 174 were injured.
                                                                                terraces a t those grounds. It might also involve
    Shortly after the start o f the m atch, there was a surge o f
                                                                                amendments to strengthen the Football Spectators Bill so
 spectators on the Leppings lane terrace, which crushed
                                                                                that its provision for the licensing o f grounds m atched this
many a t the front against the perim eter fence. This
                                                                                concept. We shall be considering these m atters urgently.
accounted for m ost o f the deaths and injuries.
    The m atch was due to start a t 3 pm. To help ensure                            An appeal fund is being set up by the civic authorities
orderly access, the gates o f the ground were opened at 12                      o f Liverpool, N ottingham and Sheffield. The G overnm ent
noon. A t 2.30 pm m ost o f the N ottingham fans were in the                    will be contributing £500,000 immediately tow ards this
ground, bu t many o f the Liverpool supporters were still                       fund.
arriving. It was clear to the police officers in charge that                        This was a devastating tragedy. O ur deep sympathy
there was am ple capacity still to be filled in some parts o f                  goes to the families o f those who died, to those recovering,
the enclosure ^located to Liverpool.                                            and—particularly moving yesterday—to those ' oung
    A t about 2.45 pm there was a large crowd o f Liverpool                     people who are still fighting for life and health. W e owe a
supporters a t the turnstiles in Leppings lane behind the                       duty, it seems to us, to these passionate supporters o f
west stand. There was difficulty in coping with the pressure                    football to examine urgently and thoroughly the causes
on the turnstiles, and the police used loud hailers to urge                     and the background, and to do all in o u r power to prevent
 the crowd to be patient. A t about 2.50, more Liverpool                        such a thing from happening again. We have to set our
 supporters arrived and the num bers in front of the                            sights high and find a better way for British football.
 turnstiles increased. Some supporters started to climb the
walls and turnstiles, and those at the front o f the crowd                           M r. Roy H attersley (Birmingham, Sparkbrook): M ay I,
 outside the stadium were under considerable pressure from                       first o f all, offer the deepest sympathy o f my right hon. and
 those behind.                                                                   hon. Friends and myself to all those who were injured in
    The senior police officer present considered that there                      o r bereaved by this terrible tragedy. Little th at we say will
 was a possible danger to the lives o f the spectators at the                    help them a t this m om ent, but I hope th a t they find some
 front o f the crowd outside the stadium. In order to relieve                    com fort in the knowledge th at the whole country shares
 the pressure, he arranged for an exit gate near the                             their grief and suffering. We also offer our hopes for a full
turnstiles to be opened to let a section o f the crowd                           recovery to those 17 patients still in intensive care.
through. The relationship o f th a t action to the disaster on                       M ay I also express our gratitude to and our adm iration
the terrace shortly afterwards is clearly a central question                     for all those individuals who did such rem arkable work
to be investigated.                                                              saving lives, com forting the dying, and helping the injured
    M y right hon. Friend the Prime M inister and I                             —police, fire officers, the am bulance service, St. John
yesterday visited the football ground and the two Sheffield                     Ambulance Brigade, doctors and nurses, the staff o f the
hospitals which received casualties. I should like to pay                       club, and the football supporters who acted with such
tribute to all those involved in the rescue operations at the                   great discipline and compassion?
ground, including the many spectators who gave their                                 M ay I go on to welcome the Home Secretary’s decision
help, and to those others, including the hospital staffs and                    to set up a public inquiry, and express our hope th a t its
voluntary agencies, who have since been working so hard                         report will lead to immediate and decisive action? M ay I
treating the injured and consoling the bereaved. We heard                       ask the H om e Secretary about the police inquiry th at is to
many accounts o f courage exerted on behalf o f others.                         be carried o ut a t the same time? C an we be assured that
    I have asked for further factual reports from the police                    neither its proceedings n or its conclusions will delay or
and other services, the local authority and the Football                        inhibit the public inquiry th at he has announced today?
Association. Inquests will be held in due course. But over                      We need an unequivocal and authoritative account o f
and above this, there is clearly need for a full and                            w hat happened a t Hillsborough, why it happened, and
independent inquiry to identify the causes o f the disaster                     w hat m ust be done to prevent such a thing from ever
and to examine w hat needs to be done to prevent such an                        happening again. O n the face o f it, two parallel inquiries
accident happening again. I have therefore asked Lord                           are not the best way to achieve th at result.
Justice Taylor to carry o ut an inquiry with the following                          The report em anating from the public inquiry m ust be
terms o f reference:                                                            followed by a reorganisation o f football ground control,
     “T o in q u ire in to th e events a t Sheffield W ednesday
fo o tb all g ro u n d o n 15 A pril 1989 an d to m ake re c o m m e n d a ­    which may take some tim e to achieve. I refer, for example,
tio n s a b o u t the needs o f crow d c o n tro l a n d safety at spo rts      to the replacement o f terraces witli seats. But some action
g ro u n d s.”                                                                 m ust be taken a t once. Will the H om e Secretary issue an
M r. Brian Johnson, the chief constable of Lancashire, has                     immediate instruction to those safety committees and chief
agreed to assist the inquiry as an assessor, and                               constables w ho have insisted upon football clubs installing
arrangem ents will be m ade as necessary for other qualified                   perim eter fences? M any football ciubs have w arned fo r
assessors to be appointed and for the inquiry t o l *                          years th a t perim eter fencing is a potential danger. O n
provided with technical advice and support. I am asking                        Saturday it proved lethal. It m ust n o t be m aintained where
th a t the inquiry should proceed with all possible speed.                     lives are p ut a t risk.

   20 CD39/1 Job 1-1
   20                      Hillsborough Stadium Disaster           17 APRIL 1989               Hillsborough Stadium Disaster             22

>egin         We assume that the recommendations of the public               to get through it, often in vain, can believe that the right
g to      inquiry will concern crowd control outside the turnstiles          answer was found on that occasion. It m ust be for Lord
          and on the way to matches—not simply organisation and              Justice Taylor and the inquiry to look into that. He is
 The      accommodation inside grounds. In the light o f that, will          aware—I discussed the m atter with him this morning—
  this    the Home Secretary consider the implications of any                th at if he believes, as he may well, th at there are certain
; in      policy or legislation that results in concentration o f crowds     matters—perhaps this one—th a t require an urgent interim
ems,      outside grounds immediately before matches? The                    report, so th at steps can be taken in advance o f the next
lajor     potential consequences o f football supporters being held in       football season, he will be able to do that.
;e of     large numbers outside turnstiles was demonstrated                      The right hon. Gentlem an referred to the Football
'olve     yesterday. N othing must be done to make such                      Spectators Bill. The next stage o f the Bill was to have been
ill so    concentrations m ore likely or more frequent.                      Third Reading in another place, on M onday next. We
1this         M ost informed opinion, including th at o f the police,        believe that the House and the other place will agree that
 ntly.    insists that the concentration of supporters outside               it is seemly to have a short delay in th at. Perhaps after that
rities    turnstiles would be the certain result of p art I o f the          delay, the best course would be for the Bill to complete its
nent      Football Spectators Bill. This m orning’s decision to push         stages in the other place so that any additions th at we
  this    that Bill through Parliament even while the inquiry is             propose in the light o f my earlier statem ent can be
          sitting is neither rational nor sensitive to the mood o f the      introduced when it comes to this H ouse. In the first
          country. We shall oppose it with every legitimate means a t        instance, th at is a m atter for the usual channels in another
iathy
          our disposal.                                                      place.
 ring,
aun           I offer the co-operation of the Opposition for any
                                                                                Several Hon. Members rose ------
 we       legislation th at is genuinely concerned with football safety.
rs of     Indeed, I do m ore: I assure the Home Secretary of my                 Mr. Speaker: Order. I know th at I speak for the whole
luses     party’s profound wish th at proposals on safety a t football       House when I say th at we are all appalled a t this tragedy.
:vent     grounds can be made with the general support o f all               O ur sympathy goes o u t to the relatives o f those who have
t our
          political parties and wholly free from political controversy.      been killed and to the injured. It m ay n o t be possible for
          It will clearly be in the interests o f everybody to obtain        me to call every hon. M ember who wishes to ask a
          unanimous agreement on a subject th at has nothing                 question, but I propose to give precedence to those whose
[ay I,    whatever to do with party politics. I ask the Home                 constituencies are m ost directly affected.
. and     Secretary to try to achieve th a t agreement.
                                                                                 Mr. David Blunkett (Sheffield, Brightside): As the
ed in         M r. Hurd: I am grateful for the earlier p art o f the right   Member o f Parliam ent representing the area th at covers
1 will    hon. Gentlem an’s statem ent, which expressed sentiments           the ground and the N orthern general hospital, I wish to
some      on which the House is united. He raised several particular         reiterate what has already been said in paying tribute to
lares     points. The chief constable o f South Yorkshire took the           those who helped, in the ground, in the com m unity around
a full    view, which I think the right hon. G entlem an will probably       and a t the two m ajor hospitals in Sheffield, to deal with the
          consider right, th at since the actions o f some o f his force     dead and injured. I offer my sym pathy and those of
ation     will be central to any inquiry, it is right th at another force,   colleagues in the city o f Sheffield to the bereaved and to
work      and one with experience in these m atters, should                  those families whose relatives have been injured. I am sure
jured     undertake the police work th at is necessary both in               that we all w ant to consider every possible way o f avoiding
John      preparation for inquests and to subm it the necessary              such an incident ever occurring again.
if the    inform ation to Lord T aylor’s inquiry. Therefore, he m ade            I ask the Home Secretary to confirm th a t the Sheffield
suc£      the announcem ent to which the right hon. Gentlem an               Wednesday football club has done m ore than m ost clubs
          referred. I do not think th a t there is any confusion or          in investing more than £1 m illion over the past 10 years in
ision     duplication. The work to be carried out by the chief               improving safety and facilities in a ground th at m ust be
at its    constable o f the W est M idlands force will be a t the service    one of the best o f the top two or three football league
la y I    of Lord Justice Taylor, and will n ot cut across w hat he          grounds in the country.
 is to    does.                                                                  I hope th at the Home Secretary will confirm th at the
 th at        The right hon. Gentleman spoke about barriers and              inquiry will accept the task o f considering how we might
ly or     perimeter fencing, and it is w orth answering th at point in       change the image o f football. Will it be possible for us to
>day?     a little detail. As the right hon. Gentlem an knows, they are      take a fresh look a t how we treat football spectators? The
nt of     not a statutory requirement, but they are in many places a         behaviour o f a few has led to a concentration on actions
  and     requirement imposed by the local authorities as a                  and attitudes whereby fans are treated as hooligans, or
 ever     condition of the safety certificate, which is required under       potential hooligans, rather than as hum an beings.
airies    the law. The purpose of the barriers and in particular o f             N o one would condone the pressure and the late arrival
          the perimeter fences is to increase security and improve           o f fans Outside the game on Saturday, b ut we want to see
ist be    protection from one type o f threat—th at of violence.             facilities for entertainm ent, catering and com fort in
itro l,                                                                      grounds begin to restore decency and a sense o f purpose.
             M r. Hattersiey: N ot violence— hooliganism.
nple,                                                                        I speak as someone who sat on a small wall behind the goal
ction        Mr. Hurd: T hat is their purpose. We have yet to find           a t Hillsborough when I was a child w ithout fear or
ae an     satisfactory means o f ensuring that, in removing one              anything happening to me o r to those around me.
 chief    hazard, the authorities do n ot create another.                        I ask the Home Secretary to reject the alleged statem ent
illing       The Home Office guidance, which the right hon.                  this afternoon by the president o f U E FA , in which he
d for     Gentleman will have studied, specifically lays dow n the           described fans as “beasts”. I hope th a t the H om e Secretary
 . On     importance o f exits on to the pitch through the perim eter        will say that we shall restore dignity and a sense o f decency
vhere     fence for emergency purposes. N o one who saw the fence            to our football supporters and to the viewing o f football in
          and the gate a t Hillsborough or listened to those who tried       Britain.

             21 CD39/2 Job 1-3
23                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster           17 APRIL 1989              Hillsborough Stadium Disaster              24

   M r. H urd: I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his             It is a tragedy th at should never have happened. The
comments. I agree willingly that Sheffield Wednesday has           people o f Liverpool in particular are in deep m ourning but
p ut massive investment into m odern facilities a t the            there is also a measure of anger because, as has been urged
Hillsborough ground. The term s o f reference o f Lord             elsewhere, they feel th a t steps should have been taken well
Justice T aylor are wide and will enable him to range over         before the m atch to avoid such things happening.
w hat he thinks is essential. I agree th at those whom my              A lthough the attitude th at the G overnm ent have
right hon. Friend the Prime M inister and I visited                adopted has been sym pathetic, may I urge them n o t to go
yesterday in the hospitals were hum an beings who had              ahead a t the m om ent with their proposals? Please be
suffered greatly in body and, sometimes, in mind as well.          sensitive to the feelings o f our people. Is the Home
N o one who m ade those visits could conceivably think o f         Secretary aware that I have, recently, received letters from
them in any other way.                                             some o f those who died urging th at the Governm ent
   I agree also with the m ain thrust o f the question o f the     should n ot introduce the scheme because they felt th a t it
hon. M em ber for Sheffield, Brightside (M r. Blunkett). It is     would add to the existing problems? I urge the
by building up the com fort and the conditions o f the game        G overnm ent, please desist a t least until the report is
and its high reputation th at we can attract m ore and more        published. Let us have another look a t the situation.
people to become spectators and restore the attractiveness              M ay I also urge the G overnm ent to take some
o f the game. T h at will m ean raising our sights, and            im mediate steps? For G od’s sake, do n o t let our people be
thinking o f new ways o f doing that. T h at is why we have        trapped like anim als again. I am an Evertonian—I do not
come to the conclusion th at seated accomm odation in the          often attend Liverpool m atches and I was n ot a t this one
larger stadium s is an im portant p a rt o f the objective which   — but I saw on television the agony and the dreadful scenes
the hon. G entlem an states.                                       when young people, children and others had their lives
                                                                   crushed out o f them, n ot only because o f the perim eter
   Sir Bernard Braine (Castle Point): O ur hearts go out to         fences but because o f the barriers. We m ust ensure th at this
the bereaved families, but surely our thoughts should be            never happens again anywhere in the country.
concentrated on w hat lessons should be learnt for general
                                                                        Those who are in authority and w ho had n o t foreseen
application thoughout the country. M y right hon. Friend
                                                                    th a t such a situation could develop cannot run away from
the Hom e Secretary did not refer to one pressing matter.
                                                                    their responsibilities. The last thing th at I w ant to do is to
Is he aware that, over the past three years, ever since the
                                                                    create a scapegoat and I do no t w ant to condem n the
inquiry o f M r. Justice Popplewell, the St. John Ambulance
                                                                    policeman outside the ground w ho m ade a decision,
Brigade, which has unrivalled experience in providing first
                                                                    thinking, perhaps, th a t he was saving lives. I ju st w ant us
aid a t sports grounds, has been pressing the Home Office,
                                                                    to look a t the whole situation again, again and again, so
local authorities and the Football Association to provide
                                                                    th at such a tragedy does not happen again.
much higher standards o f medical care and equipment at
football stadium s throughout the country.                              The interests o f the spectators should be p ut before the
                                                                    interests o f everybody else. They m ust be treated as
   I f it has n ot been possible outside L ondon to achieve
                                                                    civilised hum an beings, no t as the enemies o f society. Yes,
these standards—in London it has been all right—will my
                                                                    a few enemies o f society m ay get into football grounds
right hon. Friend take appropriate action in advance o f the
                                                                    from time to time, b u t our lovely people o f Liverpool—
inquiry? There is clearly a need to ensure that in any
                                                                    and those elsewhere—m ust never suffer again because they
breakdow n where injury is inflicted, the rescue services and
                                                                    have suffered too m uch already.
the magnificient w ork done by the St. John Ambulance
Brigade are no t frustrated by a lack o f proper facilities.
                                                                      M r. H urd: Anyone who watched on television the
                                                                   reaction o f people in Liverpool, particularly a t the services
    M r. H urd: M y right hon. Friend is right to draw
                                                                   in and outside the cathedrals yesterday, will know th a t the
attention to the criticisms th at have been made. He may
                                                                   hon. G entlem an was right in the way th at he started his
have heard the doctor from Glasgow give his considered
talk on th at m atter on the radio this morning. I understand      question. There is also absolutely no doubt from w hat we
                                                                   heard yesterday th at the hon. G entlem an is right to talk
th at before the m atch began two am bulances were at the
                                                                   about people being trapped, crushed and helpless. T hat
ground together with attendants from the St. John
                                                                   leads back to the point ab ou t perim eter fences. The hon.
Am bulance Brigade. The first call for additional
am bulances was received by the am bulance service at eight        G entlem an is right also to advise against a rush to
                                                                   judgm ent. Yesterday, we listened to m any accounts o f
m inutes past three and within 17 m inutes a total of 10
additional ambulances had attended. We spoke yesterday             w hat happened from casualties and witnesses. The broad
                                                                   thrust o f w hat they said tallied. However, there were
to the head o f the am bulance service. Its record o f quick
                                                                   discrepancies—as there usually are—on m any im portant
recourse is a good one. However, it does no t help with my
                                                                   points o f detail. It is for precisely th a t reason th at an
right hon. Friend’s point about the facilities already a t the
ground. I imagine th at th at is a m atter to which Lord           inquiry is needed.
Justice Taylor will w ant to give urgent attention.                    There is no particular difficulty ab ou t p art II o f the
                                                                    Football Spectators Bill. As to p art I, the national
    M r. Eric S. Heffer (Liverpool, W alton): These are            membership scheme is designed as a remedy against
probably the m ost difficult questions th at I have ever had       violence. Violence was not present a t H illsborough on
to ask in the H ouse o f Commons. I say th at because many         Saturday, bu t it has been the curse o f the game and m ight
o f my constituents and m any o f the constituents o f my          be again unless we find the right remedy. The remedy in the
                                                                   Bill flows from the Popplewell report on the last disaster
colleagues who represent Liverpool and Merseyside, as
well as elsewhere, are dead or injured because o f the great       —  [Interruption.]  In considering the H illsborough disas­
                                                                   ter, it would be foolish to forget the lessons o f earlier
tragedy a t H illsborough. I am thinking o f the families and
o f the people who are bereaved.                                   disasters.

     22 CD39/3 Job 1-6
• 24
              25                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster          17 APRIL 1989                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                  26
The
                The action that we propose is reasonable. I mentioned           membership scheme or from th at o f designated grounds,
but
             the parliamentary delay that we believe to be seemly. I            for reasons that I have already given. I f Lord Justice
ged
             mentioned also that we w ant to go forward and not back            Taylor wishes to comment on that, nothing in his terms o f
well
             on the Football Spectators Bill and on the concept o f a           reference will prevent him from doing so.
             national membership scheme, which we believe to be
 ave         necessary and right. We m ust go forward, to see whether               Mr. Menzies Campbell (Fife, N orth-East): On behalf of
) go         the Bill’s licensing provisions need to be strengthened, to        my right hon. and hon. Friends, let me offer my sympathy
  be         make possible the move to all-seated accom m odation in            to the bereaved and injured. Let me also acknowledge the
)me          big stadiums, which we believe is the right way to proceed.        efforts o f those who rendered assistance, especially the
 om          There will be consultations and discussions about that             unsung acts o f heroism perform ed by m any young people.
lent         possibility. I f we reach the conclusion th at the Bill needs to       I should like to press the Home Secretary a little on the
it it        be altered and strengthened in th at way, we shall bring that      scope o f the inquiry. Will it be wide enough to enable the
 the         conclusion to the House.                                           inquiry to consider whether lessons should have been
t is                                                                            learned from an alleged incident in 1981, in the same p art
                  Sir Neil M acfarlane (Sutton and Cheam): Is my right          o f the same ground? It is said th at there was severe
)me          hon. Friend aware that right hon. and hon. M embers in all         overcrowding on that occasion, but mercifully no one was
e be         parts o f the House wholeheartedly share his sentiments            killed or injured.
 not         about the heroic acts th at took place on Saturday? I shall            The Home Secretary would receive support from both
one          be grateful if he will address his mind to two points that I       sides of the House if he took a much m ore robust attitude
;n e s ^ ^   will put to him. I associate myself in many ways with the          to the football membership scheme. M any o f us feel that
ives^P       comments o f the hon. M ember for Liverpool, W alton (Mr.          even proceeding in the way th at he has outlined will
eter         Heffer). Will my right hon. Friend confirm th at the inquiry       inevitably pre-empt Lord Justice Taylor’s report.
this         will be all-embracing, because the disaster has major
             implications for many other m ajor spectator sports? Also,             Mr. Hurd: On the second point, I do n o t think that I
             can the inquiry be speeded up? M any o f my right hon. and         have anything to add to w hat I have already said. As for
seen
             hon. Friends feel that the inquiry is desperately im portant,      the first point, Lord Justice Taylor will o f course be able
rom
             even allowing for the recommendations made four years              to look at evidence from the past if he considers if relevant.
is to
             ago by Mr. Justice Popplewell. If some o f them had been              The hon. and learned Gentlem an asked me about the
  the
             acknowledged, perhaps we would not find ourselves where            kind o f issues that Lord Justice Taylor will need to
ion,
             we are today. Does my right hon. Friend hold the opinion           address. I have already mentioned the decision to open the
it us
             that it would be prem ature and foolhardy to proceed with          outside gate. There is also the question o f why, once in the
i, so
             the national membership scheme until he has an                     ground, fans were propelled into the central tunnel rather
             opportunity to consider all the contributory factors, both         than to the side entrances to the terraces, and the question
: the        inside and outside the ground, to the Hillsborough
1 as                                                                            why those responsible did not notice earlier w hat was
             tragedy? Those factors clearly included panic on the part          happening on the central terrace behind the goal posts.
Yes,         o f the police and o f spectators. I am certain th at it would
inds                                                                            Then there is the whole question—which we have already
             be premature to proceed with the scheme until the inquiry          discussed—of the perimeter barrier and the gates within it,
ol—          has been concluded.
they                                                                            which were designed to serve as an emergency exit but
                                                                                which obviously failed to do so.
                 M r. Hurd: Lord Justice Taylor’s report m ust be speedy
             and thorough. In theory, there can be a contradiction                 Mr. John Carlisle (Luton, N orth): As my right hon.
  th A       between the two. However, I have made it clear to Lord             Friend knows, I am one o f the strongest supporters o f the
'i c e ^ ^   Justice Taylor—and he accepts this—that he may                     Football Spectators Bill, and I rem ain com m itted to the
: the        encounter m atters and issues that need to be tackled with         principle o f membership to com bat football hooliganism.
1 his        particular urgency and upon which he may wish to make              Does my right hon. Friend accept, however, th at in
t we         pressing recommendations. If that is the case, it will be          consideration o f w hat has been said this afternoon— and,
 talk        open to him—and I have the impression th at he will take           indeed, o f the tragic circumstances—it would be wise to
That         this course—to subm it an interim report on such matters           postpone any further discussion until the full results o f the
ion.         before he has finished reaching all o f his conclusions, so        public inquiry are known? I hope th a t my right hon.
i to         that they may be acted upon. Lord Justice Taylor has it in         Friend will then bring to the House a Bill th at will receive
s of         mind that, as with the Popplewell inquiry, the proceedings         not merely all-party support but support from outside the
 oad         o f his inquiry will be in public, unless there is a particular    House, to com bat the terrible problem s th at have been
vere         reason in any case against allowing that. T hat is the             highlighted by Saturday’s tragic events.
taut         procedure. I do not w ant to pin Lord Justice Taylor down
tan          to a specific tim etable before he has even visited Sheffield,        Mr. Hurd: As I have said, there will be a pause for the
             which he is to do tom orrow, but I hope that my hon.               sake of seemliness—as the House w ould wish—and also
  the        Friend feels reassured.                                            for consultations on the possible s tre n g th e n in g o f the Bill.
onal             I note w hat my hon. Friend said about the comments o f        Both purposes are, I think, im portant from the point o f
linst        the hon. M ember for Liverpool, W alton (M r. Heffer), and         view of my hon. Friend.
i on         he will have noted w hat I said in reply. I agree to the extent       I entirely agree with my hon. Friend th at the events at
light        that we need to set our sights high, and that, ap art from         Hillsborough ought to m ake us all step aside from
ith e        other considerations, a delay would be seemly. As I have           preconceptions and look afresh a t how we are to find a
ister        said, we shall need to look at the Bill to see how it might        better way for British football. {Hon . M embers: “H ear,
isas-        be strengthened to meet the extra points that I have               hear.”] However, I think th at my hon. Friend will agree,
rlier        mentioned. I do not consider that it would be right or             even if the Opposition do not, th at an im portant p a rt of
             sensible to resile from the concept o f a national                 that must be protection against hooliganism and violence,

                23 CD39/4 Job 1-9
27                  Hillsborough Stadium Disaster        17   APRIL 1989             Hillsborough Stadium Disaster              28

[M r . H u rd ]                                                    authorities—how th at works out in practice and whether
                                                                   it is right, as the right hon. M ember for Birmingham,
and that in that context a national membership scheme, or          Sparkbrook (M r. Hattersley) pointed out earlier, that
the kind that flows from the Popplewell report, has a              perimeter fences should in many cases be regarded as a
crucial p art to play.                                             requirement for a safety certificate— are m atters on which
                                                                   Lord Justice Taylor could comment.
    M r. Joseph Ashton (Ashfield): I was a t the match on
Saturday and saw everything th at happened. If those                   M r. A. E. P . Duffy (Sheffield, Attercliffe): We all grieve
events had taken place a t a mid-week Cup tie replay on a          today, but some o f us are angry. I speak not only as a
black, dark January night, with people dashing from work           Sheffield M ember o f Parliam ent but also as someone who
in the rush hour trying to get in, it would have been twice        still stands on the popular side week in, week out. Is the
as bad. M ost o f the fans had a ticket, which is a form of        Home Secretary aware that in the afterm ath o f Heysel and
membership card. If the Secretary o f State introduces a           Bradford I wrote to his D epartm ent and described the
com puter system and a membership card, all we shall need          extensive improvements that had been p u t in hand a t
is one idiot to take a piece o f chewing gum and jam it into       Hillsborough, costing £750,000 for crowd control and
the slot. T hat would put the turnstile out o f action. The        police liaison and that I invited the M inister who was then
police would then have no option but to allow people to            responsible for these m atters to come up and see them? He
rush into the ground through the emergency exit. They              did not. Will he caution those who would make whipping
would not then be in a position, especially on a dark night,       boys o f Sheffied W ednesday and the South Yorkshire
to direct the fans to the proper entrances.                        police? Will he concentrate on those who, in trying to
    If this tragedy had happened after the Football                shape our safety requirements since Heysel and Bradford,
Spectators Bill had been introduced, the Secretary of State        have taken us in a im practical and unreal direction?
would certainly have had to resign. Will he not wait until             Will he look hard at football—its structure, greed and
the report is published? In the meantime, will he not              psyche, and its contem pt for ordinary working-class lads
arrange for the barriers to be taken down? Will he not             —and ask how far the football establishment is responsible
insist that all big matches are played live on television on       for the continuing slaughter? D uring the past three or four
Sunday afternoons so that there is less reason for people          years cages have been set up to contain visiting supporters
w ithout tickets to turn up a t the ground, as they did on         a t football grounds th at detain them m ore severely than
Saturday, and fewer traffic problems? If the Secretary of          prisoners o f war were detained in w orld w ar 2 Britain.
State took those interim measures and introduced in the                M r. H urd: I entirely agree with the hon. Gentleman
next Session o f Parliam ent a safety o f sports grounds Bill,     th at it is unreal and wrong, a t this stage and with our
we should certainly support him.                                   present knowledge to look for, or talk about, whipping
    M r. H ard: The tragedy happened under the existing            boys. I am glad that, from the Opposition Benches and
system, not under any future system. [In te rru p tio n .] No,     from all parts o f the House, that has been stated clearly. As
the hon. Gentleman has not proved th at point. Part of the         the hon. G entlem an said, we have endured—and football
problem on Saturday, as on other occasions, was that               supporters in particular have endured—a series o f
people turned up w ithout tickets, as the hon. Gentleman           tragedies a t home and abroad. We have had a tragic fire,
said, in the belief, which tragically turned out to be correct,    a num ber o f tragedies brought about by violence—
th at some o f them would find a way in. U nder the scheme,        Birmingham and Heysel—and now a tragedy brought
that would not have been possible because they would or            about not by violence but by physical pressures because
would not have a football membership card. They would              too many people were concentrated in one narrow part o f
not travel to the game in the expectation that they would          the ground.
be let in w ithout one.                                                Each o f those different tragedies has brought forth a
                                                                   series o f answers, inquiries, reports and guidance designed
   M r. Michael Shersby (Uxbridge): Is my right hon.               to avert a recurrence o f the m ost recent tragedy—the one
Friend aware that the Police Federation welcomes both              that is on everyone’s mind. We m ust not forget the earlier
the public and the police inquiry? Can he say whether the          lessons as we concentrate on the new lessons. We must
inquiry will particularly consider the question o f safety of      look a t the whole picture. T hat includes protection against
stadiums and whether it will have the power to recommend           violence and hooliganism and w hat Popplewell said about
tem porary closure, should that prove necessary? Can he            fire. It also includes the problems that we have naturally
also say whether the inquiry will further consider how             been discussing following the H illsborough tragedy—the
supporters travel to matches, the parking arrangements             problems o f perimeter fences and pressure exerted on
and the way in which supporters approach the ground?               people by physical objects that can w ound and crush them.
Can he further say whether the inquiry will consider the           Unless we are prepared to consider all these m atters, we
role o f the Football Association in connection with the           shall continue to chase partial solutions. T hat was the
proposed football membership scheme?                               nature o f my statem ent today.
    M r. H ard: We have deliberately cast “very widely the            M r. Irvine P atrick (Sheffield, Hallam): M ay I join the
terms o f reference for Lord Justice Taylor so that he can         hon. M embers for Sheffield, Brightside (M r. Blunkett) and
examine all those m atters that my hon. Friend has listed,         Sheffield, Atterliffe (M r. Duffy) in speaking about the
I believe w ithout straining a t the terms o f reference. There    tragedy th at occurred in Sheffield. I pay my compliments
are m any angles to this—many points o f comment and               to the emergency services on the way in which they
criticism th at have already arisen, even in the last 48 hours     handled themselves at the weekend and to Sheffield people
—and it is right that Lord Justice Taylor should be able to        who volunteered to give accom m odation to those from
look a t them all. The existing system o f safety certificates     Liverpool who were bereaved. W hen I visited the
under the 1975 Act and the responsibility o f local                tem porary m orgue th at had been set up with my hon.

     24 CD39/5 Job 2-1
         28
                    29               Hillsborough Stadium Disaster          17 APRIL 1989              Hillsborough Stadium Disaster             30
w h e th e r
in g h a m ,         Friend the Minister for Sport I was appalled by the             that is possible. It is about time th at the football industry,
;r, th a t          tragedy. Only when one sees the bodies laid out can one          the Home Secretary, the House and society in general
ed as a             fully appreciate the extent o f the tragedy that happened in
                    Sheffield.                                                       concentrated their minds on bringing in legislation to
i w h ic h                                                                           make football grounds safe and deal with the hooligan
                        I ask my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary to bear        element. No genuine football supporter w ants to tolerate
                    in mind that it was apparent to me that there was a lack o f     that. We want those people rooted out o f our sport, and
  grieve           a disaster plan for that sports ground, which is one o f the      they can be rooted out. But let us not categorise football
ly as a            major sports grounds in the United Kingdom. As the hon.
                                                                                    spectators so that anybody and everybody will look for an
ie who             Member for Attercliffe said there are few better grounds
                                                                                    excuse not to listen to them. They know about the grounds
 Is the            than that ground. Nevertheless, shortcomings were
                   apparent.                                                        as they visit them week after week, and they know where
iel and
                                                                                    the faults lie. I hope the Home Secretary will say that the
jd the                 I congratulate the two radio stations, Radio Hallam          inquiry will have full regard to those people who go to
 nd at            and Radio Sheffield, which kept up a non-stop                     football matches and know the problems. I f we listen to
 1 and            commentary on what help was needed for people in the              them and act upon w hat they say, the game will be brought
s then            area and the Sheffield S ta r on its special edition—a copy       back to what it was—a game that families can watch and
n? He             o f which I gave to my right hon. Friend the Prime M inister      enjoy without any danger to themselves or to other people.
pping             —which showed graphically the horror and mayhem.
cshire                Will my right hon. Friend examine two questions—                  Mr. Hurd: I hope indeed th at football supporters will
ig to             first, the apparent lack o f a disaster plan and, secondly, the    find their voices and mobilise their ideas and p u t them to
ford,             part that alcohol played in the disaster?                          Lord Justice Taylor, for the reasons th at the hon.
                                                                                     Gentleman has given. As regards the police, there was no
 anc^^               M r. Hurd: M y hon. Friend is right to the extent that
                                                                                    shortage o f police officers—there were upw ards o f 770
 lads            Lord Justice Taylor will have to look very carefully a t the
                                                                                    police officers in or around the ground. The hon.
sible            shortcomings in control and communication which seem
                                                                                    Gentleman will agree that m any o f them showed great
four             to have been present at the crucial moments that
                                                                                    heroism for an h our or m ore trying to extricate people,
rters            afternoon. I f the hon. Gentlem an’s second point becomes
                                                                                    help people and restore people to consciousness and life.
han              substantiated, it will certainly fall within Lord Justice
                 Taylor’s terms o f reference.                                          O f course he is right to say that, as the chief constable
a.
                                                                                    has recognised, the decisions o f the police and the general
nan                    M r. Eddie Loyden (Liverpool, G arston): Can I say to        question o f control and com m unication will have to be
our                 the Home Secretary that I am probably one o f the few           examined by Lord Justice Taylor.
ing                 people in the House who was at the game, if it can be called        Because o f the passionate loyalty o f so m any for
ind                a game. I was in the Leppings lane area and I was pinned          football—we all know o f it even if we do not share it—it
 As                against a wall for about 20 minutes. One o f my immediate         must be right to do everything we can to restore the game’s
>all               observations was the inadequate policing o f the Leppings         reputation.
  of               lane entrance. People were coming down the road in quite
-re,              large numbers and there was virtually no direction. W hat             Several Hon. Members rose —
                  could have and should have happened is th at the outer
;ht               gates to that enclosure should have been closed to limit the          Mr. Speaker: Order. I ask for brief questions on this
ise               number o f people within it. T hat did not happen, and the        matter please, because a great many hon. M embers wish to
of                police cannot be blamed for removing themselves from              take part and it is difficult if long questions are asked.
                 within that enclosure as the crushing became greater.
                                                                                       Mr. Malcolm Thornton (Crosby): I am sure the House
                      In my view the disaster had nothing to do with late
                                                                                    and the country sense the feeling o f tragedy that every
id               arrivals. When I go to Anfield road to see a football match,
                                                                                    person on Merseyside feels today because o f the events of
le                  arnve at ten to three and walk through with no problem
                                                                                    Saturday when w hat should have been one o f the great
                 at all, because the policing there is quite adequate and the
                                                                                   showpiece o f our sporting calendar turned into such a
                 crowds are broken up by the police outside the ground.
                                                                                   tragedy. On behalf o f my constituents and all the people o f
                     As has been said, football supporters have been
                                                                                   Merseyside who were helped, I thank the people of
                virtually disregarded because o f the behaviour o f a tiny         Sheffield for all they did. I am sure that I can speak for all
                minority o f fans, and have been typecast as gorillas and
                                                                                   my colleagues on Merseyside when I say that our heartfelt
                inhuman people. T hat image develops in the m ind o f
                                                                                   sympathy goes to the families o f all those who were
                police, politicians and others the idea th at everyone who
                                                                                   bereaved, including the family o f a 17 year-old boy from
                goes to watch a football m atch falls into that category, and
                                                                                   Crosby who was named today as one o f the dead It is an
                that influences the way th at people treat football               absolute tragedy.
               supporters. T hat did not happen in Sheffield, because the
                                                                                      I welcome my right hon. Friend’s statem ent about a
                community around the football ground understood the
                                                                                  wide-ranging inquiry. M ay I ask him to take oneparticular
               situation, because their sons, daughters, fathers and
                                                                                  thing on board, because m any lessons m ust be learned
                  rot ers are probably football fans. They gave immediate
                                                                                  from the events a t H illsborough on Saturday? Will he see
               sustenance and help to the football supporters. I wish to
                                                                                  th at part o f the inquiry looks a t the way in which the
                                gratitude to the working-class people in
                                                                                  Football Association allocates tickets to the clubs involved
                    etneld who did all they could to assist those who were
                                                                                 in major sporting occasions? F or clubs such as Liverpool
                    tressed and injured and to deal with other m inor
               matters.                                                          Manchester United, Everton, Arsenal and Tottenham ,
                                                                                 with huge followings, the allocation is often fearfully
                    I do not understand how the H om e Secretary can
                                                                                 inadequate and exacerbates a problem which should not
               continue to defend a scheme that, had it been in operation
                                                                                 exist but which we all know was p a rt and parcel o f the
                      hat day, would have caused even greater damage, if         problem causing the fatal events on Saturday.
                 25 CD39/6 Job 2-4
31                 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster         17 A P R I L 1989                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                       32

    M r. H urd: T hat point will certainly come within the         o f mine, who died, and R obert G raham , who is fighting for
review. There seems to be a general opinion—Lord Justice           his life in intensive care. M ay I express, on behalf o f the
Taylor will test this—th at there was still room at the            people o f Skelmersdale and Ormskirk, who are ardent
Liverpool end o f the ground. The trouble was not that the         Liverpool supporters, our appreciation o f the Sheffield
total space was overcrowded but that particular area_              services, which acted so quickly?
[In te r r u p tio n .] Yes, as the hon. M ember for Bassetlaw         I support my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary on
(M r. Ashton) said, the distribution was wrong. That is            the introduction o f all-seated grounds, which I have
what I was referring to when I talked o f people being             advocated for some time and regard as a solution. Will he
propelled through the central tunnel rather than directed          return to the Bradford City fire report by M r. Justice
round the sides where there was access to parts o f the            Popplewell, in which he will find am ong the 63
Liverpool terraces. The hon. M ember for Bassetlaw also            recommendations one th at says that it is essential to have
mentioned that people came from Liverpool without                  exit gates in perim eter fencing that keeps in the crowd to
tickets in the hope o f getting in. Both those facts               give an exit on to the field should there be disturbances?
aggravated the situation.                                          Will he reconsider that and bear in m ind that such gates do
                                                                   not exist a t 16 first division grounds, including M anchester
    M r. M artin Flannery (Sheffield, Hillsborough):
                                                                   United’s ground, Old Trafford, where it is proposed to
Yesterday afternoon a t this time my hon. Friend the
                                                                   hold the rematch o f this game in the next week or two?
M ember for Sheffield, Brightside (M r. Blunkett) and
myself, together with dignitaries from the three cities                 M r. H urd: One point on which we can all agree is the
involved, were standing on the tu rf in front o f where all         absolute necessity o f emergency exits through perimeter
those people were killed. Everyone stood silently; there            fences. As my hon. Friend said, that is contained in the
were no photographers present. O ur hearts went out from            Popplewell report and is clearly spelled out, with
Sheffield to the people o f Liverpool. The heart o f Sheffield      specifications about the widths o f gates, in paragraph 215
is collectively a great heart and the people o f Sheffield are      o f the Home Office guide to safety a t sports grounds.
appalled a t w hat happened. The last time I stood in such          Anyone will agree that if the guidance is implemented it is
a way was a long time ago during the war. The sense of              adequate. There m ust be an investigation in to why the exit
what had occurred was horrific to me, and I hope, to                gate was not an effective way in which desperate people
everybody. W e all have our opinions about what went                could get on to the pitch.
wrong. I know the ground intimately, the exact spot and
all the details bu t I do no t w ant to apportion blame now.            M r. David Alton (Liverpool, Mossiey Hill): In the face
W hen the inquiry takes place we should all realise that it         o f this terrible and wholly avoidable tragedy—many o f the
is the m ost im portant inquiry in the history o f football in      fatalities were young children, including a 13-year-old boy
this country and w hat it decides will decide the future o f        from my constituency—expressions o f condolences and
football. Football is a dynamic not a static sport. It will         sympathy seem inadequate to sum up the enorm ity o f it for
not stand still and will never go away—thank heaven—but             a city th at is m ourning its dead and is united in its grief.
we w ant to m ake the proper decisions. Therefore, I want                A time will come when grief will give way to anger and
voices th at say “D o it rapidly” to be listened to with much       questions will have to be answered. I should like an
care. I do not w ant skimping. The decisions that we take           assurance from the Home Secretary that it will be made
m ust be long-term decisions. Every aspect must be                  clear why the gate was opened and who took that decision.
considered, otherwise this will occur again and we shall            Why were emergency arrangem ents so pitifully inade­
once again need to have another melancholy inquiry into             quate? I welcome w hat the right hon. Gentlem an said
what went wrong. I w ant an assurance from the Secretary            about the provision o f seats in our national stadium s, but
o f State th at we shall have such an inquiry and that it will      will he take urgent action to ensure that those terrible
not be rushed in any way whatever.                                  metal cages are p u t on the scrap heap and people are
   M r. H urd: I agree with everything that the hon.                treated like hum an beings instead o f animals?
Gentlem an said. I should like to m ention the generosity o f           On 22 M arch, I w rote to the M inister about the ticket
the people o f Sheffield, which has been evident. I have            allocation for Saturday’s match. I enclosed a statem ent
heard m any stories o f offers o f help, accommodation and          from M r. Peter Robinson, the chief executive o f Liverpool
transport to complete strangers from his constituents and           football ground, who said:
other citizens o f Sheffield.                                           “I m ade it p la in th a t th ere w as n o w ay I co u ld su p p o rt the
                                                                    choice o f H illsb o ro u g h th is year w ith th e sam e tick et
   I repeat, w ithout wishing to be tedious, w hat seems to
                                                                    allo catio n s ap p ly in g .”
be the crux o f the m atter. We have had a series o f disasters
                                                                    W hen I received a reply dated 11 April from the M inister
and tragedies arising from different causes and circumstan­
                                                                    o f Sport, he said that the m ater was entirely for the
ces. We m ust not simply ignore the earlier lessons and
                                                                    football authorities. In the light o f w hat has happened, will
concentrate on the latest ones. The latest one is terrible and
                                                                    the Home Secretary accept that the M inister should take
perhaps m ore appalling than the others because o f its
                                                                    an interest in this matter? Will he confirm that which the
nature. It therefore needs to be thoroughly and urgently
                                                                    Minister said, th at the allocations were m ade on the basis
investigated, and the totals m ust be added together to find
                                                                    o f police advice? I ask that because there have been
a new way for British football. The hon. Gentleman rightly
                                                                    conflicting statem ents in the past 24 hours.
said th at the inquiry m ust be dynamic. There must be no
resting on ancient attitudes as the right foundation for the            Liverpool is a city schooled in adversity. However, not
future o f the game.                                                since the blitz has it had to face a tragedy on such a
                                                                    shocking scale. I am sure th at the House today will wish to
   M r. Kenneth Hind (Lancashire, West): I am sure that             express its solidarity with those who grieve and those
the House will jo in me in sending condolences to the               awaiting news o f loved ones, whose lives still lie in the
families o f Colin Sefton and David Rimmer, constituents            balance.

     26 CD39/7 Job 2-6
     32                      Hillsborough Stadium Disaster           17 APRIL 1989              Hillsborough Stadium Disaster            34
           33

n g fo r       Mr. Hurd: All the points raised by the hon. G en tlem an          How long are we going to carry on treating fans like
o f the    are clearly covered by the terms o f reference o f the inquiry,    cattle? Their treatm ent contrasts with the champagne
irdent     and Lord Justice Taylor will be able to look into them. I          swilling that goes on in the plush directors’ boxes. The
effield    am slightly surprised that he suggests that M in isters            views and conditions o f the fans m ust be taken into
           should become involved in deciding, m atch by match, how           account. If we lock people up we create a certain mentality,
try on     tickets should be allocated. He is perfectly right in his          and it is little wonder th at they react in these
  have     understanding—these are m atters for the football                  circumstances.
/ill he    authorities. They consult on them and are guided by the
 ustice    police. 1 shall repeat my earlier point that, although the            Mr. Hurd: Nothing th at we heard yesterday at the
le 63      matter o f total allocation will certainly be looked into, it      ground or in the hospitals bore out the sort o f rhetoric that
>have      was not the total allocation, so much as the concentration         the hon. Gentleman has sought to employ. It is precisely
wd to      of that allocation in a p art o f the Liverpool terrace, which     because o f the incredible nature o f the tragedy that we
inces?     resulted in the terrible damage.                                   have moved quickly to set up w hat even the hon.
tes do                                                                        Gentleman would agree is a fully independent inquiry with
hester        Mr. Jim Lester (Broxtowe): M ay I, as a regular                 what even he would agree are wide and complete terms of
>ed to     supporter o f the N ottingham Forest team, speak on behalf         reference. The proceedings will be conducted in public,
• two?     of all its fans and the people o f N ottinghamshire, and           unless there is a special reason for not doing so. It will be
           associate myself with the remarks o f the hon. M ember for         open to everyone to make their views and recommenda­
 is the    Liverpool, W alton (M r. Heffer). It was a m ost tragic            tions known. T hat is the proper way to proceed and then
m e ta ^   accident and, as my right hon. Friend the Prime M inister          to reach conclusions afterwards—instead o f gabbling with
in t l 9   said, no words uttered in this place will fill the gaps in those   malice, as the hon. Gentlem an has done today.
   with    families who have lost young people who went out on a
                                                                                 Sir Fergus Montgomery (Altrincham and Sale): I ask
>h 215     happy day which ended in tragedy.
                                                                              my right hon. Friend to think again about putting the
>unds.        We should recollect th at more factors unite football           Football Spectators Bill on ice. Is he aware th at m any of
 d it is   fans than divide them. T hat was clearly shown a t the             the police are concerned th at if the Bill is enacted and
le exit    Hillsborough ground when the N ottingham Forest                    crowds build up outside stadium s the same sort o f thing
>eople     supporters—as soon as they realised th at a tragedy was            could happen again as happened on Saturday? W ould it
           taking place—behaved in an exemplary fashion and                   not be better to wait for the results o f a full inquiry and
           helped in every way. The m ajority o f people who follow           then to bring forward a Bill th at is acceptable to everyone
e face     football are united in the game’s interests. The Home
 o f the                                                                      concerned with football?
           Secretary has an opportunity to utilise that good will on all
 d boy                                                                           Secondly, was my right hon. Friend, like me, nauseated
           sides. There is no shortage o f suggestions or ideas. I beg
s and                                                                         by some o f the pictures in some o f the tabloids, which must
           him not to rush ahead too far but to think carefully before
  it for                                                                      have caused enormous distress to some o f the bereaved
           he proceeds in any direction. H e should take all the advice
 grief.                                                                       families? W ould it not have been better if they had never
           given from all those o f good will who w ant the future o f
                                                                              been published?
;r and     football—this country’s national game—to continue in a
ce an      proper and rightful way.                                               Mr. Hurd: On the first point, perhaps I can add
 m ade                                                                        something to w hat I have already said. I rem ind the House,
 ision.       M r. Hurd: I agree with my hon. Friend that the right           which has not yet considered the Bill, th at it is an enabling
nade-      sequence o f action is thought, consultation, thought,             framework and my right hon. Friend the Secretary o f State
i s a j^   action.                                                            for the Environment has already given a full commitment
s, b S ^                                                                      not to implement the scheme within that fram ework until
 rrible        M r. Terry Fields (Liverpool, Broadgreen): Like                the necessary technology has been satisfactorily worked
le are     thousands o f Liverpool families on Saturday, my wife and          out. My hon. Friend will agree th at the point about
           I waited tearfully and anxiously because we had two sons           terraces that I emphasised a t the beginning is also relevant.
ticket     and a nephew in that part o f the ground where the disaster           I note w hat my hon. Friend said ab o u t newspaper
;ment      happened. My relief on discovering th at my family was all
                                                                              photographs, and I also note th at the new chairm an o f the
rpool      right was tinged with the realisation th at thousands of
                                                                              Press Council has said today th at the Press Council should
           other Liverpool families would never see their kids come           inquire into th at m atter.
>rt th e   home as a result o f the terrible tragedy. A fter the Heysel
tick et    tragedy we were assured that the Prime M inister would                 Mr. Robert N. W areing (Liverpool, W est Derby): I was
           leave no stone unturned in discovering who was                     a t the other semi-final on Saturday a t which the other
nister     responsible. I w ant an assurance today from the Home              Merseyside team, Everton, was successful, but there was
 r the     Secretary that, similarly, no stone will be left unturned          no real rejoicing. W hen we came out o f the ground and
i, will    when this incident is investigated.                                learnt o f the problems a t Hillsborough, we were all united
I take        Others have said th at they are not looking for                 in grief with all football fans on Merseyside.
;h the     scapegoats, but the anger th at permeates Liverpool today              Will the Home Secretary use his influence to get
           reflects the tragedy that occurred in Georgia in the USSR,         football clubs to be m ore flexible about kick-off times? One
 been      after which the top tier o f the country’s leadership was          o f the reasons why crowds try to crush through turnstiles
           forced to resign. We need assurances because we do not             quickly into the central areas o f grounds is th a t they hear
r, not     want a whitewash. The fans are param ount in this                  the roar from inside the ground when the team s run on to
ich a      incident, and m ust be consulted when the in-depth inquiry         the pitch and play starts. M atches in G erm any are often
ish to     takes place—no m atter how long it takes for their point o f       held up for h alf an hour to ensure the safety o f the
those      view and experiences to be p u t across. If they were decent       spectators, which should come first.
n the      honest and honourable, the responsible M inister, chief o f            When, oh when, will the G overnm ent escape from the
           police and FA officials would resign.                              “We never make mistakes” syndrome? W hen will they

             27 CD39/8 Job 2-9
35                 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                    17 APRIL 1989                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster             36

[ M r . R o b e rt N . W a re in g ]                                           e n su re that we can genuinely call our sports grounds safe?
                                                                               Will he ensure that all recommendations by the inquiry are
learn from their Back Benchers, not one o f whom has                           legislated into action?
supported them this afternoon, and withdraw part I o f the                        M r. H urd: Certainly, as my hon. Friend will have seen,
Football Spectators Bill and start from scratch?                               the terms o f reference are very wide. W hen we receive the
   Will the Hom e Secretary ensure th at the inquiry                           report—whether it is an interim and then a final or a single
examines the location o f football grounds? I know that                        report—we will need to act quickly.
there can be improvement—by relocating grounds when
necessary—only in the long term, but too many o f our                             Several Hon. Members rose ------
grounds are in built up urban areas. Because o f the war,                        M r. Speaker: Order. The whole House knows th at we
G erm any and H olland have been able to build grounds in                      have a heavy day ahead o f us. I shall call those Members
open space areas in which there are far m ore facilities for                   whose constituents have been m ost severely affected, the
controlling crowds. Will the right hon. Gentleman look                         Liverpool Members, and then we m ust move on.
into that?
                                                                                   M r. Frank Field (Birkenhead): M ay I, too, associate
     Several Hon. Members rose ------                                          myself with the statements m ade to the families who lost
                                                                               people on Saturday? I find it impossible to express the
  M r. Speaker: Order. I ask for brief questions; long                         despair th at I feel and th at suggests something o f the utter
questions are unfair to other hon. Members.                                    desolation th at those families m ust be experiencing at this
                                                                               time. W hile none o f those families will today be thinking
   M r. H urd: I shall try to be succinct. I have much                         about com pensation, does the H om e Secretary think that
personal sympathy for the hon. Gentlem an’s point about                        we have a duty to them? Am I right in saying th at some
flexibility and timing o f the start o f matches. I am sure that               fam ilies who lost members on Saturday will receive no
that will be looked into. I have nothing further to say on                     autom atic com pensation payments? Is that right or fair? If
the other m atter.                                                             it is not fair will the Governm ent change the law?
   M r. Churchill (Davyhulme): M ay I on behalf o f my                            M r. H urd: I think th at the hon. Gentlem an is right in
constituents and supporters o f M anchester United join in                     saying th at there is no autom atic compensation. O f course
the expressions o f sympathy to the families o f the                           I have read about the possibilities o f civil action and I have
bereaved? Will my right hon. Friend have urgent                                also read and spoken about the fund that has been set up.
consultations with the football authorities to ensure that in                  I should like to look further into the m atter.
future special coaches and trains for away matches do not
                                                                                    M r. Sean Hughes (Knowsley, South): I represent half
leave their points o f origin unless everybody on board is
                                                                                the borough th at is today m ourning the deaths o f 12 young
already armed with a ticket? T hat would avoid thousands
                                                                                people, including the infinitely tragic death o f a
o f fans, m any o f them w ithout tickets, arriving
                                                                                10-year-old child from my constituency. As an Everton
simultaneously five or 10 minutes before the start o f a
                                                                                season ticket holder, I was at the other semi-final. As a
m atch.
                                                                                football supporter I share the disappointm ent o f many
    M r. H urd: T hat is an interesting suggestion and I shall                  people a t the Hom e Secretary’s reply about the ID scheme
 m ake sure that the inquiry takes it into account.                             which dem onstrates a woeful ignorance o f the nature o f
                                                                                the football fan. Increasingly in the greatest spectator
    M r. Robert P arry (Liverpool, Riverside): I should like                    sport in Britain the least im portant person is the spectator.
 to be associated with the condolences and the messages o f                     We feel very deeply that the Governm ent and the Football
 sym pathy to the bereaved families. I pay tribute to the                       Association do n o t dem onstrate an awareness o f th at fact.
 Liverpool supporters and the Evertonians for their tribute                         Finally, in addition to the disappointm ent that has been
 to Liverpool yesterday at Anfield and at Liverpool                             caused by w hat we have heard about the ID scheme, there
 m etropolitan cathedral. I was present a t both o f those                      will be disappointm ent about the Home Secretary’s
 ceremonies and they were very moving. M y brother’s son                        response to questions concerning the allocation o f tickets.
 lost three friends on Saturday, all o f whom were in their                     I remain absolutely convinced that the allocation o f tickets
 twenties. T hat was a tragic loss o f life. I welcome the public               for big games, such as semi-finals and finals, is crucial.
 inquiry and hope th at there will be no cover-ups. Such a                      Going to a football m atch is not like going to the theatre;
 tragedy m ust never happen again, although any preventive                      it is a way o f life for an enorm ous num ber o f people. Those
 m easures are too late for all those people who are now                        people will be acutely disappointed by w hat has been said
 dead.                                                                          about the allocation o f tickets. The fans who turn up
                                                                                without tickets, and those who pay exorbitant am ounts to
     M r. H urd: I a g r e e w ith t h e h o n . G e n tle m a n a n d w ith    ticket touts, are not the ones who are intent on
 t h e w a y in w h ic h h e e x p r e s s e d h im s e lf.                     hooliganism; they are the ones who have been going,
                                                                                match in, m atch out, throughout the season, but cannot
     M r. Robert G. Hughes (H arrow , West): My con­                            get tickets for the big games. Therefore, the Football
 stituents are shocked th at even the London suburbs should                     Association too m ust be thoroughly investigated.
 now be associated with this terrible tragedy. Sarah a
 Victoria Hicks, two teenage girls attending the match wi                          M r. H urd: I agree entirely th at the allocation o f tickets
 their family, now lie dead. Does my right hon. Friend                          —working out the totals between the tw o clubs—is
 agree th at in the shadow o f this tragedy it w o u l d be easy                extremely im portant. W hat I was arguing against was the
 to jum p to conclusions and adopt what ml® .                                   argum ent o f the hon. M ember for Liverpool, Mossley Hill
 fashionable solutions? Will he give us an assurance that the                   (M r. A lton), th at this is a m atter that M inisters should
 widest possible brief will be followed by the inquiry o                        decide.                                                    •

     28 CD39/9 Job 3-1
36                                                                   17 APRIL 1989                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster              38
          37               Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

fe?          Mr. George Howarth (Knowsley, N orth): 1 should like               and another chief constable with a high reputation and
ire       to associate myself with the sympathy that has been                   with experience in these matters to do that jo b on their
          expressed. At the invitation o f the Merseyside fire and civil        behalf. I think that that is the right course.
          defence authority, 1 visited Sheffield yesterday. 1 was very             M r. Gerald Bermingham (St. Helens, South): As
sn ,
          touched indeed by the response o f some Nottingham                    somebody who has constituents who are now dead, or are
the
          Forest supporters, who had organised a collection in their            relatives o f those who are dead as result o f this tragedy,
gle
          pub the previous evening and had come to the ground to                and as someone who lived in Sheffield for 25 years, I have
          present more than £100 towards the appeal fund. It was                a dual interest in this matter. Will the Hom e Secretary take
          very helpful o f my hon. Friend the Member for Sheffield,             one urgent step, which I hope is non-controversial? Will he
          Central (Mr. Caborn) to make arrangements so that those               arrange that all the film coverage and the pictures that
we
          of us who came over were able to find our way around and              were taken on Saturday both by ITN and the BBC and by
>ers
          could go to the appropriate places.                                   amateurs be made available to the inquiry? Unless we
th e
              Having spoken to several people who came over to                  move quickly, that footage may be lost and it contains
          Sheffield yesterday to find out what had happened to their            evidence that may be o f great value to the inquiry, because
iate      relatives, I think it is clear that the emergency telephone           it will enable the inquiry to see the pressures both inside
lost      system simply did not work satisfactorily on Saturday. I              and outside the ground, and allow it to draw some
th e      spoke to one woman who had tried for eight hours to find              valuable conclusions.
tter      out w hat had happened to her son, but had been unable to
this                                                                               Mr. Hurd: I know that there are sometimes difficulties
          get through. I understand from the fire and civil defence             about this material, but that is a valuable suggestion, and
 ing A    authority that an exercise was conducted recently—using
;hatw                                                                           I shall pursue it.
          the Bristol exchange—aimed at dealing with precisely such
>me       problems, and th at th at exercise was relatively successful.            Several Hon, Members rose ------
  no      On this occasion, the provision o f far m ore lines would
r? If                                                                             Mr. Speaker: Order. I will now call two Back-Bench
          have enabled the emergency telephone num ber to w ork
                                                                                Members from each side, and then we m ust move on.
           more effectively. I understand th at th at system was used
t in       for the flotation o f the British G as shares. If it was good           Sir Anthony G rant (Cambridgeshire, South-W est): I
urse       enough for the flotation o f the British G as shares, it would       shall not comment on the Hillsborough ground itself, but
rnve       have been good enough as an emergency system.                        my right hon. Friend will be aware th at in m any grounds,
 up.                                                                            the facilities are deplorable. Will he have discussions with
             Mr. Hurd: As the hon. M ember has indicated, there                 his colleagues in the Treasury to see whether the tax system
          certainly was a problem o f swamped lines, at there often is          can be adapted so that there is an incentive to invest in
half      on these occasions. I understand absolutely the distress,             improved stadiums, and a disincentive to spend ludicrous
'ung      anxiety, and worse, caused by that, but I think that it is            sums on transfer fees? I do not expect my right hon. Friend
f a       rather apart from the terms o f reference o f the inquiry.            to make any decision about the Football Spectators Bill
rton      Perhaps I m ay look into the point that the hon. Gentleman            this afternoon, but will he say th at the G overnm ent will
\s a      has raised and then get in touch with him.                            reflect on the views that have been expressed in the House
lany                                                                            this afternoon?
 eme         Mr. John Evans (St. Helens, N orth): In view o f the fact
 e of     that fans from St. Helens died at Hillsborough on                         Mr. Hurd: I have noted those views on the Bill. I believe
a to i^   Saturday, I w ant to associate myself with the condolences             that the Bill, which addresses a different problem from the
itoi^P    that have been expressed.                                              one that caused the tragedy at Hillsborough, is soundly
tball                                                                            based. There will be a pause, as I have said, and there is a
             Can the Hom e Secretary confirm that the trouble
 fact,                                                                           case for adding to the Bill and strengthening it. However,
          started outside the ground because o f the late arrival o f
been                                                                             the improvement that we are seeking for football cannot
          fans and the inability o f the turnstiles to cope with them?
 here                                                                            be total without a provision along the lines o f a national
          Will he ask Lord Justice Taylor to look into the traffic
ary’s                                                                            membership scheme. On the first m atter, my hon. Friend
          arrangements for visiting fans, bearing in m ind the
kets.                                                                            is touching on a point that is sensitive in the football
          abysmal signposting and the sometimes rather odd
:kets                                                                            industry, but he is right to say th at those in it m ust examine
          decisions o f traffic police when they are directing fans
icial.                                                                           carefully the priorities for spending their not inconsider­
          towards the ground?
                                                                                 able resources.
atre;        Secondly, can the Hom e Secretary inform us that the
 hose     South Yorkshire police will reply directly to the inquiry,                 Mr. Richard Caborn (Sheffield, Central): I associate
  said    and will not allow the West M idlands police to answer on              myself with all the remarks m ade by my Sheffield
n up      their behalf?                                                          colleagues on the Opposition Benches. I was a t the ground,
its to                                                                           with my hon. Friend the M ember for Knowsley, N orth
t on          Mr. Hurd: The question o f traffic and signposting is              (M r. Howarth). I ask the Home Secretary to take action
oing,      certainly within the terms o f reference o f the inquiry, and         on perimeter fencing. Yesterday, I spoke to some
 nnot      I shall make sure that it is noted.                                   experienced engineers, one o f whom said that this was an
>tball        On the second point, as I explained earlier, the chief             accident waiting to happen. I call on the Home Secretary
           constable believes—and I think that he is quite right—that            to ensure that no m ajor games are played with fans kept
           since the actions o f some o f his officers are obviously a           behind perimeter fencing.
ckets
           matter for the investigation, it is right, for the credibility o f        Today, the media have been singled out, and the local
is—is
           the exercise, that the police preparing the inform ation for          radio stations in Sheffield, both Radio Hallam and Radio
is the
           Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry, let alone for eventual                 Sheffield, played a m ajor p art in helping to co-ordinate the
y Hill
           inquests, should not belong to the same force. Therefore,             m a g n ific e n t efforts made by the Sheffield people in, for
lould
           the chief constable looked for, and found, another force              example, blood donation and other services, and the

               29 CD39/I0 Job *4
 39                 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster         17 APRIL 1989               Hillsborough Stadium Disaster            4

 [ M r . R ic h a rd C a b o rn ]                                  identity card scheme, and I say that from experienc
                                                                   because I live alongside the Leeds United football ground
 arrangem ents between the Liverpool and Sheffield                 However, if the reports are in favour o f identity cards,
 families. W hen the Hom e Secretary looks at the White            would be prepared to change my mind. Therefore, the Bil
 Paper on broadcasting and particularly at that part               should be abandoned until the reports are in.
 dealing with local radio, I ask him to bear that effort in
                                                                        M r. Hurd: I have listened to the right hon. Gentlemai
 mind. Local radio showed w hat magnificent assistance it
 can give in a tragedy.                                            and to others who have said this. The comments would b
                                                                   just if this tragedy had occurred under the new regime
    My main point to the Home Secretary is that he should
                                                                   [In t e r r u p tio n . ] The right hon. Gentlem an knows th
 consider carefully the removal o f those fences. I think he
                                                                   origins o f this proposal. H e knows the recommendation ii
 will find that all the m ajor engineers were saying that that
 was an accident waiting to happen.                                the final Popplewell report and the nature o f the scheme
                                                                   He knows, as I have said and as my hon. Friend thi
    M r. H urd: I agree with the hon. Gentlem an about local       M em ber for Welwyn, Hatfield (M r. Evans) has jus
 radio. The perim eter fences are not there by accident. They      confirmed, th at the Bill sets up an enabling framework. H<
 are there because local authorities, to issue safety              knows th at my right hon. Friend the Secretary o f State fo
 certificates, have often required them as a form of               the Environm ent has already com m itted himself no t tc
 protection against violence.                                      implement the membership scheme, which is the core o
                                                                   part I, within the enabling framework, until satisfactory
      M r. Hattersley: N o, against hooliganism.                   arrangem ents have been worked out. H e knows w hat is ii
     M r. H urd: The danger o f violence has not gone away.        the Bill about the making o f those arrangements. The righ
 W hat is required is a way to reconcile the need to protect       hon. Gentlem an is accustomed to seeing things in ths
 spectators against violence with the need for people to be        round and do not believe that he would argue that
 able to get out on to the pitch, or to get back in the case       because there was no violence a t Hillsborough, which )
 o f emergency. T hat is tackled in the Home Office guidance,      concede, we can forget the lessons o f earlier disasters
 but it did no t work successfully at Hillsborough. That is        where there was violence, and which were examined bj
 the nature o f the problem that the inquiry will have to          Mr. Justice Popplewell.
 tackle.                                                               M r. Denis Howell (Birmingham, Small H eath): On
    M r. David Evans (Welwyn, Hatfield): Is not the                behalf o f all those who were present on Saturday to face
Football Spectators Bill about separating the hooligans            first the traum a and then the grief o f w hat happened, I ask
from the football fans? It is an enabling Bill and the FM A        the Hom e Secretary firmly to repudiate the provocative,
and football itself will put forward a scheme for the              inaccurate and disgraceful statements m ade by represen­
Secretary o f State to approve.                                    tatives o f U EFA and FIFA . In particular, M r. Jacques
    Are there any plans to introduce legislation to remove         George said:
the control o f football from the Football Association and            “T his reg io n seem s to have a p articu larly aggressive
                                                                   m en tality .”
the Football League, which have consistently been
                                                                  He drew com parisons with Heysel, and said that the fans
incom petent and, some would say, bloody-minded in their          were “sewage”. Sepp Blatter o f F IF A said:
attitude to football spectators? Can my right hon. Friend             “W ill th e fan s never learn?”
assure us that football families will be able to go to football     Will the Hom e Secretary support us, and I speak with the
grounds in safety and be safe within those grounds?                authority o f the Football Association and the Football
   M r. H ord: On the second point, there is evidence o f           League, in totally rejecting that suggestion that the
thinking ahead, which I welcome. I notice that Mr.                 Liverpool supporters and fans were in any way responsible
G raham Kelly said on the television that he supports the          for this tragedy? The Hom e Secretary would carry us all
move tow ards all-seated matches in im portant stadiums,           with him if he did so.
and I notice that the hon. M ember for Stalybridge and                 The right hon. Gentlem an is right to realise th at there
Hyde (M r. Pendry), with his experience, agrees. It is partly      is a difference between crowd behaviour control and crowd
because o f the evidence o f fresh thinking among the              safety. As one who was there on Saturday, I know that
football authorities th at we have given that suggestion the       there was no crisis management there. There was no
impetus th at I have announced today.                              apparent relationship between the fears o f those outside
                                                                   the ground and the danger to those inside the ground.
    M r. M erlyn Rees (M orley and Leeds, South): At the           There was no appreciation or understanding expressed
end o f these questions, I ask the Hom e Secretary and the         about conditions and delays on motorw ays and o f the
Prime M inister to reflect on the view, which has come from        effect that they would have on late arrival a t the ground.
both sides o f the House, that, in the light o f Saturday—we       There was no proper crowd control and no arrangements
all saw it on o ur televisions and have read the newspapers        were apparent inside the ground for dealing with the
and the views o f interested parties—the Government               disaster and with the mass o f injuries and deaths which
should withdraw the Football Supporters Bill? They                had to be dealt with. It was not apparent th at any member
would not be losing political face, in the light o f the          o f the police force—I do not say this critically—
feelings that have been expressed. TTie Taylor report will        understood that the first priority was to get the fences
look a t these m atters afresh—those are the words o f the        down and to get the 10,000 spectators on to the field, that
Home Secretary. The police inquiry, under the chief               being the only possible place to which they could be
constable o f the W est M idlands force, is a statutory           evacuated.
inquiry. It will be looking, legalistically but carefully, at         I turn to the controversial aspect o f the Hom e
the role o f the police. W hy not wait until those reports are    Secretary’s statement. Lord Justice Taylor’s appointm ent
out and ome back with a new Bill? I am sceptical about the        to conduct the inquiry is a commendable choice and I fully

   30 CD39/11 Job 3-6
f
    40         41                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster             17 APRIL 1989                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                42

ricncc           support it. Is he to proceed with his inquiry on the                intervention. If they are as he stated, they are certainly
ound.            assumption that the Football Spectators Bill will be                wholly unjustified by w hat occurred a t Hillsborough. I am
irds, I          enacted? It will have a profound effect upon his thinking,          grateful to the right hon. Gentlem an for getting in touch
le Bill          and that is one of the reasons why the Bill should be               with me on Saturday night. He is correct in saying th at the
                 withdrawn.                                                          problems of control and communications, some o f which
leman                Many of us are distressed by the adversarial philosophy         he listed, are central to the inquiry.
aid be           that the Government practise on sport as in other matters.             I am sorry that the right hon. M ember for Birmingham,
;gime.           They never trust the Supporters’ Associations, and the              Small Heath (M r. Howell) concluded the exchanges by
s the            Minister has not even suggested that the association be             using what happened a t Hillsborough as a stick to beat the
ion in          appointed a member o f the Football Membership                       Football Spectators Bill— [In te rr u p tio n .] T hat is w hat he
heme,           authority. It is my experience, having dealt with the                did. He is straining and upsetting history to argue th at the
d the           association in recent months, that there is enormous                 approach o f my right hon. Friends has been arrogant or
5 ju st
                collective wisdom and good will to be harnessed, especially          adversarial. I have been present a t several meetings at
 k .H e         from football supporters and their associations’ represen­           which my right hon. Friends and my hon. Friend the
ite for         tatives. Will the M inister please take counsel from them?           Minister for Sport have been straining nerves to try to
lot to          Will he listen to w hat they say, as should the police and the       carry football with them. They have done this year after
jre o f         football authorities? The goodwill has to be tapped.                 year. What is the date o f the Popplewell report? The
ictory              1 say to the Home Secretary as gently as I can, but I am         answer is 1986. The effort which has been m ade by my
 t is in        afraid harshly, that the decision to continue with the               right hon. Friends to build support and to carry the
: right         Football Spectators Bill in all these circumstances is a             football authorities with them has been prolonged and
n th A          profound mistake. It is appalling arrogance for the                  conscientious. It is only because that effort did not yield a
  th a t^ ^     Government to think that they know better than anyone                voluntary scheme on the lines which M r. Justice
lich I          else. The Government never consult the O pposition on                Popplewell recommended th at the Bill has been drafted.
asters          these matters. They never consult football generally about              I repeat that the Bill is an enabling measure. It has been
ed by           these matters. As far as I can see— [In te r r u p tio n .] It is    worked out by my right hon. Friend’s working party. The
                true. The Minister for Sport m ty get upset, but three times         assurances that have been given about im plem entation are
                I have offered from the Opposition Dispatch Box to                   crucial to it. It is in the interests o f football supporters
): On           formulate a policy that would, in effect, cross the House.           —the right hon. M ember for Small H eath rightly stressed
3 face          I have never been invited to meet the M inister to discuss           their importance and their commitment—th at there
, I ask         these matters. This is disgraceful and it is time that this          should not remain the gap in protection that the Bill is
•.ative,        lack o f discussion came to an end.                                  designed to fill.
resen-              1 hope that the Home Secretary will reflect on w hat he
cques           has said today. He keeps telling us that the Government                 Mr. Nigel Spearing (Newham, South): On a point o f
                will proceed with the scheme because o f previous violence,         order, Mr. Speaker, arising from the statement. The terms
•essive        but there has been no substantial violence within football           o f reference o f Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry are clearly
               grounds for three years.                                             wide and the timing o f the report is indeterm inate. It surely
; fans                                                                              follows that the conclusions o f such a n inquiry could be
                   1 am grateful to the Prime M inister for remaining in her
               place throughout the exchanges to listen to w hat everyone           contrary to the views o f H ouse th at are taken in pursuit o f
               has to say, but 1 say to her and to the Home Secretary that          legislation of which we have ju st heard. Will you confirm,
th the                                                                              M r. Speaker, that in this instance the sub judice rale does
               anyone who was present on Saturday, as I was, will know
otball                                                                              not apply? Would not that be the view o f m ost persons
               that advocates o f a membership scheme th at requires
t th ^ ^                                                                            with legal training?
               harassed gatekeepers, in addition to their great traum as
nsibl^P
              and problems, to inspect cards, possibly to look at                      Mr. Speaker: I can confirm w hat the hon. G entlem an
us all
              photographs, and then to put the cards into a machine, are            says. The sub judice rule does not apply to legislation.
              saying, in effect, that they wanted the disaster to be
 there
              aggravated. T hat is the essence o f the problem.                        Mr. Allen McKay (Barnsley, West and Penistone): On
;rowd
                   1 ask the Home Secretary to try to achieve a consensus           a point o f order, M r. Speaker. Given the im portance o f the
/ th at
              within football generally and within the House so that we             inquiry to our greatest spectator sport and to thousands o f
is no
              can all agree to get through this place a Bill to deal with           our constituents, can you assure us th at the report will be
utside
              football troubles, whether they be behavioural o r are                debated before any recommendations o r observations are
ound.
              related to ground safety. If we are all convinced about the           acted upon?
•essed
>f the        merits o f such a Bill, we shall be happy to support it and
              to secure its passage in record time. I ask the Home                     M r. Speaker: T hat is not a m atter for me but I am sure
sund.                                                                               that the hon. Gentlem an’s words have been heard by those
nents         Secretary to take on board the collective view o f everyone
                                                                                    who are responsible.
              in the country, except the members o f H er M ajesty’s
h the
vhich         Government, that the Football Spectators Bill should be                   EUROPEAN COMMUNITY DOCUMENTS
              withdrawn in the interest of public safety.
:mber                                                                                  Ordered,
illy—            Mr. Hurd: I have not read the generalisations which the               T h at E uropean C om m unity D o cu m en t N o . 4092/1/69 on
ences                                                                               pesticide residues be referred to a S tan d in g C o m m ittee o n
              right hon. Gentleman quoted a t the beginning o f his                 E uropean C om m unity D ocum ents.— [Mr. Maclean.]
, th at
Id be

iom e
m ent
 fully
                31 CD39/I2 Job 3-9
                                                                [ 17 A P R IL 1989                                 Bill                             558
5,57                        Water

a fte r th e c ritic ism w h ich w as m a d e a b o u t th a t sell-off        c o n su m e r a n d th e e n v iro n m e n t a re b e n e fic ia rie s o f
th e G o v e rn m e n t w o u ld n o t h a v e th e n e rv e to com e          th e p riv a tisa tio n p ro c e d u re s.
fo rw a rd a g ain w ith sim ila r p ro p o sa ls. Y e t th is B ill               O n all th o se m a tte rs , w e fin d a c o n flic t in th e
d o e s n o t c o n ta in a n y th in g lik e a d e q u a te a ssu ra n ce s   p riv a tisa tio n p ro p o sa ls, th e te rm s o f th is len g th y a n d
th a t th e a sse ts w h ich b e lo n g to th e p e o p le — w h e th e r      e la b o ra te B ill a n d th e in te re s ts o f th e c o n su m e r, th e
th e y a re ra te p a y e rs o r ta x p a y e rs— w ill n o t sim p ly b e     e n v iro n m e n t a n d th e e co n o m y . T h e D a ily
u se d a s a b e n e fit fo r p riv a te p ro fit.                             T e le g ra p h — n o     e n e m y o f th e G o v e rn m e n t—
    I f w e lo o k a t w a te r q u a lity , th e p ro b le m th e re is       su m m e d th e w h o le m a tte r u p a few w eek s ago by
v ery se rio u s in d e e d . T h e re a re a m illio n h o u se h o ld s      d escrib in g it a s a “ w h o lly m isg u id e d v e n tu re ” . It
in th is c o u n try w ith w a te r su p p lie s w h ich c o n ta in           said:
n itra te s a t a lev el w h ich is a b o v e th a t p e rm itte d by            “ It is still not too late to think again” .
th e E u ro p e a n C o m m u n ity . F o r ex am p le , th e A nglian            I u rge th e G o v e rn m e n t to liste n carefu lly to th e
W a te r A u th o rity w ill h a v e to sp e n d fro m b etw een               a rg u m e n ts w h ich w ill b e p u t fo rw ard o n a ll th o se
 £ 6 0 m illio n a n d £ 7 0 m illio n o v e r 10 y ea rs in o rd e r          p o in ts; to liste n w ith a n o p e n m in d a n d n o t to reject
 to d e a l w ith th a t p ro b le m . W e h a v e ta k e n n o effective      th e m o u t o f h a n d ; a n d to seek to im p ro v e th e B ill
 ste p s to d e a l w ith E u ro p e a n C o m m u n ity ru le s on            a s it passes th ro u g h y o u r L o rd s h ip s ’ H o u se.
 p e stic id e s. T e n p e r c e n t, o f W elsh h o u se h o ld s a re a t      I w a rn th e G o v e rn m e n t th a t w h a te v e r th e y m ay
 risk fro m ex cessive le a d in th e ir w a te r. A v ast a m o u n t         th in k a b o u t th e B ill, th e p riv a tis a tio n o f w a te r is
 o f in v e s tm e n t is re q u ire d a n d it is re q u ire d as a           deeply o ffen siv e to th e p e o p le o f th is c o u n try . T h a t
 re su lt o f neglect o v e r a sig n ific an t n u m b e r o f years.         h a s b ee n p ro v e d o v e r a n d o v e r ag ain . I re p e a t th e
 M o re o v e r, th e p riv a tis a tio n p ro c e d u re w h ic h w e         w o rd s o f m y rig h t h o n o u ra b le frie n d th e L e a d e r o f
 b A c b e fo re u s d o es n o t give u s a n y c o n fid e n c e th a t      th e O p p o sitio n w h o , e c h o in g th e w o rd s o f Jo se p h
 tm n n eg lect w ill b e d e a lt w ith .                                     C h a m b e rla in , said o n ly la st w eek:
     I c o u ld e x te n d th e a rg u m e n ts a b o u t th e e n v iro n ­     “Water is our country’s largest natural monopoly. We in the
 m e n t a t so m e len g th . H o w ev er, m a n y o f m y n o b le           Labour Party believe that it m ust be publicly controlled and fully
 frie n d s a re m u c h b e tte r in fo rm e d th a n I o n such              accountable. We will end the private monopoly and bring the
 m a tte rs. I h a v e n o d o u b t th a t th e y w ill b e talk in g         water industry back into public control” .
 a b o u t th e p o llu te rs p ay s p rin c ip le ; th ey w ill be
 ta lk in g a b o u t co d es o f p ra c tic e fo r le isu re access to
 w a te r a u th o rity la n d a n d th e y w ill ra ise m a n y o th e r                         Hillsborough Disaster
 p o in ts w ith w h ic h I sim p ly d o n o t h a v e tim e to deal.
      I m a k e it clear, as I d id b e fo re, th a t w e w elcom e             3.34 p.m .
 th e N a tio n a l R iv e rs A u th o rity . W e w ish it w ell. W e              E a rl F erre rs: M y L o rd s, w ith th e leav e o f th e
 w ish it a d e q u a te reso u rce s, staffin g a n d p o w ers. W e           H o u se, it m ay b e c o n v e n ie n t if I re p e a t a sta te m e n t
 d o n o t h o w ev e r w elcom e m a n y o f th e p o w ers o f th e           a b o u t th e d isa ste r a t th e S heffield W ed n esd ay
 D ire c to r G e n e ra l o f W a te r Services.                               F o o tb a ll C lu b g ro u n d a t H illsb o ro u g h S ta d iu m on
      I n o w re fe r to o u r re sp o n sib ilitie s to w a rd s               S aterd ay w hich is n o w b e in g m a d e in a n o th e r p lace
 c o n su m ers. T h e p ro b le m w e h a v e w ith th e c o n su m e r        by m y rig h t h o u n o u ra b le frie n d th e H o m e S ecretary.
 re g u la tio n p ro p o se d in th e B ill is th a t th e D ire c to r        T h e S ta tm e n t is as follow s:
 G e n e ra l o f W a te r S ervices h as d ire c t c o n tro l for                    “ E v eryon e h a s b e e n h o rrifie d by th is in c re d ib le
 c u sto m e r serv ice c o m m itte e s w h ich a re set u p u n d e r            trag ed y in w h ich 94 lo st th e ir lives a n d 174 w ere
 t i ^ B i l l . W e b eliev e, ju s t as we b e lie v e th a t th e codes          in ju red .
 ( ^ p r a c tic e sh o u ld b e s ta tu to ry , th a t th e c u sto m e r             “ S h o rtly a fte r th e s ta rt o f th e m a tc h th e re w as
 serv ice c o m m itte e s sh o u ld b e in d e p e n d e n t o f th e              a surge o f sp e c ta to rs o n th e L ep p in g s L an e te rra c e
 D ire c to r G e n e ra l o f W a te r S erv ices w ho has                         w hich c ru sh ed m a n y a t th e fro n t ag ain st th e
 re sp o n sib ilitie s w h ich a re d iffe re n t fro m look in g                  p e rim e te r fence. T h is a c c o u n te d fo r m o st o f th e
 a fte r th e co n su m e r.                                                        d e ath s a n d in ju rie s.
    T h e B ill is d e fe c tiv e in so m a n y w ays th a t it w ould                 “ T h e m a tc h w as d u e to s ta rt a t 3 p .m . T o h elp
 b e im p o ssib le fo r m e to p in p o in t e v en th e m o st                    en su re o rd e rly access, th e g ates o f th e g ro u n d w ere
 im p o rta n t. I sh a ll p ic k o n e e x a m p le o nly w hich                   o p en ed a t 12 n o o n . A t 2 .3 0 p .m . m o st o f th e
 show s th e w ay in w h ich th e tre a tm e n t o f co n su m ers                 N o ttin g h a m fans w ere in th e g ro u n d , b u t m a n y o f
 a n d th e e n v iro n m e n t is in a d e q u a te in th e B ill an d             th e L iv erp o o l su p p o rte rs w ere still arriv in g . It was
 w ill n ee d to b e a m e n d e d as th e B ill p ro c e e d s th ro u g h         clear to th e p o lice o ffic ers in ch arg e th a t th e re w as
 y o u r L o rd sh ip s’ H o u se. T h a t e x am p le re la te s to th e           a m p le cap acity still to b e fille d in so m e p a rts o f
 d u tie s o f th e S ec retary o f S ta te a n d th e D ire c to r                 th e en clo su re a llo c a te d to L iv e rp o o l.
 G e n e ra l o f W a te r S erv ices u n d e r C lau ses 7 a n d 8.
                                                                                      “ A t ab o u t 2.45 p .m . T h e re w as a larg e cro w d o f
 D e sp ite stro n g p ro te sts o v e r th e p a st m o n th s as th e
                                                                                   L iv erp o o l su p p o rte rs a t th e tu rn stile s in L eppings
 B ill w as going th ro u g h a n o th e r p la c e, th e B ill still
                                                                                   L ane b e h in d th e W est S ta n d , th e re w as difficu lty
 says th a t th e first d u ty o f th e D ire c to r G e n e ra l o f
                                                                                   in co p in g w ith th e p re ssu re o n th e tu rn s tile s an d
 W a te r S ervices a n d o f th e w a te r c o m p a n y pics is to
                                                                                   th e p o lice u sed lo u d h a ile rs to urge th e cro w d to
 ach iev e a re a so n a b le re tu rn o n assets. It is only
                                                                                   b e p a t i e n t .'
 su b jec t to th a t d u ty th a t th e re is a n y p ro te c tio n
 fo r th e c o n su m e r o r th e e n v iro n m e n t. W h ile th a t                “ A t a b o u t 2.5 0 p .m . m o re L iv e rp o o l su p p o rte rs
 c o n flic t exists, a n d w hile th e re tu rn o n assets tak es                 a rriv e d a n d th e n u m b e rs in fro n t o f th e tu rn stile s
 p rio rity o v e r th e in te re sts o f th e c o n su m e r a n d th e           in creased. S om e s u p p o rte rs s ta rte d to clim b th e
 e n v iro n m e n t, we sh a ll n o t b e re a ssu re d th a t th e               w alls a n d tu rn stile s a n d th o se a t th e fro n t o f th e
559                      Hillsborough                                [ LORDS ]                               Disaster                                560

  [E arl F errers.]                                                             life a n d h e a lth . W e ow e a d u ty to th e se p a ssio n a te
 cro w d o u tsid e th e sta d iu m w ere u n d e r c o n sid e r­              su p p o rte rs o f fo o tb a ll to e x a m in e u rg en tly a n d
 ab le p re ssu re fro m th o se b e h in d .                                   th o ro u g h ly th e cau ses a n d b a ck g ro u n d , a n d to do
                                                                                all in o u r p o w e r to p re v e n t su ch a th in g h a p p e n in g
     “ T h e se n io r p o lice o fficer p re se n t c o n sid e re d
 th a t th e re w as a p o ssib le d a n g e r to th e liv es o f th e          a g a in .”
 sp e c ta to rs a t th e fro n t o f th e c ro w d o u tsid e th e                M y L o rd s, th a t c o n c lu d es th e te x t o f th e
 sta d iu m . In o rd e r to relie v e th e p re ssu re he                      sta te m e n t.
 a rra n g e d fo r a n exit g ate n e a r th e tu rn stile s to be
 o p e n e d to let a se c tio n o f th e c ro w d th ro u g h . T h e
                                                                             3.42 p .m .
 re la tio n sh ip o f th a t a c tio n to th e d isa ste r o n th e
 te rra c e sh o rtly a fte rw a rd s is clearly a cen tra l                    L ord E lw y n -Jo n es: M y L o rd s, I sh o u ld like to
 q u e stio n to b e in v e stig a te d .                                    th a n k th e n o b le E a rl, L o rd F e rre rs, fo r re p e a tin g th e
                                                                             so m b re S ta te m e n t o f th e H o m e S ecretary . T h e w ho le
     “ M y rig h t h o n o u ra b le frie n d th e P rim e M in iste r
                                                                             H ou se w ill jo in w ith h im in o fferin g o u r d ee p
 a n d I y e ste rd a y v isite d th e fo o tb a ll g ro u n d a n d th e
                                                                             sy m p a th y to th e b e re a v e d fam ilies o f th e m an y
 tw o S h effield h o sp ita ls w h ich re ce iv ed c asu alties. I
                                                                             v ictim s a n d to th o se w ho w ere in ju re d in S a tu rd a y ’s
 sh o u ld lik e to pay trib u te to all th o se in v o lv e d in
                                                                             te rrib le tra g ed y a t H illsb o ro u g h . T h e w hole n a tio n
 th e rescu e o p e ra tio n s a t th e g ro u n d , in c lu d in g th e
                                                                             sh ared , a n d still sh ares, in th e ir g rie f a n d th e ir
 m a n y sp e c ta to rs w ho gave th e ir h elp ; a n d to th o se
                                                                             suffering.
 o th e rs, in c lu d in g th e h o sp ita l staffs a n d v o lu n ta ry
 ag encies w ho h a v e sin ce b e e n w o rk in g so h a rd                     P e rh a p s I m ay e x p ress o u r g ra titu d e to all w ho
 tre a tin g th e in ju re d a n d c o n so lin g th e b erea v e d .        re sp o n d e d so q u ic k ly a t th e scene o f th e trag ed y to
 W e h e a rd m an y ac co u n ts o f co u ra g e ex erte d on               w hat w as going o n a n d w h o w o rk ed so a d m ira b ly in
 b e h a lf o f o th ers.                                                    saving, a n d try in g to save, liv es, in c o m fo rtin g th e
     “ I h a v e asked fo r fu rth e r fa c tu a l re p o rts fro m          dying a n d in h elp in g th e in ju e d . I refer to th e p o lice
 th e p o lice a n d o th e r serv ices, th e lo cal a u th o rity           officers, th e fire o fficers, th e d o cto rs, n u rse s, th e
 a n d th e F o o tb a ll A sso ciatio n . In q u e sts w ill b e held       h o sp ita ls a n d o th e r em ergency services. It is a
  in d u e co u rse. B u t o v e r a n d ab o v e th is, th e re is          p a rtic u la r sa tisfa c tio n , in v iew o f o th e r p re v io u s
 clearly n e e d fo r a full an d in d e p e n d e n t in q u iry to         events, to say th a n k y o u also fo r th e e n d e a v o u rs o f
 id e n tify th e causes o f th e d isa s te r a n d to e x am in e          th e fo o tb a ll su p p o rte rs o n th e g ro u n d . O n S a tu rd a y
 w h a t n ee d s to be d o n e to p re v e n t su ch a n a c c id e n t     they a c te d w ith d isc ip lin e a n d co m p assio n . N o o n e
 h a p p e n in g ag ain. I h av e th e re fo re asked L o rd                b e h a v ed b a d ly th a t day.
 Ju stic e T a y lo r to carry o u t a n in q u iry , w ith th e                 W e w elco m e th e d e c isio n o f th e H o m e S ecretary
 fo llow in g te rm s o f refrence:                                          to set u p a p u b lic in q u iry a n d th e a p p o in tm e n t o f
   “To inquire into the events at Sheffied Wednesday football                L o rd J u s tic e T a y lo r to c o n d u c t it, w ith assistan ce.
 ground on 15th April 1989 and to make recommendations                       T he p u b lic w ill n e e d a n u n e q u iv o c a l a n d a u th o rita t­
 about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.”
                                                                             ive a c c o u n t o f w h a t h a p p e n e d a t H illsb o ro u g h , w hy
     “ M r B ria n Jo h n so n , th e C h ie f C o n sta b le o f            it h a p p e n e d an d w h a t n ee d s to b e d o n e to p re v e n t
 L a n c a sh ire , h a s agreed to a ssist th e in q u iry as               any d isa s te r o f th a t k in d ev er h a p p e n in g again. It
 a n assesso r; a n d a rra n g e m e n ts w ill b e m a d e as              seem s c le a r th a t th e re p o rt o f th e in q u iry w ill b e
 n ec essa ry fo r o th e r q u a lifie d assesso rs to be                   follow ed by a re o rg a n isa tio n o f fo o tb a ll g ro u n d
 a p p o in te d a n d fo r th e in q u iry to b e p ro v id e d w ith       c o n tro l a n d th a t th is m ay ta k e so m e tim e to ach ieve.
 te c h n ic a l ad v ic e a n d su p p o rt. I a m ask in g th a t th e
 in q u iry sh o u ld p ro c ee d w ith all p o ssib le speed.                   T h e g re a te st e m p h a sis so fa r— a n d th e S ta te m e n t
 L o rd Ju stic e T a y lo r w ill v isit S h effield to m o rro w           o f th e H o m e S e cretary seem s to p o in t to th is— h a s
 to b e g in h is in v e stig a tio n . I a m g ra te fu l to h im fo r      b ee n p la c e d o n re p la c e m e n t o f sta n d in g te rra c e s w ith
 a g reein g to u n d e rta k e th is task .                                 seatin g a c c o m m o d a tio n . B ut w ill n o t so m e a c tio n be
                                                                             ta k e n a t o n c e a b o u t o n e p a rtic u la r m a tte r? W ill
     “ H o w ev er, w e n eed also to ta k e a w id e r view.                th e H o m e S e cretary c o n sid e r m ak in g a n im m e d ia te
 T h e G o v e rn m e n t b elie v e th a t th e fu tu re o f fo o tb a ll   re c o m m e n d a tio n to th o se safety c o m m itte e s a n d
 in th is co u n try lies in a n a tio n a l m e m b e rsh ip                c h ie f c o n sta b le s w h o h a v e in siste d o n fo o tb a ll clubs
 sch em e in d e sig n ated g ro u n d s, a n d n o w it seem s              in stalin g p e rim e te r fences g iving u rg en t th o u g h t to
 a lso in p ro v id in g all-seated a c c o m m o d a tio n at               th e ir e x iste n c e a n d to th e p a r t th e y p lay e d in
 m a jo r fo o tb a ll clubs. T h is w o u ld in v o lv e th e               S a tu rd a y ’s trag ed y ? I a m in fo rm e d th a t m a n y
 d isa p p e a ra n c e o f te rra c e s a t th o se g ro u n d s. It        fo o tb all clubs h a v e w a rn e d fo r y ears ag ain st
 m ig h t also in v o lv e a m e n d m e n ts to stre n g th e n th e        p e rim e te r fen cin g o n th e g ro u n d th a t it w as a
 F o o tb a ll S p e c ta to rs B ill so th a t its p ro v isio n s for      p o te n tia l d a n g er. O n S a tu rd a y it seem s to h a v e
 th e lic en sin g o f g ro u n d s m a tc h e d th is co n cep t. W e       p ro v e d le th a l. I th in k th a t th e H o u se m ay w ell w ish
 sh all b e c o n sid erin g th ese m a tte rs u rg en tly an d              to k n o w w h a t th e G o v e rn m e n t w ill d o a b o u t th a t
 b rin g in g fo rw ard changes as so o n as possible.                       im m e d ia te , lim ite d b u t im p o rta n t m a tte r.
     “ A n a p p e a l fu n d is b ein g set u p by th e civic                   M ay w e a ssu m e th a t th e re c o m m e n d a tio n s o f th e
 a u th o ritie s o f L iv erp o o l, N o ttin g h a m         an d          p u b lic in q u iry w ill n o t sim p ly b e a b o u t c o n d itio n s
 S h effield . T h e G o v e rn m e n t w ill b e c o n trib u tin g         in sid e fo o tb a ll g ro u n d s o n w h ich p u b lic a tte n tio n
 £ 5 0 0 ,0 0 0 im m e d ia te ly to w a rd s th is fu n d .                 has p re v io u sly b e e n fo c u se d , b u t also a b o u t crow d
    “ T h is w as a d e v a sta tin g trag ed y . O u r d eep                c o n tro l o u tsid e th e tu rn s tile s a n d o n th e w ay to
 sy m p a th y goes to th e fam ilies o f th o se w h o d ie d ,             m atch e s w h e n larg e cro w d s a re a n tic ip a te d ? W as n o t
 to th o se rec o v e rin g a n d to th o se still fig h tin g for           th is a c ritic a lly re le v a n t fa c to r la st S a tu rd a y ?
559                      Hillsborough                                [ LORDS                                   Disaster                                560
  [E arl F errers.]                                                               life a n d h e a lth . W e ow e a d u ty to th e se p a ssio n a te
  crow d o u tsid e th e sta d iu m w ere u n d e r c o n sid e r­                su p p o rte rs o f fo o tb all to e x a m in e u rg e n tly a n d
  ab le p re ssu re fro m th o se b e h in d .                                    th o ro u g h ly th e causes a n d b a c k g ro u n d , a n d to d o
     “ T h e se n io r p o lic e o ffic er p re se n t co n sid ered              all in o u r p o w e r to p re v e n t su ch a th in g h a p p e n in g
 th a t th e re w as a p o ssib le d a n g e r to th e liv es o f th e            a g a in .”
 sp e c ta to rs a t th e fro n t o f th e cro w d o u tsid e th e                   M y L o rd s, th a t co n c lu d es th e te x t o f th e
 sta d iu m . In o rd e r to re lie v e th e p re ssu re he                       sta te m e n t.
 a rra n g e d fo r a n ex it g ate n e a r th e tu rn stile s to be
 o p e n e d to let a se c tio n o f th e crow d th ro u g h . T h e
 re la tio n s h ip o f th a t a c tio n to th e d isa ste r o n th e          3.42 p .m .
 te rra c e sh o rtly a fte rw a rd s is clearly a cen tra l                      L o rd E lw y n -Jo n es: M y L o rd s, I sh o u ld lik e to
 q u e stio n to b e in v e stig a te d .                                     th a n k th e n o b le E arl, L o rd F e rre rs, fo r re p e a tin g th e
     “ M y rig h t h o n o u ra b le frie n d th e P rim e M in iste r        so m b re S ta te m e n t o f th e H o m e S ecretary . T h e w hole
 a n d I y e ste rd a y v isite d th e fo o tb all g ro u n d a n d th e      H o u se w ill jo in w ith h im in o fferin g o u r d e e p
 tw o S h effield h o sp ita ls w h ich rec e iv e d casu alties. I           sy m p ath y to th e b e re a v e d fam ilies o f th e m a n y
 sh o u ld lik e to p a y trib u te to all th o se in v o lv ed in            v ictim s a n d to th o se w ho w ere in ju re d in S a tu rd a y ’s
 th e re sc u e o p e ra tio n s a t th e g ro u n d , in c lu d in g th e    te rrib le tra g e d y a t H illsb o ro u g h . T h e w h ole n a tio n
 m an y sp e c ta to rs w ho gave th e ir help; a n d to th o se              sh a re d , a n d still sh ares, in th e ir g rie f a n d th e ir
 o th e rs, in c lu d in g th e h o sp ita l staffs a n d v o lu n ta ry      suffering.
 ag en cies w ho h a v e sin ce b e e n w o rk in g so h a rd                     P e rh a p s I m ay express o u r g ra titu d e to all w h o
 tre a tin g th e in ju re d a n d c o n so lin g th e b ereav ed .           re sp o n d e d so q u ick ly at th e scene o f th e trag ed y to
 W e h e a rd m a n y a c c o u n ts o f co u rag e ex erted on               w h at w as going o n a n d w ho w o rk e d so a d m ira b ly in
 b e h a lf o f o th ers.                                                     saving, a n d try in g to save, lives, in c o m fo rtin g th e
     “ I h a v e ask ed fo r fu rth e r fac tu al re p o rts fro m            dying a n d in h e lp in g th e in ju e d . I re fe r to th e p o lic e
 th e p o lic e a n d o th e r serv ices, th e local a u th o rity            o fficers, th e fire officers, th e d o c to rs, n u rses, th e
 a n d th e F o o tb a ll A sso ciatio n . In q u e sts w ill b e held        h o sp ita ls a n d o th e r em ergency serv ices. It is a
 in d u e co u rse. B u t o v e r a n d ab o v e th is, th e re is            p a rtic u la r sa tisfa c tio n , in view o f o th e r p re v io u s
 clearly n e e d fo r a full a n d in d e p e n d e n t in q u iry to         e vents, to say th a n k y o u also fo r th e e n d e a v o u rs o f
 id e n tify th e cau ses o f th e d isa ste r a n d to e x am in e           th e fo o tb a ll su p p o rte rs o n th e g ro u n d . O n S a tu rd a y
 w h a t n ee d s to b e d o n e to p re v e n t su ch a n a c cid e n t      they a c te d w ith d isc ip lin e a n d c o m p a ssio n . N o o n e
 h a p p e n in g ag ain . I h a v e th e re fo re ask ed L o rd              b e h a v e d b a d ly th a t day.
 Ju stic e T a y lo r to c a rry o u t a n in q u iry , w ith th e                W e w elco m e th e d e cisio n o f th e H o m e S ecretary
 follow ing te rm s o f refren ce:                                            to set u p a p u b lic in q u iry a n d th e a p p o in tm e n t o f
   “To inquire into the events at Sheffied Wednesday football                 L o rd J u s tic e T a y lo r to c o n d u c t it, w ith a ssista n c e.
 ground on 15th April 1989 and to make recommendations
 about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.”
                                                                              T h e p u b lic w ill n e e d a n u n e q u iv o c a l a n d a u th o rita t­
                                                                              ive a c c o u n t o f w h a t h a p p e n e d a t H illsb o ro u g h , w hy
     “ M r B ria n Jo h n so n , th e C h ie f C o n sta b le o f             it h a p p e n e d a n d w h at need s to b e d o n e to p re v e n t
 L a n c a sh ire , h a s agreed to assist th e in q u iry as                 a n y d isa s te r o f th a t k in d e v er h a p p e n in g ag ain . It
 a n assesso r; a n d a rra n g e m e n ts w ill b e m a d e as               seem s c le a r th a t th e re p o rt o f th e in q u iry w ill b e
 n ecessary fo r o th e r q u a lifie d assessors to b e                      follow ed b y a re o rg a n isa tio n o f fo o tb a ll g ro u n d
 a p p o in te d a n d fo r th e in q u iry to be p ro v id e d w ith         c o n tro l a n d th a t th is m ay ta k e so m e tim e to ach iev e.
 te c h n ic a l a d v ice a n d su p p o rt. I a m ask in g th a t th e
 in q u iry sh o u ld p ro c e e d w ith all p o ssib le speed.                   T h e g re a te st em p h a sis so fa r— a n d th e S ta te m e n t
 L o rd J u s tic e T a y lo r w ill v isit S heffield to m o rro w           o f th e H o m e S e cretary seem s to p o in t to th is — h as
 to b eg in h is in v e stig a tio n . I a m g ratefu l to h im fo r          b ee n p la c e d o n re p la c e m e n t o f sta n d in g te rra c e s w ith
 ag reein g to u n d e rta k e th is task .                                   seatin g a c c o m m o d a tio n . B ut w ill n o t so m e a c tio n b e
                                                                              ta k e n a t o n ce a b o u t o n e p a rtic u la r m a tte r? W ill
    “ H o w ev er, w e n ee d also to ta k e a w id er view .                 th e H o m e S ec retary c o n sid e r m a k in g a n im m e d ia te
T h e G o v e rn m e n t b elie v e th a t th e fu tu re o f fo o tb all      re c o m m e n d a tio n to th o se safety c o m m itte e s a n d
in th is c o u n try lies in a n a tio n a l m e m b e rsh ip                 c h ie f c o n sta b le s w ho h av e in siste d o n fo o tb a ll clubs
sch em e in d e sig n a te d g ro u n d s, an d n o w it seem s              in sta lin g p e rim e te r fences g iving u rg e n t th o u g h t to
also in p ro v id in g a ll-sea te d a c c o m m o d a tio n a t             th e ir e x isten ce a n d to th e p a rt th e y p la y ed in
m a jo r fo o tb a ll clubs. T h is w ould in v o lv e th e                  S a tu rd a y ’s trag ed y ? I a m in fo rm e d th a t m a n y
d isa p p e a ra n c e o f te rra c e s a t th o se g ro u n d s. It         fo o tb all clu b s h a v e w arn ed fo r y ears a g ain st
m ig h t also in v o lv e a m e n d m e n ts to stre n g th e n th e         p e rim e te r fen cin g o n th e g ro u n d th a t it w as a
F o o tb a ll S p e c ta to rs B ill so th a t its p ro v isio n s for       p o te n tia l d an g er. O n S a tu rd a y it seem s to h av e
th e lice n sin g o f g ro u n d s m a tc h e d th is c o n c ep t. W e      p ro v e d le th a l. I th in k th a t th e H o u se m ay w ell w ish
shall b e c o n sid e rin g th ese m a tte rs u rg e n tly an d              to k n o w w h a t th e G o v e rn m e n t w ill d o a b o u t th a t
b rin g in g fo rw a rd ch an g es as soon as p o ssib le.                   im m e d ia te , lim ite d b u t im p o rta n t m a tte r.
    “ A n a p p e a l fu n d is b e in g set u p by th e civic
                                                                                 M ay w e assu m e th a t th e re c o m m e n d a tio n s o f th e
a u th o ritie s o f L iv e rp o o l, N o ttin g h a m      and              p u b lic in q u iry w ill n o t sim p ly b e a b o u t c o n d itio n s
S heffield. T h e G o v e rn m e n t w ill b e c o n trib u tin g
                                                                             in sid e fo o tb a ll g ro u n d s o n w h ich p u b lic a tte n tio n
£ 5 0 0 ,0 0 0 im m e d ia te ly to w a rd s th is fu n d .
                                                                             h as p re v io u sly b e e n focused, b u t also a b o u t cro w d
   “ T h is w as a d e v a sta tin g traged y. O u r deep                    c o n tro l o u tsid e th e tu rn stile s a n d o n th e w ay to
sy m p ath y goes to th e fam ilie s o f th o se w ho d ied ,                m a tc h e s w h e n large crow ds are a n tic ip a te d ? W a s n o t
to th o se re c o v e rin g a n d to th o se still fig h tin g fo r          th is a critic a lly re le v a n t fa c to r la st S a tu rd a y ?




                         sBwpBfgaiiwgsiWI
      561                      Hillsborough                             [ 17 APRIL 1989 ]                                Disaster                            562

          I e n d w ith an a ssu ra n c e o f th e O p p o s itio n ’s re ad y        w h ich re fers to o n e o f th e m o st h o rrify in g a c cid en ts
      c o -o p e ra tio n in p a ssin g an y leg islatio n d ire c te d to            th a t w e h a v e seen re c e n tly .
      e n su rin g th e safety o f th e p u b lic w h o c o m e fo r                     T h e n o b le a n d le a rn e d L o rd , L o rd E lw yn-Jones,
      e n jo y m e n t to fo o tb a ll m a tc h e s, so p o p u la r a fe a tu re     ask ed w h at a c tio n th e G o v e rn m e n t w ould b e
      o f o u r liv es. T h e n a tio n ex p ects th a t o u t o f S a tu rd a y ’s   p re p a re d to ta k e w ith re g a rd to th e p e rim e te r safety
      tra g e d y effec tiv e ste p s w ill b e ta k e n to p ro te c t th e          fencing. H e w ill rec a ll th a t m a n y g ro u n d s h a v e th e
      safe ty o f th e p u b lic a n d its e n jo y m e n t o f sp o rt.              fencing in d ire c t re sp o n se to th e P o p p lew e ll in q u iry
                                                                                      a n d th a t th e fences w e re p u t u p fo r re a so n s o f a d d e d
          L o rd H a rr is o f G reenw ich: M y L o rd s, I jo in w ith               safety. O b v io u sly th a t is a m a tte r w h ich w ill b e
      th e n o b le a n d le a rn e d L o rd , L o rd E lw y n -Jo n es, in           c o n sid e re d by th e p u b lic in q u iry . I th in k it w o u ld
      th a n k in g th e n o b le E arl, L o rd F e rre rs, fo r re p e a tin g       n o t b e a p p ro p ria te to ta k e a d v a n c e d e cisio n s as yet
      th e S ta te m e n t. Is h e a w a re th a t in th is a p p a llin g            u p o n th a t. H o w e v e r I n o te th e n o b le a n d le a rn e d
      trag e d y all o f us a re g ra te fu l to th e em ergency                      L o rd ’s co n cern .
      serv ices w h o d id su c h m a g n ific e n t w ork? A g ain , I                  H e also re fe rre d to th e cro w d c o n tro l o u tsid e th e
      jo in th e n o b le a n d le a rn e d L o rd , L o rd E lw y n -Jo n es,        fo o tb a ll sta d iu m . I h a d c a u se to in q u ire h ow m a n y
      in p ay in g trib u te to th e v ery large n u m b e r o f fo o tb a ll         po lice w ere in v o lv e d . T h e re w ere 773 p o lice in v o lv e d
      su p p o rte rs, b o th o f N o ttin g h a m F o re s t a n d o f               a t th e fo o tb all m a tc h , tw o -th ird s o f w h o m w ere
      L iv e rp o o l, w h o gave a ssista n c e to th o se w h o h a d               o u tsid e th e sta d iu m a n d o n e -th ird in sid e . T o th o se
      b ee n so g riev o u sly in ju re d in th is ep iso d e.                        w ho a re co n ce rn e d th a t th e re w ere n o t en ou gh p o lice
          P e rh a p s I m ay a sk th e n o b le E arl, L o rd F e rre rs             a t th e g ro u n d , I w o u ld m e re ly say th a t th a t fig u re
j     th re e q u e stio n s. F irs t, is h e aw are th a t w e w arm ly              w o rks o u t a t a b o u t o n e p o lic e m a n fo r every 70
     jv e lc o m e th e a p p o in tm e n t o f L o rd Ju stic e T a y lo r to        sp ec ta to rs.
[   ^ b n d u c t th e in q u iry a n d th e fact th a t M r. B rian                     T h e n o b le L o rd , L o rd H a rris o f G re en w ich , ask ed
I     J o h n so n , th e c h ie f c o n sta b le o f L a n c a sh ire , has          w h e th e r w e w o u ld w e lc o m e a n in te rim re p o rt fro m
       agreed to b e o n e o f th e assessors?                                        L o rd ju s tic e T ay lo r. I th in k h e w ill b e co n c e rn e d to
         Is th e n o b le E a rl p re p a re d to in d ic a te w h e th e r           m a k e a n in te rim re p o rt, i f h e feels h e is ab le to w h en
      L o rd Ju stic e T a y lo r w ill b e in v ite d to p ro d u c e an             he h a s c o n sid e re d th e c irc u m sta n c e s. I am su re h e
      in te rim re p o rt o n o n e p a rtic u la r q u e stio n ? T h a t is         w ill rea lise th e a p p re h e n s io n a n d co n c e rn th a t ex ists
      th e issu e o f p e rim e te r fencing. T h e n o b le a n d le a rn e d        fo r an im m e d ia te re sp o n se , p ro v id e d it can b e d o n e
      L o rd , L o rd E lw y n -Jo n es, h a s a lre a d y re fe rre d to th a t,     w ith success a n d d ig n ity .
      b u t it is c le a r th a t it w as a m a jo r fa c to r in th is                  T h e n o b le L o rd , L o rd H a rris o f G reen w ich , also
      d re a d fu l d isa ste r. Is th e n o b le E a rl a w a re th a t m an y       re fe rre d to th e F o o tb a ll S p e c ta to rs Bill. I realise th e
      o f us h o p e th a t, if L o rd Ju stic e T a y lo r fo rm s a view            co n cern s w hich h e a n d o th e rs h av e . I t is rig h t to say
I    o n th e m a tte r, h e w ill b e e n c o u ra g e d to p ro d u c e an          th a t th e G o v e rn m e n t c o n sid e r it seem ly to delay th e
I    in te rim re p o rt d ealin g w ith it so th a t P a rlia m e n t can            p ro g ra m m e o f th e B ill fo r a sh o rt w h ile in resp e ct o f
1    ta k e a p p ro p ria te a c tio n ?                                             w h at h a s h a p p e n e d .
*
I        Is th e n o b le E arl, L o rd F e rre rs, a w a re th a t alth o u g h
5    th e re w as a re fe re n c e to th e F o o tb a ll S p e c ta to rs Bill            B aroness S ted m an : M y L o rd s, fro m th ese B enches
J    in th e S ta te m e n t w h ich h e h a s ju s t re p e a te d , m a n y         w e also w ish to th a n k th e n o b le E a rl fo r th e
I    o f us th in k it in a p p ro p ria te to b e co m e in v o lv e d in            S ta te m e n t w hich h e h a s m a d e . H o w ev er, w e re g re t
       a n a rg u m e n t o n c e ag a in o n th is m a tte r? W e shall              th e rea so n s w hy h e h a d to m a k e it. I w ish also to
    J i a v e th e o p p o rtu n ity o f d e b a tin g it o n T h ird R e a d in g    e x te n d o u r sy m p a th y to th e b e re a v e d a n d in ju re d
    ^ e x t w eek. B u t is th e n o b le E a rl also a w a re th a t it is           a n d o u r a p p re c ia tio n to th e em erg en cy services a n d
       cle a r th a t th e large cro w d s try in g to g ain a d m issio n            to th e sp ec tato rs Who b e h a v e d so w ell w hen th is
|    a t th e tu rn s tile s in L ep p in g s L a n e ju s t b e fo re th e           h a p p e n ed .
I    m a tc h b eg an w ere clearly a sig n ific a n t fa c to r in w h at                W e agree w ith th e su g g estio n in th e S ta te m e n t
j    h a p p e n d e d th e re a fte r? W e c a n d ea l w ith th a t m a tte r       th a t th e tim e h a s c o m e to m o v e to w a rd s all-seated
|    n ex t M o n d ay , b u t th e n o b le E a rl w ill rec o g n ise th a t        a c o m m o d a tio n . W e th in k th a t o n ly s ta d ia p ro v id in g
i    w e sh all w a n t to d e b a te th e su b je c t if th e                        th a t k in d o f a c c o m m o d a tio n sh o u ld b e licensed to
|    G o v e rn m e n t in te n d to c o n tin u e w ith th e F o o tb a ll           stage th e big gam es. I f p e rim e te r fen cin g a n d p e n n in g
I    S p e c ta to rs B ill in its p re se n t fo rm .                                is c o n tin u e d o n g ro u n d s o f safety , w e suggest th a t th e
|       L astly, is th e n o b le E a rl aw are th a t m a n y o f us                 design o f th e p e n n in g sh o u ld b e u rg e n tly review ed. It
|    agree w ith th e S ta te m e n t b y th e H o m e S ec reta ry th a t            w ould a p p e a r fro m w h a t w e saw o n te le v isio n o v e r
     th e id e a o f h a v in g all se ated fa c ilitie s a t fo o tb a ll            th e w eekend th a t th e re w as ro o m a t th e sid es o f th e
     m a tc h e s h a s n o w b e en clearly a n d d ra m a tic a lly                 te rra c e s b u t th e d esig n o f th e p e n n in g w as such th a t
     p la ce d o n th e a g en d a ag ain ? I f L o rd Ju stic e T a y lo r           th o se in th e m id d le c o u ld n o t m o v e sidew ays to get
     fo rm s a c o n c lu sio n o n th e m a tte r a t a n e arly stage               in to area s w h ere th e re w as space.
     in th e in q u iry , is th e n o b le E a rl p re p a re d to in d ic a te          W e th in k th e m e th o d s o f c o m m u n ic a tio n b etw een
     th a t th e G o v e rn m e n t w ould w elco m e a n in te rim                   th e p o lice in sid e th e g ro u n d a n d th o se o u tsid e sh o u ld
     re p o rt fro m h im o n th a t issu e as well?                                  be u rg en tly rev iew ed , so th a t b o th k n o w w h a t is going
                                                                                      o n in th e ir p a rtic u la r a re a. P e rh a p s, w ith h in d sig h t, if
         L o rd F e rre rs: M y L o rd s, I a m g ra te fu l to b o th th e           th e re h a d been b e tte r c o m m u n ic a tio n o n S atu rd a y ,
      n o b le a n d le a rn e d L o rd , L o rd E lw y n -Jo n e s, an d             th e p o lice o u tsid e m ig h t h a v e ask ed fo r th e k ick o ff
      th e n o b le L o rd , L o rd H a rris o f G re e n w ic h , fo r th e          to b e p o stp o n e d a n d m ig h t h a v e b e e n ab le to p la c a te
      m a n n e r in w hich th e y h a v e ac c e p te d th e S ta te m e n t         th e crow d a n d c a rry o u t a n o rd e rly a d m issio n in to
 563                        Hillsborough                               [ LORDS ]                             Disaster                                564

     [Baroness Stedman.]                                                        F o o tb a ll A sso c ia tio n h a v e re p e a te d ly sa id — th is w as
 th e g ro u n d . T h e fru s tra tio n o f th o se w h o co u ld n o t        argued stro n g ly d u rin g th e co u rse o f th e B ill in
 get in to th e g ro u n d c o n firm s th e view o f m a n y o f us            C o m m itte e — th e y h a v e p u t th e ir h o u se in o rd e r
 th a t th is is th e k in d o f th in g th a t is likely to h ap p e n         w ith in th e g ro u n d s a n d th e re is n o tro u b le an y m o re,
 i f ID c a rd s a re issued. W e s u p p o rt a n y m o v e to delay           th e n w hy n o t p u ll dow n th e fen ces a n d see if sa n ity
 th e im p le m e n ta tio n o f th e F o o tb a ll S p e c ta to rs Bill       p rev ails. I f so, th e F o o tb a ll S p e c ta to rs B ill can b e
 a n d th e ID cards, a t least u n til g ro u n d s h a v e been               scrap p ed ?
 lo o k e d a t again, a n d u n til th e se a tin g a n d th e
 a c c o m m o d a tio n fo r sp e c ta to rs is sa tisfac to ry .                E a rl F e rre rs: M y L o rd s, I a m g ra te fu l to th e n o b le
                                                                               L o rd fo r h is su ggestions. I th in k th a t an y o n e w ho
    E a rl F e rre rs: M y L o rd s, I a m g rate fu l to th e n o b le        saw th e p ic tu re s o f th e e v e n ts th a t o c c u rre d last
B aro n e ss fo r h e r co m m en ts. I u n d e rs ta n d h e r view s         S atu d ay w o u ld h a v e so m e sy m p a th y w ith th e feelings
a b o u t all-seated a c c o m m o d a tio n a n d th a t a licence            o f th e n o b le L o rd a b o u t p e o p le b ein g in cages.
sh o u ld reflect th a t. T h e G o v e rn m e n t a re also                   H o w ever, I sh o u ld ju s t re m in d th e n o b le L o rd th a t
th in k in g along th o se k in d s o f lin es. W ith reg ard to               th o se fen ces w ere p u t u p in o rd e r to p re v e n t som e
th e m e th o d s o f c o m m u n ic a tio n co n c e rn in g crow d           o f th e o th e r d isa ste s w h ich w e h a d p re v io u sly
c o n tro l b etw een p o lice in sid e a n d o u tsid e gro u n d s,          w itn essed . W h a t v ery o fte n h a p p e n s is th a t w h en a
th a t is o b v io u sly a m a tte r w h ich L o rd Ju stic e T a y lo r       d isa ste r o ccu rs, o n e re a c ts to th a t a n d o fte n th a t h a s
w ill b e c o n sid erin g .                                                   a n o th e r effect la te r on.
                                                                                   I u n d e rs ta n d th e view w h ich th e n o b le L o rd h a s
   L ord C am pbell o f C roy: M y L o rd s, I jo in in th e                   ex p ressed . I w o u ld o n ly say to h im th a t o u r in te n tio n
sy m p a th y expressed by o th e r n o b le L o rd s to th e                  is th a t th e se p laces m u st b e safe. All th e se m a tte rs
b e re a v e d fam ilies, a n d in th e g ra titu d e to th o se               a re b o u n d to b e lo o k e d a t afresh in view o f w h at h as
w h o gave im m e d ia te help. T h e la st o ccasio n in th is                h a p p e n e d , b u t safe ty is im p o rta n t. T h e n o b le L o rd
c o u n try w h en crow d p re ssu re c a u se d a d isa s te r w as           asked w h e th e r w e w ould a b a n d o n P a rt I o f th e
in G lasgow o n 1st Ja n u a ry 1971 a t a C eltic-R an g ers                  F o o tb a ll S p e c ta to rs Bill. I a m b o u n d to tell h im
m a tc h . M o re th a n 60 p eo p le lo st th e ir lives th a t               th a t th e w h o le p u rp o se o f th a t B ill is to p re v e n t
a fte rn o o n . I h a v e th e sad re c o lle c tio n o f v isitin g th e     h o o lig an ism a n d to allow fo r o rd e re d fo o tb all
g ro u n d sh o rtly a fterw ard s, as S e cre tary o f S ta te fo r           m atch es. I k n o w it is c o n tro v e rsia l a n d I d o n o t w ish
S c o tla n d , a n d o f v isitin g th e in ju re d in h o sp ital. A s       to get in to th a t k in d o f c o n tro v e rsy th is a fte rn o o n .
a co n seq u en c e o f th a t trag ic e p iso d e , a c o m m itte e          H ow ever, I th in k th e n o b le L o rd w ill u n d e rs ta n d if
w as set u p u n d e r th e c h a irm a n sh ip o f th e la te L ord           I say th a t th e G o v e rn m e n t d o n o t in te n d to a b a n d o n
W h ea tley w ho, b esid es b eing a d istin g u ish e d ju d g e,             it.
w as a k een follow er o f fo o tb all.
    A fte r th e W h eatley C o m m itte e ’s re c o m m e n ­                     L ord D e a n o f B esw ick: M y L ords, I jo in w ith
d a tio n s h a d b een d igested, m a n y o f us h o p e d th a t             p re v io u s sp e ak e rs in ex p ressin g d eep c o n d o len c es to
th e d an g ers o f cru sh in g in fo o tb a ll cro w d s h a d been           th e b e re a v e d in th is te rrib le tragedy. H o w ev er, th e
re m o v e d . B esides c o n sid e rin g th e re p o rt o f th e              n o b le E a rl m u st b e a w are th a t d u rin g m y sh o rt tim e
H illsb o ro u g h in q u irie s no w b e in g set in tra in , w ill           in th is H o u se th is is th e th ird tim e th a t a M in iste r
th e G o v e rn m e n t check w h e th e r all a p p ro p ria te               has rise n fro m th e G o v e rn m e n t F ro n t B ench to m ak e
a c tio n h a s b een ta k e n o n th e re c o m m e n d a tio n s o f         a S ta te m e n t on a p p a llin g tra g e d ie s in fo o tb all th a t
th e W h eatley C o m m itte e?                                                could h a v e b een av o id e d . I a m ta lk in g a b o u t th e
                                                                               B ra d fo rd d isa ste r w hich to o k p la c e n e a r w h ere I live
   E a rl F e rre rs: M y L o rd s, I sh all ce rta in ly see th a t           a n d th e H eysel d isa ste r in v o lv in g h eav y lo ss o f life
th e p o in t m a d e by m y n o b le frie n d is lo o k ed into.              w hich re su lte d in e x te n siv e d e b a te s in y o u r
                                                                               L o rd sh ip s’ H o u se. W e h a v e h a d th e P o p p lew ell
    L o rd M a so n o f B arnsley: M y L o rd s, S a tu rd a y w as            R e p o rt.
a so rro w in g d ay fo r fo o tb a ll su p p o rte rs a n d a sad                P a rt II o f th e F ire S afety a n d S afety o f P la ce s o f
a n d sa lu ta ry d ay fo r th e fo o tb a ll clubs. H o w ev er, is           S p o rt A ct 1987 is in tro d u c e d by th e w ords,
it n o t tim e th a t fo o tb all clubs sto p p e d tre a tin g th e ir        A p p lic a t io n o f S a fe ty o f S p o rts G r o u n d s A c t 1 9 7 5
su p p o rte rs as caged p riso n e rs o f w ar? T h is m e th o d             to a l l s p o r ts g ro u n d s . C an th e n o b le E a rl give an
is n o c o n d u c iv e to safety. A s th e M in iste r suggested              u n d e rta k in g th a t th e c o m m itte e o f in q u iry to be set
in th e S ta te m e n t, in crea se d safety w ill co m e w ith                u p u n d e r L o rd Ju stic e T a y lo r w ill m ak e a d e ta ile d
in c re a se d c o m fo rt a n d d e ce n t c o n d itio n s. It is ab o u t   in v e stig a tio n as to w h e th e r th ese p a rtic u la r
tim e clubs im p ro v e d th e ir fa c ilitie s in k ee p in g w ith           c o n d itio n s h a v e b een a d o p te d , a p p lie d an d
th e n eed s o f d ecen t h u m a n beings.
                                                                               e n fo rced ? B ea rin g in m in d th a t th e v ic tim s o f th e se
    In th e light o f re c e n t ev en ts, I ask th e G o v e rn m e n t       d isa sters a re alw ays fo o tb a ll sp e c ta to rs, w ill th e
to a b a n d o n P a rt I o f th e B ill p ro p o sin g th e fo o tb all       G o v e rn m e n t give u rg e n t c o n sid e ra tio n to re p re se n ­
m e m b e rsh ip schem e. T h e scene th a t w e w itn essed                   ta tiv e s o f su p p o rte rs in g en e ra l b ein g in c lu d e d on
o u tsid e th e S heffield W e d n e sd a y g ro u n d last                    th e c o m m itte e o f in q u iry u n d e r L o rd Ju stic e T ay lo r?
S a tu rd a y co u ld be a p rev iew o f th e o p e ra tio n o f               I th in k th a t th a t w ou ld m a k e th e in q u iry m o re
th e fo o tb a ll m e m b e rsh ip sch em e— a m a lfu n c tio n in g          g enerally a c c e p ta b le a n d w o u ld d e stro y an y
c o m p u te r, th e n m a y h em , w ith th e p o ssib ility o f              suggestion o f a w h itew a sh , o f w h ich in th e p a st th e re
a n o th e r surge in to th e g ro u n d .                                     h a s b een m o re th a n a w hiff.
   T h e fences w en t u p b ecau se o f p itc h in v a sio n s by                I sh o u ld like to su p p o rt m y colleag ue on th e F ro n t
fo o tb a ll h o oligans. If, as th e F o o tb a ll L eague a n d th e         B ench, th e n o b le a n d le a rn e d L o rd , L o rd E lw yn-
- 565                     Hillsborough                            [ 17 APRIL 1989 ]                                Disaster                            566

  Jo n es, in h is re q u e st fo r th e im m e d ia te re m o v a l o f            L o rd H a tc h o f L usby: M y L o rd s, all o f u s w h o h a v e
  th o se zo o -lik e b a rs w h ic h a re p la c e d b e h in d th e           p a rtic ip a te d , e ith e r a ctiv ely o r as sp e c ta to rs, in any
  goals, su p p o se d ly in o r d e r to p re v e n t h o o lig an ism .       sp o rt felt d eeply sh o ck e d a n d sa d d e n e d th is w eek en d .
  T h e re is n o re c o rd o f a n y sp e c ta to r in th is c o u n try       I jo in in th e c o n d o le n c es th a t h a v e b e e n se n t to th e
  d y in g in a fo o tb a ll g ro u n d as a re su lt o f h o o lig an ism .    b e re a v e d in th is d isa s te r a n d in th e a p p re c ia tio n o f
  T h e re is a re c o rd o f a n 18 y e a r-o ld su p p o rte r o f            th e m a g n ifice n t w o rk th a t w as d o n e o n th e field a n d
  T o tte n h a m H o ts p u r b e in g k n ife d in B elgium , fo r            o u tsid e th e g ro u n d , p a rtic u la rly b y th e in h a b ita n ts
  w hich n o o n e w as b ro u g h t to tria l. W ill th e                      o f th e lo cality o f H illsb o ro u g h all th ro u g h th e nigh t.
  G o v e rn m e n t give c o n s id e ra tio n im m e d ia te ly to th e          I sh o u ld like to a sk th e n o b le E a rl tw o q u e stio n s.
  re m o v a l o f th o se b a rs, w h ich p la y e d a m a jo r p a r t in     F irst, in view o f th e im p lic a tio n s o f th e d isa s te r fo r
  th e a p p a llin g seq u e n c e o f e v e n ts a t H illsb o ro u g h on    th e G o v e rn m e n t’s o b je c tiv e in th e F o o tb a ll
  S a tu rd ay ?     .                                                          S p ec tato rs B ill o f in c re a sin g safety in fo o tb a ll
                                                                                g ro u n d s, d o th e G o v e rn m e n t n o t c o n sid e r th a t th e
  4 p.m .                                                                       p ro g ress o f th e B ill sh o u ld b e su sp e n d e d , a t least
                                                                                u n til th e p re lim in a ry re p o rt o f th e ju d ic ia l c o m m itte e
     E a rl F e rre rs: M y L o rd s, th e n o b le L o rd , L o rd
                                                                                is p u b lish e d ?
  D e a n o f B esw ick, a sk e d w h e th e r safety c o n d itio n s
  w ould b e c o n sid e re d . H e w ill rea lise th a t u n d e r th e            Secondly, I h a v e k n o w th e H illsb o ro u g h g ro u n d
  te rm s o f re fe ren ce o f th e in q u iry , L o rd Ju stic e T a y lo r    a n d its s u rro u n d in g a re a fo r m a n y y ea rs. I sh o u ld
  w ill b e in a p o s itio n to c o n sid e r th o se safety                   lik e to ra ise w ith th e n o b le E a rl o n e p o in t w h ich h a s
  c o n d itio n s if h e th in k s fit.                                        n o t b een ra ise d so fa r. It is a p o in t a b o u t w hich I
                                                                                d o u b t w h e th e r h e h a s a n y k now ledge a n d h e m a y
     T h e n o b le L o rd a sk e d w h e th e r su p p o rte rs w ill be
                                                                                n o t b e ab le to a n sw e r m y q u e stio n th is a fte rn o o n . I f

•    elu d ed in th e in q u iry . T h a t w ill n o t b e so.

     L ord D ea n o f B esw ick: W hy?
                                                                                h e c an n o t, I h o p e th a t h e w ill d ra w it to th e a tte n tio n
                                                                                o f h is rig h t h o n o u ra b le frie n d a n d see th a t a n an sw er
                                                                                is given.
     E a rl F e rre rs: M y L o rd s, if th e n o b le L o rd w ill                I h av e ta lk e d to p e o p le w h o sp e n t all n ig h t c o m fo r­
  c o n ta in h im se lf, I sh all e x p la in . T h e in q u iry is to be      tin g th e b e re a v e d a n d h e lp in g to o rg a n ise th e m in
  c o n d u c te d by L o rd Ju stic e T a y lo r, w ho w ill h av e            th e grisly ta sk o f id e n tify in g th e d e a d b o d ie s o f th e ir
  w ith h im a n a ssesso r— o r m o re th a n o n e assesso r—                 re la tiv e s a n d frie n d s. T h a t p ro c ess w en t o n u n til th e
  in o rd e r th a t h e m a y re a c h h is co n clu sio n s as q u ickly      e arly h o u rs o f S u n d a y m o rn in g .
  as p ossible. It is n o t th e in te n tio n to h a v e a w hole                 T h e re p o rts th a t I h a v e h a d at first h a n d in d ic a te
  range o f in d iv id u a ls to assist h im , a lth o u g h h e can           th a t th e re w as v e ry little d ire c tio n , n o le a d e rsh ip ,
  call u p o n a ssista n ce a n d ad v ic e as h e th in k s fit.             a n d a g reat d e al o f ch ao s. A g reat d ea l o f p a in w as
    T h e n o b le L o rd sa id th a t so m e tim e s in th e p a st           su ffered by th o se w h o h a d to w a it u n til th e early
 th e re h a s b een a w h itew ash . I th o u g h t th a t th a t             h o u rs o f th e m o rn in g fo r th e p ro c e ss o f id e n tifi­
 re m a rk w as u n fo rtu n a te . I can assu re th e n o b le L o rd         c atio n . C a n th e n o b le E a rl say w h o is re sp o n sib le
 th a t th e re is n o in te n tio n o f a n y w h itew ash . W h at           fo r th e o rg a n isa tio n o f th e so cial serv ices a n d th e
 h as h a p p e n e d is a n a b so lu te d isa ste r. W e w a n t to          essen tia l h e lp fo r th o se w h o fin d th e m se lv e s in th a t
 fin d th e b e st w ay o f e n su rin g so fa r as w e can th a t             d istre ssin g situ a tio n in such a d isa ste r? T h is ap p lies
 it does n o t h a p p e n ag ain .                                            to all d isasters. Is th e re a n y c e n tra l agency th a t can
                                                                               o rg an ise th e m a n y w illin g h e lp e rs? A s I u n d e rs ta n d
( ■ L o r d T ay lo r o f B lac k b u rn : M y L o rd s, I sh o u ld           — an d I stress, as I u n d e rs ta n d — fro m th o se w ho
  lik e to ask th e n o b le E a rl a q u e stio n re g a rd in g th e         p a rtic ip a te d , th e re ,w a s v irtu a lly n o d ire c tio n , no
  assessor. I d o n o t b e lie v e th a t th e H o m e O ffice has            le a d e rsh ip a n d n o o rg a n isa tio n .
  realised th e im p lic a tio n s. T h e c h ie f co n sta b le w ho
  has been ask ed to serv e as a n assesso r is a very                            E a rl F e rre rs: M y L o rd s, w h e th e r o r n o t th o se
  resp ected c h ie f c o n sta b le a n d a p e rso n a l frie n d o f        m a tte rs to w h ich th e n o b le L o rd , L o rd H a tc h o f
  m in e. N ev erth eless, ta k in g in to a c c o u n t th e fact th a t      L usby, re ferred a re fact w ill u n d o u b te d ly com e o u t
  th e in q u iry w ill be c o n d u c te d by a n e m in e n t law yer        in L o rd Ju stice T a y lo r’s in q u iry . I can te ll th e n o b le
  a n d a c h ie f c o n sta b le , I feel th a t it w o u ld b e w ise fo r   L o rd th a t w hen a n y th in g o f su ch a n a tu re h a p p e n s,
  th e H o m e O ffice to a p p o in t a n o th e r p e rso n a n d to         th e      em ergency         serv ice s— fire,         p o lic e      and
 n a m e th a t o th e r p e rso n . I ac ce p t th a t th e ju d g e can      a m b u la n c e — ta k e th e lea d . T h e re are p la n s fo r
 call u p o n o th e r assesso rs, b u t I th in k th a t it w ou ld           d ealin g w ith d isa ste rs o f th is n a tu re . I h a v e n o t h e a rd
 b e a d v isa b le fo r th e H o m e O ffice to n a m e a n o th e r          re p o rts w h ich lead m e to b e lie v e th a t th e s itu a tio n
 assessor fro m o u tsid e th e legal p ro fessio n o r th e                   w as as th e n ob le L o rd , L o rd H a tc h , h a s suggested.
 p o lice a u th o ritie s.
                                                                                  T h e n oble L o rd re fe rre d to th e F o o tb a ll S p e c ta to rs
                                                                               B ill. As I e x p lain ed e a rlie r, th e G o v e rn m e n t th in k it
    E a rl F e rre rs: M y L o rd s, I q u ite see th e p o in t o f           seem ly to d elay th e p ro g re ss o f th e F o o tb a ll
 view o f th e n o b le L o rd , L o rd T a y lo r. T h e S ta te m e n t      S p ec tato rs B ill fo r a sh o rt tim e in d e fe re n c e to w h at
 states:
                                                                               has happened.
         ®r' an Johnson, the C hief Constable o f Lancashire, has
 agreed to assist the inquiry as an assessor; and arrangements will
  e made as necessary for other qualified assessors to be appointed               L o rd H a tc h of L u sby : M y L o rd s, is th e n o b le E arl
 an ror the inquiry to be provided with technical advice and                   assu rin g th e H o u se th a t th e ju d ic ia l in q u iry w ill
 support .
                                                                               in c lu d e a n e x a m in a tio n o f w h a t h a p p e n e d d u rin g
 O th e r assessors can a n d w ill b e p ro v id e d .                        th e n ig h t follow ing th e d isa ste r?
567                           W a te r                               t LORDS ]                                    B ill                                568

   E a rl F e rre rs: N o , m y L o rd s. T h e ju d ic ia l in q u iry          w hich th e in te n tio n w as to p riv a tise th e 10 w a te r
h as its o w n te rm s o f refe ren c e. T h ey w o u ld enable                  a u th o ritie s as th ey sto o d o n th e b asis o f th e riv e r
L o rd Ju stic e T a y lo r to co v er th o se p o in ts if he                   c a tc h m e n t a rea s, o n w h ich b asis th e y h a d b e en
th o u g h t it a p p ro p ria te .                                              c rea te d in th e W a te r A ct o f 1973.
                                                                                     H o w ev er, in d u e course, th e G o v e rn m e n t chan g ed
                             Water Bill                                          th e ir m in d . T h ey w ere su b je cted to a c o n sid e ra b le
                                                                                 a m o u n t o f p re ssu re fro m v ary in g in te re sts, a n d a fte r
 4 .8 p .m .                                                                     th e 1987 e le c tio n th ey cam e fo rw a rd w ith th e
    S econd R e a d in g d e b a te resu m ed .                                  p ro p o sa ls th a t w e now h av e b efo re us. I b eliev e th a t
                                                                                 it w o u ld b e a p ity if, b ecau se th e G o v e rn m e n t h a v e
   L ord E zra: M y L o rd s, th e p riv a tis a tio n o f w a te r is           ch anged th e ir m in d — n o d o u b t o n re aso n ab le
p ro b a b ly th e m o st c o n tro v e rsia l o f th e p riv a tisa tio n       g ro u n d s— w e sh o u ld in any w ay d e m e a n th e v ery
m e asu res w h ich th is G o v e rn m e n t h av e in tro d u c e d .           s u b sta n tia l c o n trib u tio n m a d e by th e w a te r
I th in k it rig h t to recall briefly th e w ay in w hich th e ir               a u th o ritie s o n th e riv e r c a tc h m e n t b asis. In itia lly ,
th in k in g o n p riv a tis a tio n a p p e a rs to h av e d ev elo p ed .      w h en th e G o v e rn m e n t cam e o u t w ith th e ir ch an g ed
                                                                                 p ro p o sa ls, th e c h a irm e n o f th e w a te r a u th o ritie s
    In itia lly th e in te n tio n w as to tra n s fe r to th e p riv a te       w ere v irtu a lly u n a n im o u s in th e ir o p p o sitio n to th e
se c to r fro m th e p u b lic se c to r th o se e n te rp rise s w hich         p ro p o sa l. T h e y sin ce a p p e a r to h a v e c o m e ro u n d .
c o u ld re sp o n d p o sitiv e ly to c o m p e titio n ; nam ely,
th o se w h ich w ere e ith e r a lre a d y in a co m p e titiv e                   W e a re no w c o n c e rn e d w ith th e new p ro p o sa ls.
s itu a tio n o r p o te n tia lly in o n e. Such b o d ies fo r                 T h e re a re u n d o u b te d ly very grave d o u b ts a b o u t th e
e x am p le as A m e rsh a m In te rn a tio n a l, Jag u ar,                     m a tte r, as th e n o b le L o rd , L o rd M c In to sh o f
A sso c ia te d B ritish P o rts, N a tio n a l F reig h t, N a tio n a l        H a rin g ey , m e n tio n e d . As reg ard s co n su m e rs, th e re
B us, B rito il, w ere tra n sfe rre d .                                         has p ro b a b ly n o t so fa r b een a m e a su re so
                                                                                 u n p o p u la r— c e rta in ly n o t am o n g p riv a tis a tio n
    T h a t p o licy seem ed to b e c o n firm e d in th e                       m e a su re s— w h ich h as stru ck th e p u b lic im a g in a tio n .
 C o n se rv a tiv e P a rty ’s m a n ife sto in 1983. T h a t stated:           N o b le L o rd s w ill h a v e seen th e m an y re p o rts o n
  “ Merely to replace state monopolies with private ones would                   c o n su m e rs’ re a c tio n s. I h av e in fro n t o f m e o n e o f
be to waste an historic opportunity” .
                                                                                 th e la te s t w h ic h I receiv ed th is m o rn in g fro m th e
C learly, h e re w as a sta te m e n t o f in te n t th a t, w hen               C o n su m e rs A sso c ia tio n . It co n d u c te d su rv ey s in
th e re w ere tra n sfe rs fro m th e p u b lic to th e p riv a te               N o v e m b e r a n d F ebruary' a n d n o tic e d very little
secto r, th e y sh o u ld b e w ith in th e fram e w o rk o f                    chang e in c o n su m e rs’ resp o n se. I d o n o t w ish to go
c o m p e titio n . H o w ev er, th a t p o licy seem ed to be                   in to d e ta il, b u t th e re p o rt stated :
m o d ifie d in d u e co u rse. W h e n th e G o v e rn m e n t                   “For every positive com ment—for example, that service or
tu rn e d th e ir a tte n tio n to th e p riv a tis a tio n o f w hat            water quality would get better—we recorded 11 negative ones” .
h a d p re v io u sly b e en reg ard ed as p u b lic u tilitie s, th a t         R ig h tly o r w rongly th e re fo re th e re is a p e rc e p tio n o f
ra ise d a n e n tire ly new issue. T h e re w as th e n very                    serio u s d o u b t a b o u t th e m ea su re in th e p u b lic m in d .
little escap e fro m th e fact th a t, in tra n sfe rrin g th o se               I sh o u ld h av e th o u g h t it im p o rta n t fo r P a rlia m e n t
m assiv e o rg a n isa tio n s to th e p riv a te sector, th ey                  to try to allay th o se d o u b ts in w h a te v e r w ays w e can.
w o u ld be so tra n s fe rre d e ith e r as to ta l m o n o p o lies
o r as q u asi m o n o p lies. T h a t ra ise d th e w hole d ifficu lt             A s re g a rd s e n v iro n m e n ta l gro u p s, th e y to o a re
q u e stio n o f re g u la tio n .                                               very d u b io u s a b o u t th e im p a c t o f th e m easu res.
                                                                                 G rav e c o n c e rn h a s b een reg istered by a w h o le v a rie ty
    O u r first e x p e rien c e o f th a t m a tte r w as w ith                 o f g ro u p s in w h ic h M em b ers o f all sid es o f th is H o u se
T eleco m . I d o n o t believ e th a t o n e can say th a t th e                a re m u c h in v o lv e d . T h a t m a tte r w ill u n d o u b te d ly be
first few m o n th s at an y ra te o f th e ex p erien ce o f th e               d ea lt w ith la te r. So fa r as w e o n th e se B en ch es are
p riv a tis e d T ele co m o rg a n isa tio n w as reg a rd ed as                c o n c e rn e d , m y n o b le frie n d L o rd R o ss o f N e w p o rt
e n tire ly successful, a lth o u g h , to b e fair, it is m ak in g             w ill d ea l w ith th a t m a tte r w h en h e speaks.
very g reat e ffo rts to rec o v e r fro m th a t exp erien ce
now . T h e n th e re w as th e e x am p le o f th e gas in d u stry               T h e n o b le L o rd , L o rd M c In to sh o f H arin g ey ,
w h ich w as sim p ly tra n s fe rre d as it sto o d as a p u b lic             e x p ressed th e d o u b ts th a t p o te n tia l in v e sto rs h av e
m o n o p o ly in to th e p riv a te secto r, in sp ite o f m an y              ex p ressed a b o u t th is so rt o f in v e stm e n t w ith its
q u a lm s b e in g ex p ressed o n th is side o f th e H ouse.                 severe a n d re stric tiv e reg u latio n . T h e re a re th e re fo re
W h ile th e re w as so m e d egree o f re g u latio n fo r th e                d o u b ts a ll ro u n d . I b eliev e th a t w e sh all h a v e to b e a r
d o m e stic m a rk e t, th e re w as n o n e at all fo r th e                  th o se d o u b ts in m in d as w e go th ro u g h th e v a rio u s
in d u s tria l m a rk e t. In d u e co u rse, th a t m a tte r w as            stages o f d e alin g w ith th e Bill.
re fe rre d to th e M o n o p o lie s C o m m issio n w hich ru led                A g ain st th a t b a ck g ro u n d , I sh o u ld lik e to d ra w
th a t th e re h a d b e e n a n ab u se o f m o n o p o ly .                   a tte n tio n to so m e o f th e specific issues w h ich I feel
C o rre c tiv e a c tio n h a s n ow b ee n tak en . T h a t lesson             w ill a ttra c t a good d e a l o f a tte n tio n w h en w e com e
a p p e a rs to h a v e b e e n le a rn t reg a rd in g th e ele ctric ity      to la te r stag es. L et us sta rt w ith th e N a tio n a l R iv e rs
in d u stry , a n d e ffo rts a re b e in g m a d e to in tro d u c e a         A u th o rity . I b e liev e th a t th e N R A c o n c e p t, as it h a s
d egree o f c o m p e titio n a t th e g e n eratin g en d .                    now d e v e lo p e d , h as o b ta in e d p re tty stro n g su p p o rt.
    H o w ev er, in th e case o f w ater, it is d iffic u lt to                 W e h e a rd th a t p o in t m a d e by th e n o b le L o rd , L o rd
see h ow a n y m a jo r ele m en t o f c o m p e titio n can be                 M c In to sh o f H arin g ey , a n d w e o n th e se B enches
in tro d u c e d . T h a t raises th e w ho le q u e stio n o f th e            su p p o rt th e c o n ce p t. It is sa tisfa c to ry to n o te th a t,
w ay in w h ich it is b e in g h a n d le d . In itially , w h en th e          in h is o rg a n s a tio n o f th e m a tte r, th e n o b le L o rd ,
G o v e rn m e n t a n n o u n c e d th e ir in te n tio n to p riv a tise      L o rd C rick h o w ell, p u ts th e e m p h asis o n its re g io n al
w a te r, th e y d id so in th e W h ite P a p e r o f 1986 in                I o rg a n isa tio n . T h a t is fine; b u t I am a little d istu rb e d
 19               Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                    17   A P R I L 1989           Hillsborough Stadium Disaster              20

          Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                                        Lord Justice Taylor will visit Sheffield tom orrow to begin
                                                                               his investigation. I am grateful to him for agreeing to
3.30 pm                                                                        undertake this task.
                                                                                   However, we need also to take a wider view. The
    The Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr.                        Government believe that the future o f football in this
 Douglas Hurd): W ith permission, Mr. Speaker, I should
                                                                               country lies in a national membership scheme in
 like to make a statem ent about the disaster at the Sheffield
                                                                               designated grounds— [ In te rru p tio n .]—and now, it seems,
W ednesday football club ground a t Hillsborough on
                                                                               also in providing all-seated accom m odation a t m ajor
 Saturday. Everyone has been horrified by this incredible
                                                                               football clubs. This would involve the disappearance o f
 tragedy in which 94 lost their lives and 174 were injured.
                                                                               terraces a t those grounds. It m ight also involve
    Shortly after the start o f the match, there was a surge of
                                                                               amendments to strengthen the Football Spectators Bill so
 spectators on the Leppings lane terrace, which crushed
                                                                               that its provision for the licensing o f grounds m atched this
m any at the front against the perimeter fence. This
                                                                               concept. We shall be considering these m atters urgently.
 accounted for m ost o f the deaths and injuries.
    The m atch was due to start at 3 pm. To help ensure                            An appeal fund is being set up by the civic authorities
 orderly access, the gates o f the ground were opened at 12                    o f Liverpool, N ottingham and Sheffield. The G overnm ent
 noon. A t 2.30 pm m ost o f the N ottingham fans were in the                  will be contributing £500,000 immediately tow ards this
ground, but m any o f the Liverpool supporters were still                      fund.
 arriving. It was clear to the police officers in charge that                      This was a devastating tragedy. O ur deep sympathy
 there was ample capacity still to be filled in some parts o f                 goes to the families o f those who died, to those recovering,
 the enclosure allocated to Liverpool.                                         and—particularly moving yesterday—to those young
    A t about 2.45 pm there was a large crowd o f Liverpool                    people who are still fighting for life and health. We owe a
 supporters a t the turnstiles in Leppings lane behind the                     duty, it seems to us, to these passionate supporters o f
west stand. There was difficulty in coping with the pressure                   football to examine urgently and thoroughly the causes
 on the turnstiles, and the police used loud hailers to urge                   and the background, and to do all in our power to prevent
 the crowd to be patient. A t about 2.50, more Liverpool                       such a thing from happening again. W e have to set our
 supporters arrived and the numbers in front of the                            sights high and find a better way for British football.
 turnstiles increased. Some supporters started to climb the
walls and turnstiles, and those at the front o f the crowd                          M r. Roy H attersley (Birmingham, Sparkbrook): M ay I,
 outside the stadium were under considerable pressure from                      first o f all, offer the deepest sympathy o f my right hon. and
 those behind.                                                                  hon. Friends and myself to all those who were injured in
    The senior police officer present considered that there                     or bereaved by this terrible tragedy. Little that we say will
was a possible danger to the lives o f the spectators at the                     help them a t this m om ent, but I hope th a t they find some
 front o f the crowd outside the stadium. In order to relieve                   com fort in the knowledge th at the whole country shares
 the pressure, he arranged for an exit gate near the                             their grief and suffering. We also offer our hopes for a full
turnstiles to be opened to let a section o f the crowd                           recovery to those 17 patients still in intensive care.
through. The relationship o f that action to the disaster on                        M ay I also express our gratitude to and our adm iration
the terrace shortly afterwards is clearly a central question                    for all those individuals who did such rem arkable work
to be investigated.                                                             saving lives, com forting the dying, and helping the injured
    M y right hon. Friend the Prime Minister and I                              —police, fire officers, the am bulance service, St. John
yesterday visited the football ground and the two Sheffield                     Ambulance Brigade, doctors and nurses, the staff o f the
hospitals which received casualties. I should like to pay                       club, and the football supporters w ho acted with such
tribute to all those involved in the rescue operations at the                   great discipline and compassion?
ground, including the m any spectators who gave their                               M ay I go on to welcome the Home Secretary’s decision
help, and to those others, including the hospital staffs and                    to set up a public inquiry, and express our hope th at ill
voluntary agencies, who have since been working so hard                         report will lead to immediate and decisive action? May?!
treating the injured and consoling the bereaved. We heard                       ask the Hom e Secretary about the police inquiry th at is to
m any accounts o f courage exerted On behalf o f others.                        be carried out a t the same time? C an we be assured that
    I have asked for further factual reports from the police                    neither its proceedings nor its conclusions will delay d t
an d other services, the local authority and the Football                       inhibit the public inquiry that he has announced today!
Association. Inquests will be held in due course. But over                      We need an unequivocal and authoritative account o f
and above this, there is clearly need for a full and                           w hat happened a t Hillsborough, why it happened, and
independent inquiry to identify the causes o f the disaster                    w hat m ust be done to prevent such a thing from ever
and to examine w hat needs to be done to prevent such an                        happening again. On the face o f it, two parallel inquiries
accident happening again. I have therefore asked Lord                          are not the best way to achieve th at result.
Justice Taylor to carry ou t an inquiry with the following                         The report emanating from the public inquiry m ust be
terms o f reference:                                                           followed by a reorganisation o f football ground control,
     “T o in q u ire in to th e events a t Sheffield W ednesday
fo o tb all g ro u n d o n 15 A pril 1989 a n d to m ake recom m enda­
                                                                               which may take some time to achieve. I refer, for example,
tio n s a b o u t th e needs o f crow d c o n tro l an d safety at sports      to the replacement o f terraces with seats. But some action
g ro u n d s.”                                                   .             m ust be taken a t once. Will the H om e Secretary issue an
M r. Brian Johnson, the chief constable of Lancashire, has                     immediate instruction to those safety committees and chief
agreed to assist the inquiry as an assessor, and                               constables who have insisted upon football clubs installing
arrangem ents will be made as necessary for other qualified                    perimeter fences? M any football clubs have w arned for
assessors to be appointed and for the inquiry t ° b e                          years that perim eter fencing is a potential danger. On
provided with technical advice and support. I a® as*cin8                       Saturday it proved lethal. It m ust n o t be m aintained where
that the inquiry should proceed w ith all possible speed.                      lives are put a t risk.

   20 CD39/1 Job 1-1
   20      21                 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster        17 APRIL 1989              Hillsborough Stadium Disaster             22

>egm           We assume that the recommendations o f the public             to get through it, often in vain, can believe th at the right
g to       inquiry will concern crowd control outside the turnstiles         answer was found on that occasion. It m ust be for Lord
           and on the way to matches—not simply organisation and             Justice Taylor and the inquiry to look into that. He is
 The       accommodation inside grounds. In the light o f that, will         aware—I discussed the m atter with him this m orning—
  this     the Home Secretary consider the implications o f any              that if he believes, as he may well, that there are certain
; in       policy or legislation that results in concentration o f crowds    matters—perhaps this one—that require an urgent interim
ems,       outside grounds immediately before matches? The                   report, so that steps can be taken in advance o f the next
lajor      potential consequences o f football supporters being held in      football season, he will be able to do that.
* of       large numbers outside turnstiles was demonstrated                     The right hon. Gentlem an referred to the Football
/olve      yesterday. Nothing must be done to make such                      Spectators Bill. The next stage o f the Bill was to have been
ill so     concentrations more likely o r more frequent.                     Third Reading in another place, on M onday next. We
1this          Most informed opinion, including that o f the police,         believe that the House and the other place will agree th at
ntly.      insists that the concentration o f supporters outside             it is seemly to have a short delay in that. Perhaps after that
rities     turnstiles would be the certain result o f part I o f the         delay, the best course would be for the Bill to complete its
ment       Football Spectators Bill. This m orning’s decision to push        stages in the other place so that any additions that we
  this     that Bill through Parliam ent even while the inquiry is           propose in the light o f my earlier statem ent can be
           sitting is neither rational nor sensitive to the mood o f the     introduced when it comes to this House. In the first
           country. We shall oppose it with every legitimate means at        instance, that is a m atter for the usual channels in another
iathy
           our disposal.                                                     place.
ring,
oun^^          I offer the co-operation o f the Opposition for any
                                                                                Several Hon. Members rose ------
> w e1 ^   legislation th at is genuinely concerned with football safety.
rs o f     Indeed, I do more: I assure the Home Secretary o f my                Mr. Speaker: Order. I know that I speak for the whole
juses      party’s profound wish th at proposals on safety a t football      House when I say that we are all appalled a t this tragedy.
.went      grounds can be made with the general support o f all              O ur sympathy goes out to the relatives o f those who have
           political parties and wholly free from political controversy.     been killed and to the injured. It may not be possible for
t our
           It will clearly be in the interests o f everybody to obtain       me to call every hon. M ember who wishes to ask a
           unanimous agreement on a subject that has nothing                 question, but I propose to give precedence to those whose
[ay I,     whatever to do with party politics. I ask the Home                constituencies are m ost directly affected.
. and      Secretary to try to achieve that agreement.
                                                                                 Mr. David Blunkett (Sheffield, Brightside): As the
ed in          Mr. Hurd: I am grateful for the earlier part o f the right    Member o f Parliam ent representing the area th at covers
y will     hon. Gentlem an’s statement, which expressed sentiments           the ground and the N orthern general hospital, I wish to
some       on which the House is united. He raised several particular        reiterate what has already been said in paying tribute to
hares      points. The chief constable o f South Yorkshire took the          those who helped, in the ground, in the community around
a full     view, which I think the right hon. Gentleman will probably        and at the two m ajor hospitals in Sheffield, to deal w ith the
           consider right, that since the actions o f some o f his force     dead and injured. I offer my sympathy and those o f
ation      will be central to any inquiry, it is right that another force,   colleagues in the city o f Sheffield to the bereaved and to
work       and one with experience in these m atters, should                 those families whose relatives have been injured. I am sure
jured      undertake the police work that is necessary both in               that we all w ant to consider every possible way o f avoiding
John       preparation for inquests and to submit the necessary              such an incident ever occurring again.
>f the     information to Lord Taylor’s inquiry. Therefore, he made              I ask the Home Secretary to confirm th at the Sheffield
 sua       the announcem ent to which the right hon. Gentleman               Wednesday football club has done m ore than m ost clubs
           referred. I do not think th at there is any confusion or          in investing more than £1 million over the past 10 years in
usion      duplication. The work to be carried out by the chief              improving safety and facilities in a ground th a t m ust be
at its     constable o f the W est M idlands force will be a t the service   one of the best o f the top two o r three football league
la y I     o f Lord Justice Taylor, and will not cut across w hat he         grounds in the country.
: is to    does.                                                                 I hope that the Home Secretary will confirm that the
I th at        The right hon. Gentlem an spoke about barriers and            inquiry will accept the task o f considering how we might
ly or      perimeter fencing, and it is w orth answering th at point in      change the image o f football. Will it be possible for us to
>day?      a little detail. As the right hon. Gentlem an knows, they are     take a fresh look at how we treat football spectators? The
nt o f     not a statutory requirement, but they are in m any places a       behaviour of a few has led to a concentration on actions
   and     requirement imposed by the local authorities as a                 and attitudes whereby fans are treated as hooligans, or
  ever     condition o f the safety certificate, which is required under     potential hooligans, rather than as hum an beings.
uiries     the law. The purpose o f the barriers and in particular of            No one would condone the pressure and the late arrival
           the perimeter fences is to increase security and improve          o f fans outside the game on Saturday, b u t we w ant to see
ist be     protection from one type o f threat—that o f violence.            facilities for entertainm ent, catering and com fort in
itro l,         Mr. Hattersley: N ot violence—hooliganism.                   grounds begin to restore decency and a sense o f purpose.
mple,                                                                        I speak as someone who sat on a small wall behind the goal
ction         Mr. Hurd: T hat is their purpose. We have yet to find          at H ills b o ro u g h when I was a child w ithout fear or
ue an      satisfactory means o f ensuring that, in removing one             anything happening to m e or to those around me.
 chief     hazard, the authorities do not create another.                        I ask the Home Secretary to reject the alleged statem ent
ailing        The Home Office guidance, which the right hon.                 this afternoon by the president o f U EFA , in which he
d for      Gentleman will have studied, specifically lays down the           described fans as “beasts” . I hope th at the H om e Secretary
 . On      importance o f exits on to the pitch through the perimeter        will say that we shall restore dignity and a sense o f decency
vhere      fence for emergency purposes. N o one who saw the fence           to our football supporters and to the viewing o f football in
           and the gate a t Hillsborough or listened to those who tried      Britain.

                21 CD39/2 Job 1-3
23                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster          17 APRIL 1989              Hillsborough Stadium Disaster             24

   M r. Hurd: I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his             It is a tragedy th at should never have happened. The
comments. I agree willingly th at Sheffield Wednesday has         people o f Liverpool in particular are in deep m ourning but
put massive investment into m odern facilities at the             there is also a m easure o f anger because, as has been urged
Hillsborough ground. The terms o f reference of Lord              elsewhere, they feel th at steps should have been taken well
Justice Taylor are wide and will enable him to range over         before the m atch to avoid such things happening.
w hat he thinks is essential. I agree th at those whom my             Although the attitude th at the Governm ent have
right hon. Friend the Prime M inister and I visited               adopted has been sympathetic, m ay I urge th a n n o t to go
yesterday in the hospitals were hum an beings who had             ahead at the m oment with their proposals? Please be
suffered greatly in body and, sometimes, in mind as well.         sensitive to the feelings o f our people. Is the Home
N o one who m ade those visits could conceivably think of         Secretary aware that I have, recently, received letters from
them in any other way.                                            some o f those who died urging that the Government
    I agree also with the main thrust o f the question of the     should not introduce the scheme because they felt that it
hon. M ember for Sheffield, Brightside (M r. Blunkett). It is     would add to the existing problems? I urge the
by building up the com fort and the conditions o f the game       Governm ent, please desist a t least until the report is
and its high reputation that we can attract m ore and more        published. Let us have another look a t the situation.
people to become spectators and restore the attractiveness            M ay I also urge the G overnm ent to take some
o f the game. T hat will m ean raising our sights, and            immediate steps? F or G od’s sake, do not let our people be
thinking o f new ways o f doing that. T hat is why we have        trapped like animals again. I am an Evertonian—I do not
come to the conclusion that seated accommodation in the           often attend Liverpool matches and I was n o t at this one
larger stadiums is an im portant p a rt o f the objective which   —but I saw on television the agony and the dreadful scenes
the hon. G entlem an states.                                       when young people, children and others had their lives
                                                                  crushed out o f them, not only because o f the perimeter
   Sir Bernard Braine (Castle Point): O ur hearts go out to        fences but because o f the barriers. We m ust ensure that this
the bereaved families, but surely our thoughts should be          never happens again anywhere in the country.
concentrated on w hat lessons should be learnt for general
                                                                      Those who are in authority and who had n o t foreseen
application thoughout the country. M y right hon. Friend
                                                                   that such a situation could develop cannot run away from
the H om e Secretary did not refer to one pressing matter.
                                                                   their responsibilities. The last thing that I w ant to do is to
Is he aw are that, over the past three years, ever since the
                                                                   create a scapegoat and I do n o t w ant to condemn the
inquiry o f M r. Justice Popplewell, the St. John Ambulance
                                                                   policeman outside the ground who m ade a decision,
Brigade, which has unrivalled experience in providing first
                                                                   thinking, perhaps, that he was saving lives. I ju st w ant us
aid a t sports grounds, has been pressing the Home Office,
                                                                   to look a t the whole situation again, again and again, so
local authorities and the Football Association to provide
                                                                   that such a tragedy does not happen again.
much higher standards o f medical care and equipment at
football stadium s throughout the country.                             The interests o f the spectators should be put before the
                                                                   interests o f everybody else. They m ust be treated as
   I f it has n o t been possible outside London to achieve
                                                                   civilised hum an beings, n o t as the enemies o f society. Yes,
these standards—in L ondon it has been all right—will my
                                                                   a few enemies o f society m ay get into football grounds
right hon. Friend take appropriate action in advance of the
                                                                   from time to time, but our lovely people o f Liverpool—
inquiry? There is clearly a need to ensure that in any
                                                                   and those elsewhere—m ust never suffer again because they
breakdow n where injury is inflicted, the rescue services and
                                                                   have suffered too much already.
the magnificient w ork done by the St. John Ambulance
Brigade are not frustrated by a lack o f proper facilities.
                                                                     M r. H urd: Anyone who watched on television the
    M r. H urd: M y right hon. Friend is right to draw            reaction o f people in Liverpool, particularly at the services
attention to the criticisms that have been made. He may           in and outside the cathedrals yesterday, will know th at the
have heard the doctor from Glasgow give his considered            hon. Gentlem an was right in the way th at he started his
talk on th at m atter on the radio this m orning. I understand    question. There is also absolutely no doubt from w hat we
th at before the m atch began two ambulances were at the          heard yesterday that the hon. Gentlem an is right to talk
ground together with attendants from the St. John                 about people being trapped, crushed and helpless. T hat
Ambulance Brigade. The first call for additional                  leads back to the point about perim eter fences. The hon.
ambulances was received by the am bulance service at eight        Gentlem an is right also to advise against a rush to
minutes past three and within 17 minutes a total of 10            judgm ent. Yesterday, we listened to m any accounts o f
additional ambulances had attended. We spoke yesterday            w hat happened from casualties and witnesses. The broad
to the head o f the am bulance service. Its record o f quick      thrust o f w hat they said tallied. However, there were
recourse is a good one. However, it does not help with my         discrepancies—as there usually are—on m any im portant
right hon. Friend’s point about the facilities already at the      points o f detail. It is for precisely that reason that an
ground. I imagine th at th at is a m atter to which Lord          inquiry is needed.
Justice Taylor will w ant to give urgent attention.                  There is no particular difficulty about p a rt II o f the
                                                                   Football Spectators Bill. As to p art I, the national
    M r. Eric S. Heffer (Liverpool, W alton): These are           membership scheme is designed as a remedy against
probably the m ost difficult questions th at I have ever had      violence. Violence was n o t present a t Hillsborough on
to ask in the H ouse o f Commons. I say that because many         Saturday, b u t it has been the curse o f the game and might
o f my constituents and m any o f the constituents o f my         be again unless we find the right remedy. The remedy in the
colleagues who represent Liverpool and Merseyside, as             Bill flows from the Popplewell report on the last disaster
well as elsewhere, are dead o r injured because o f the great     — [ In te rru p tio n .] In considering the H illsborough disas­
tragedy a t H illsborough. I am thinking o f the families and     ter, it would be foolish to forget the lessons o f earlier
o f the people who are bereaved.                                  disasters.

     22 CD39/3 Job 1-6
  24
            25                 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster         17 APRIL 1989              Hillsborough Stadium Disaster             26
The
               The action th at we propose is reasonable. I mentioned         membership scheme or from th at o f designated grounds,
but
            the parliam entary delay that we believe to be seemly. I          for reasons that I have already given. I f Lord Justice
ged
            mentioned also that we want to go forward and not back            Taylor wishes to com m ent on that, nothing in his terms o f
well
            on the Football Spectators Bill and on the concept o f a          reference will prevent him from doing so.
            national membership scheme, which we believe to be
lave        necessary and right. We m ust go forward, to see whether              Mr. Menzies Campbell (Fife, N orth-East): On behalf o f
>go         the Bill’s licensing provisions need to be strengthened, to       my right hon. and hon. Friends, let me offer my sympathy
  be        make possible the move to all-seated accom m odation in           to the bereaved and injured. Let me also acknowledge the
jme         big stadiums, which we believe is the right way to proceed.       efforts o f those who rendered assistance, especially the
rom         There will be consultations and discussions about that            unsung acts o f heroism perform ed by m any young people.
lent        possibility. If we reach the conclusion that the Bill needs to        I should like to press the Hom e Secretary a little on the
it it       be altered and strengthened in that way, we shall bring that      scope o f the inquiry. Will it be wide enough to enable the
 the        conclusion to the House.                                          inquiry to consider whether lessons should have been
t is                                                                          learned from an alleged incident in 1981, in the same p art
                 Sir Neil M acfarlane (Sutton and Cheam): Is my right         o f the same ground? It is said th at there was severe
Dine        hon. Friend aware that right hon. and hon. Members in all         overcrowding on that occasion, but mercifully no one was
e be        parts o f the House wholeheartedly share his sentiments           killed or injured.
 not        about the heroic acts that took place on Saturday? I shall            The Home Secretary would receive support from both
one         be grateful if he will address his mind to two points that I      sides o f the House if he took a m uch m ore robust attitude
;nes^~      will put to him. I associate myself in many ways with the         to the football membership scheme. M any o f us feel that
iives^P     comments o f the hon. M ember for Liverpool, W alton (M r.        even proceeding .;i the way th a t he has outlined will
eter        Heffer). Will my right hon. Friend confirm that the inquiry       inevitably pre-empt Lord Justice Taylor’s report.
this        will be all-embracing, because the disaster has m ajor
            implications for m any other m ajor spectator sports? Also,           Mr. Hurd: On the second point, I do n o t think that I
            can the inquiry be speeded up? M any o f my right hon. and        have anything to add to w hat I have already said. As for
seen
            hon. Friends feel that the inquiry is desperately im portant,     the first point, Lord Justice Taylor will o f course be able
rom
            even allowing for the recommendations m ade four years            to look at evidence from the past if he considers if relevant.
is to
            ago by M r. Justice Popplewell. If some o f them had been            The hon. and learned G entlem an asked me about the
  the
            acknowledged, perhaps we would not find ourselves where           kind o f issues that Lord Justice Taylor will need to
ion,
            we are today. Does my right hon. Friend hold the opinion          address. I have already mentioned the decision to open the
it us
            that it would be prem ature and foolhardy to proceed with         outside gate. There is also the question o f why, once in the
1, so
            the national membership scheme until he has an                    ground, fans were propelled into the central tunnel rather
            opportunity to consider all the contributory factors, both        than to the side entrances to the terraces, and the question
; the       inside and outside the ground, to the Hillsborough
1 as                                                                          why those responsible did not notice earlier w hat was
            tragedy? Those factors clearly included panic on the part         happening on the central terrace behind the goal posts.
Yes,        o f the police and o f spectators. I am certain that it would
mds                                                                           Then there is the whole question—which we have already
            be prem ature to proceed with the scheme until the inquiry        discussed—o f the perim eter barrier and the gates within it,
ol—         has been concluded.
they                                                                          which were designed to serve as an emergency exit but
                                                                              which obviously failed to do so.
                Mr. Hurd: Lord Justice Taylor’s report m ust be speedy
            and thorough. In theory, there can be a contradiction                Mr. John Carlisle (Luton, N orth): As my right hon.
  th A      between the two. However, I have made it clear to Lord            Friend knows, I am one o f the strongest supporters o f the
/ic e ^ ^   Justice Taylor—and he accepts this—that he may                    Football Spectators Bill, and I rem ain com m itted to the
t the       encounter m atters and issues that need to be tackled with        principle o f membership to com bat football hooliganism.
i his       particular urgency and upon which he may wish to make             Does my right hon. Friend accept, however, that in
t we        pressing recommendations. If that is the case, it will be         consideration o f w hat has been said this afternoon—and,
 talk       open to him—and I have the impression that he will take           indeed, o f the tragic circumstances—it would be wise to
That        this course—to subm it an interim report on such m atters         postpone any further discussion until the full results o f the
hon.        before he has finished reaching all o f his conclusions, so       public inquiry are known? I hope th at my right hon.
l to        that they may be acted upon. Lord Justice Taylor has it in        Frieav ill then bring to the H ouse a Bill th at will receive
s of        mind that, as with the Popplewell inquiry, the proceedings        not merely all-party support but support from outside the
 oad        o f his inquiry will be in public, unless there is a particular   House, to com bat the terrible problems th at have been
were        reason in any case against allowing that. T hat is the            highlighted by Saturday’s tragic events.
tant        procedure. I do n o t w ant to pin Lord Justice Taylor down
t an        to a specific timetable before he has even visited Sheffield,         M r. Hurd: As I have said, there will be a pause for the
            which he is to do tom orrow , but I hope that my hon.             sake of seemliness—as the H ouse would wish—and also
' the       Friend feels reassured.                                           for consultations on the possible strengthening o f the Bill.
onal            I note w hat my hon. Friend said about the comments of        Both purposes are, I think, im portant from the point of
iinst       the hon. M ember for Liverpool, W alton (M r, Heffer), and        view of my hon. Friend.
i on        he will have noted w hat I said in reply. I agree to the extent       I entirely'agree with my hon. Friend th at the events a t
light       that we need to set our sights high, and that, apart from         H ills b o r o u g h ought to m ake u s all step aside from
ith e       other considerations, a delay would be seemly. As I have          preconceptions and look afresh a t how we are to find a
ister       said, we shall need to look a t the Bill to see how it might      better way for British football. [H o n . M em bers: “H ear,
isas-       be strengthened to meet the extra points that I have              hear.”] H ow ever, I think th at my hon. Friend will agree,
rlier       mentioned. I do not consider that it would be right or            even if the Opposition do not, th at an im portant p art o f
            sensible to resile from the concept o f a' national               that must be protection against hooliganism and violence,

               23 CD39/4 Job 1-9
27                  Hillsborough Stadium Disaster          17 A P R I L 1989           Hillsborough Stadium Disaster              28

[M r . H u rd ]                                                      authorities—how that works out in practice and whether
                                                                     it is right, as the right hon. M ember for Birmingham,
and that in that context a national membership scheme, or            Sparkbrook (M r. Hattersley) pointed out earlier, th at
the kind that flows from the Popplewell report, has a                perimeter fences should in m any cases be regarded as a
crucial p art to play.                                               requirem ent for a safety certificate—are m atters on which
                                                                     Lord Justice Taylor could comment.
    M r. Joseph Ashton (Ashfield): I was a t the match on
Saturday and saw everything th at happened. If those                     M r. A. E. P. Duffy (Sheffield, Attercliffe): We all grieve
events had taken place a t a mid-week Cup tie replay on a            today, but some o f us are angry. I speak not only as a
black, dark January night, with people dashing from work             Sheffield M ember o f Parliam ent but also as someone who
in the rush hour trying to get in, it would have been twice          still stands on the popular side week in, week out. Is the
as bad. M ost o f the fans had a ticket, which is a form o f         Home Secretary aware that in the afterm ath o f Heysel and
membership card. If the Secretary o f State introduces a             Bradford I wrote to his D epartm ent and described the
com puter system and a membership card, all we shall need            extensive improvements th at had been put in hand a t
is one idiot to take a piece o f chewing gum and jam it into         Hillsborough, costing £750,000 for crowd control and
the slot. T hat would put the turnstile out o f action. The          police liaison and that I invited the M inister who was then
police would then have no option but to allow people to              responsible for these m atters to come up and see them? He
rush into the ground through the emergency exit. They                did not. Will he caution those who would m ake whipping
would not then be in a position, especially on a dark n ig h t       boys o f Sheffied W ednesday and the South Yorkshire
to direct the fans to the proper entrances.                          police? Will he concentrate on those who, in trying to
    If this tragedy had happened after the Football                  shape our safety requirements since Heysel and Bradford,
Spectators Bill had been introduced, the Secretary of State          have taken us in a impractical and unreal direction?
would certainly have had to resign. Will he not wait until               Will he look hard at football—its structure, greed and
the report is published? In the meantime, will he not                psyche, and its contem pt for ordinary working-class lads
arrange for the barriers to be taken down? Will he not               —and ask how far the football establishment is responsible
insist that all big matches are played live on television on         for the continuing slaughter? During the past three o r four
Sunday afternoons so that there is less reason for people            years cages have been set up to contain visiting supporters
w ithout tickets to turn up at the ground, as they did on            a t football grounds that detain them m ore severely than
Saturday, and fewer traffic problems? If the Secretary of            prisoners o f war were detained in world w ar 2 Britain.
State took those interim measures and introduced in the                  M r. Hurd: I entirely agree with the hon. Gentleman
next Session o f Parliam ent a safety o f sports grounds Bill,       that it is unreal and wrong, a t this stage and with our
we should certainly support him .                                    present knowledge to look for, or talk about, whipping
    M r. H urd: The tragedy happened under the existing              boys. I am glad that, from the O pposition Benches and
system, n o t under any future system. [ In te rru p tio n .] No,    from all parts o f the House, that has been stated clearly. As
the hon. Gentlem an has not proved th at point. Part o f the         the hon. Gentlem an said, we have endured—and football
problem on Saturday, as on other occasions, was that                 supporters in particular have endured—a series o f
people turned up w ithout tickets, as the hon. Gentleman             tragedies a t home and abroad. We have had a tragic fire,
said, in the belief, which tragically turned out to be correct,      a num ber o f tragedies brought about by violence—
th at some o f them would find a way in. Under the scheme,           Birmingham and Heysel—and now a tragedy brought
that would not have been possible because they would or              about not by violence but by physical pressures because
would not have a football membership card. TTiey would               too many people were concentrated in one narrow p art o f
no t travel to the game in the expectation th at they would          the ground.
be let in w ithout one.                                                  Each o f those different tragedies has brought forth a
                                                                     series o f answers, inquiries, reports and guidance designed
   M r. Michael Shersby (Uxbridge): Is my right hon.                 to avert a recurrence o f the m ost recent tragedy— the one
Friend aware th at the Police Federation welcomes both               that is on everyone’s m ind. We m ust not forget the earlier
the public and the police inquiry? C an he say whether the           lessons as we concentrate on the new lessons. We m ust
inquiry will particularly consider the question o f safety of        look a t the whole picture. T hat includes protection against
stadiums and w hether it will have the power to recommend            violence and hooliganism and what Popplewell said about
tem porary closure, should th at prove necessary? Can he             fire. It also includes the problems that we have naturally
also say whether the inquiry will further consider how               been discussing following the Hillsborough tragedy—the
supporters travel to matches, the parking arrangements               problems o f perim eter fences and pressure exerted on
and the way in which supporters approach the ground?                 people by physical objects that can w ound and crush them.
C an he further say whether the inquiry will consider the            Unless we are prepared to consider all these m atters, we
role o f the Football Association in connection with the             shall continue to chase partial solutions. T hat was the
proposed football membership scheme?                                 nature o f m y statem ent today.
    M r. H urd: We have deliberately cast “very widely the              M r. Irvine P a tn k k (Sheffield, H allam ): M ay I join the
terms o f reference for Lord Justice Taylor so that he can           hon. M embers for Sheffield, Brightside (M r. Blunkett) and
examine all those m atters that my hon. Friend has listed,           Sheffield, Atterliffe (M r. Duffy) in speaking about the
I believe w ithout straining a t the terms o f reference. There      tragedy th at occurred in Sheffield. I pay my compliments
are m any angles to this—m any points o f comment and                to the emergency services on the way in which they
criticism th at have already arisen, even in the last 48 hours       handled themselves at the weekend and to Sheffield people
—and it is right th at Lord Justice Taylor should be able to         who volunteered to give accom m odation to those from
look a t them all. The existing system o f safety certificates       Liverpool who were bereaved. W hen I visited the
under the 1975 A ct and the responsibility o f local                 tem porary morgue th at had been set u p with m y hon.

     24 CD39/5 Job 2-1
         28
                   29               Hillsborough Stadium Disaster          17 APRIL 1989               Hillsborough Stadium Disaster               30
 whether
ingham,            friend the Minister for Sport 1 was appalled by the                th at is possible. It is about time th at the football industry,
er, that           tragedy. Only when one sees the bodies laid out can one            the Home Secretary, the House and society in general
ed as a            fully appreciate the extent o f the tragedy that happened in
                   Sheffield.
                                                                                     concentrated their minds on bringing in legislation to
i which                                                                              make football grounds safe and deal with the hooligan
                     I ask my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary to bear           element. No genuine football supporter wants to tolerate
                  in mind that it was apparent to me that there was a lack o f       that. We want those people rooted out o f our sport, and
1grieve           a disaster plan for that sports ground, which is one o f the       they can be rooted out. But let us n o t categorise football
ly as a           major sports grounds in the United Kingdom. As the hon.
                                                                                    spectators so that anybody and everybody will look for an
ie who            Member for Atterciiffe said there are few better grounds
                                                                                    excuse not to listen to them. They know about the grounds
 Is the           than that ground. Nevertheless, shortcomings were
                  apparent.                                                         as they visit them week after week, and they know where
>el and
                                                                                    the faults lie. I hope the Home Secretary will say th at the
ed the                I congtratulate the two radio stations, Radio Hallam          inquiry will have full regard to those people who go to
tnd a t          and Radio Sheffield, which kept up a non-stop                      football matches and know the problems. I f we listen to
>1 and           commentary on what help was needed for people in the               them and act upon w hat they say, the game will be brought
s then           area and the Sheffield S ta r on its special edition—a copy        back to what it was—a game that families can watch and
n? He            of which I gave to my right hon. Friend the Prime M inister        enjoy without any danger to themselves o r to other people.
pping            —which showed graphically the horror and mayhem.
cshire               Will my right hon. Friend examine two questions—                  Mr. Hurd: I hope indeed that football supporters will
ng to            first, the apparent lack o f a disaster plan and, secondly, the    find their voices and mobilise their ideas and pu t them to
Iford.           part that alcohol played in the disaster?                          Lord Justice Taylor, for the reasons th at the hon.
                                                                                    Gentleman has given. As regards the police, there was no
1 ancH              M r. Hurd: My hon. Friend is right to the extent that
                                                                                    shortage o f police officers—there were upwards o f 770
  lads           Lord Justice Taylor will have to look very carefully a t the
                                                                                    police officers in or around the ground. The hon.
sible            shortcomings in control and com m unication which seem
                                                                                    Gentleman will agree that many o f them showed great
 four            to have been present a t the crucial moments that
                                                                                    heroism for an hour or m ore trying to extricate people,
rters            afternoon. If the hon. G entlem an’s second point becomes
                                                                                    help people and restore people to consciousness and life.
than             substantiated, it will certainly fall within Lord Justice
                 Taylor’s terms o f reference.                                         O f course he is right to say that, as the chief constable
n.
                                                                                   has recognised, the decisions o f the police and the general
nan                   M r. Eddie Loyden (Liverpool, G arston): C an I say to       question of control and communication will have to be
our                the Home Secretary that I am probably one o f the few           examined by Lord Justice Taylor.
>ing              people in the House who was at the game, if it can be called         Because o f the passionate loyalty o f so m a n y for
and               a game. I was in the Leppings lane area and I was pinned         football—we all know o f it even if we do not share it—it
 As               against a wall for about 20 minutes. One o f my immediate        must be right to do everything we can to restore the game’s
3all              observations was the inadequate policing o f the Leppings        reputation.
 of               lane entrance. People were coming down the road in quite
ire.             large numbers and there was virtually no direction. W hat            Several Hon. Members rose —
                 could have and should have happened is th at the outer
                 gates to that enclosure should have been closed to limit the         Mr. Speaker: Order. I ask for brief questions on this
                 number o f people within it. T hat did not happen, and the       m atter please, because a great m any hon. M embers wish to
                 police cannot be blamed for removing themselves from             take part and it is difficult if long questions are asked.
                within that enclosure as the crushing became greater.
                                                                                     Mr. Malcolm Thornton (Crosby): I am sure the House
                     In my view the disaster had nothing to do with late
                                                                                  and the country sense the feeling o f tragedy th at every
                arrivals. W hen I go to Anfield road to see a football match,
                                                                                  person on Merseyside feels today because o f the events o f
                   arrive a t ten to three and walk through with no problem
                                                                                  Saturday when w hat should have been one o f the great
                a t all, because the policing there is quite adequate and the
                                                                                 showpieces o f our sporting calendar turned into such a
                crowds are broken up by the police outside the ground.
                                                                                 tragedy. On behalf o f my constituents and all the people o f
                    As has been said, football supporters have been
                                                                                 Merasyside who, were helped, I thank the people of
               virtually disregarded because o f the behaviour o f a tiny
                                                                                 Sheffield for all they did. I am sure th at I can speak for all
               minority o f fans, and have been typecast as gorillas and
                                                                                 my colleagues on Merseyside when I say th at our heartfelt
               inhuman people. T hat image develops in the m ind o f
                                                                                 sympathy goes to the families o f all those who were
               police, politicians and others the idea th at everyone who
                                                                                 bereaved including the family o f a 17 year-old boy from
               goes to watch a football m atch falls into that category, and
                                                                                Crosby who was named today as one o f the dead It is an
               that influences the way that people treat football               absolute tragedy.
               supporters. T hat did not happen in Sheffield, because the
                                                                                    I welcome my right hon. Friend’s statem ent about a
               community around the football ground understood the
                                                                                wide-ranging inquiry. M ay I ask him to take one particular
               situation, because their sons, daughters, fathers and
               brothers are probably football fans. They gave immediate         thing on board, because many lessons m ust be learned
               sustenance and help to the football supporters. I wish to        from the events at Hillsborough on Saturday? Will he see
                                                                                that part o f the inquiry looks a t the way in which the
                          my gratitude to the working-class people in
                  effield who did all they could to assist those who were       Football  Association allocates tickets to the clubs involved
                                                                               in major sporting occasions? F o r clubs such as Liverpool,
              distressed and injured and to deal with other m inor
              matters.                                                         Manchester United, Everton, Arsenal and Tottenham ,
                                                                               with huge followings, the allocation is often fearfully
                   I do not understand how the H om e Secretary can
                                                                               inadequate and exacerbates a problem which should not
              continue to defend a scheme that, had it been in operation
                                                                               exist but which we all know was part and parcel o f the
              on at day, would have caused even greater damage, if             problem causing the fatal events on Saturday
                25 CD39/6 Job 2-4
31                 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster           17 A P R IL 1989               Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                        32

     M r. H urd: T hat point will certainly come within the          o f mine, who died, and R obert G raham , who is fighting for
review. There seems to be a general opinion—Lord Justice             his life in intensive care. M ay I express, on behalf o f the
Taylor will test this—th at there was still room at the              people o f Skelmersdale and Ormskirk, who are ardent
Liverpool end o f the ground. The trouble was not that the           Liverpool supporters, our appreciation o f the Sheffield
total space .was overcrowded bu t th at particular area—             services, which acted so quickly?
[ In t e r r u p tio n . ] Yes, as the hon. M ember for Bassetlaw        I support my right hon. Friend the Hom e Secretary on
(M r. A shton) said, the distribution was wrong. That is             the introduction o f all-seated grounds, which I have
what I was referring to when I talked o f people being               advocated for some time and regard as a solution. Will he
propelled through the central tunnel rather than directed            return to the Bradford City fire report by M r. Justice
round the sides where there was access to parts of the               Popplewell, in which he will find am ong the 63
Liverpool terraces. The hon. M ember for Bassetlaw also              recommendations one that says that it is essential to have
m entioned th at people came from Liverpool without                  exit gates in perim eter fencing that keeps in the crowd to
tickets in the hope o f getting in. Both those facts                 give an exit on to the field should there be disturbances?
aggravated the situation.                                            Will he reconsider that and bear in mind th at such gates do
                                                                     not exist a t 16 first division grounds, including M anchester
    M r. M artin Flannery (Sheffield, Hillsborough):                 U nited’s ground, Old Trafford, where it is proposed to
Y esterday afternoon at this time my hon. Friend the                 hold the rem atch o f this game in the next week o r two?
M em ber for Sheffield, Brightside (M r. Blunkett) and
myself, together with dignitaries from the three cities                  M r. H urd: One point on which we can all agree is the
involved, were standing on the tu rf in front o f where all          absolute necessity o f emergency exits through perimeter
those people were killed. Everyone stood silently; there             fences. As my hon. Friend said, that is contained in the
were no photographers present. O ur hearts went out from             Popplewell report and is clearly spelled out, with
Sheffield to the people o f Liverpool. The heart o f Sheffield       specifications about the widths o f gates, in paragraph 215
is collectively a great heart and the people o f Sheffield are       o f the Home Office guide to safety a t sports grounds.
appalled a t w hat happened. The last time I stood in such           Anyone will agree that if the guidance is implemented it is
a way was a long time ago during the war. The sense o f              adequate. There m ust be an investigation in to why the exit
what had occurred was horrific to me, and I hope, to                 gate was not an effective way in which desperate people
everybody. We all have our opinions about what went                  could get on to the pitch.
wrong. I know the ground intimately, the exact spot and
all the details but I do not w ant to apportion blame now.                M r. David Alton (Liverpool, Mossley Hill): In the face
W hen the inquiry takes place we should all realise that it          o f this terrible and wholly avoidable tragedy—many o f the
is the m ost im portant inquiry in the history o f football in       fatalities were young children, including a 13-year-old boy
this country and what it decides will decide the future o f          from my constituency—expressions o f condolences and
football. Football is a dynamic not a static sport. It will          sympathy seem inadequate to sum up the enorm ity o f it for
not stand still and will never go away—thank heaven—but              a city th at is m ourning its dead and is united in its grief.
we w ant to m ake the proper decisions. Therefore, I want                 A time will come when grief will give way to anger and
voices th at say “D o it rapidly” to be listened to with much        questions will have to be answered. I should like an
care. I do not w ant skimping. The decisions that we take            assurance from the Home Secretary th at it will be made
m ust be long-term decisions. Every aspect must be                   clear why the gate was opened and who took that decision.
considered, otherwise this will occur again and we shall             W hy were emergency arrangem ents so pitifully inade­
once again need to have another melancholy inquiry into              quate? I welcome what the right hon. Gentlem an said
what went wrong. I want an assurance from the Secretary              about the provision o f seats in our national stadiums, but
o f State th at we shall have such an inquiry and that it will       will he take urgent action to ensure that those terrible
not be rushed in any way whatever.                                   m etal cages are pu t on the scrap heap and people are
   M r. H urd: I agree with everything that the hon.                 treated like hum an beings instead o f animals?
Gentlem an said. I should like to m ention the generosity o f             On 22 M arch, I wrote to the M inister about the ticket
the people o f Sheffield, which has been evident. I have             allocation for Saturday’s match. I enclosed a statem ent
heard m any stories o f offers o f help, accommodation and           from M r. Peter Robinson, the chief executive o f Liverpool
transport to complete strangers from his constituents and            football ground, who said:
other citizens o f Sheffield.                                            “I m ad e it p la in th a t th ere w as n o w ay I co u ld su p p o rt the
                                                                     choice o f H illsb o ro u g h th is year w ith th e sam e ticket
   I repeat, w ithout wishing to be tedious, what seems to
                                                                     allo catio n s ap p ly in g .”
be the crux o f the m atter. We have had a series o f disasters
                                                                     W hen I received a reply dated 11 A pril from the M inister
and tragedies arising from different causes and circumstan­
                                                                     o f Sport, he said that the m ater was entirely for the
ces. We m ust not simply ignore the earlier lessons and
                                                                     football authorities. In the light o f w hat has happened, will
concentrate on the latest ones. The latest one is terrible and
                                                                     the Home Secretary accept that the M inister should take
perhaps more appalling than the others because o f its
                                                                     an interest in this m atter? Will he confirm that which the
nature. It therefore needs to be thoroughly and urgently
                                                                     M inister said, th at the allocations were m ade on the basis
investigated, and the totals m ust be added together to find
                                                                     o f police advice? I ask that because there have been
a new way for British football. The hon. Gentleman rightly
                                                                     conflicting statem ents in the past 24 hours.
said th at the inquiry m ust be dynamic. There must be no
resting on ancient attitudes as the right foundation for the             Liverpool is a city schooled in adversity. However, not
                                                                     since the blitz has it had to face a tragedy on such a
future o f the game.
                                                                     shocking scale. I am sure th at the H ouse today will wish to
   M r. Kenneth Hind (Lancashire, West): I am sure that              express its solidarity with those who grieve and those
the H ouse will join me in sending condolences to the                awaiting news o f loved ones, whose lives still lie in the
families o f Colin Sefton and D avid Rimmer, constituents            balance.

     26 CD39/7 Job 2-6
     32     33                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster           17 APRIL 1989             Hillsborough Stadium Disaster             34

n g fo r         Mr. Hurd: All the points raised by the hon. G en tlem an         How long are we going to carry on treating fans like
o f the     are clearly covered by the terms o f reference o f the inquiry,    cattle? Their treatm ent contrasts with the champagne
irdent      a n d Lord Justice Taylor will be able to look into them. I        swilling that goes on in the plush directors’ boxes. The
effield     am slightly surprised that he suggests that M in isters            views and conditions o f the fans m ust be taken into
            should become involved in deciding, match by match, how            account. If we lock people up we create a certain mentality,
iry on      tickets should be allocated. He is perfectly right in his          and it is little wonder that they react in these
  have      understanding—these are m atters for the football                  circumstances.
Vill he     authorities. They consult on them and are guided by the
 ustice     police. 1 shall repeat my earlier point that, although the            Mr. Hurd: Nothing th at we heard yesterday a t the
le 63       m atter o f total allocation will certainly be looked into, it     ground or in the hospitals bore out the sort o f rhetoric that
> have      was not the total allocation, so much as the concentration         the hon. Gentleman has sought to employ. It is precisely
wd to       o f that allocation in a p art o f the Liverpool terrace, which    because o f the incredible nature o f the tragedy that we
mces?       resulted in the terrible damage.                                   have moved quickly to set up w hat even the hon.
tesd o                                                                         Gentleman would agree is a fully independent inquiry with
hester          Mr. Jim Lester (Broxtowe): M ay I, as a regular                what even he would agree are wide and complete terms of
sed to      supporter o f the Nottingham Forest team, speak on behalf          reference. The proceedings will be conducted in public,
• two?      o f all its fans and the people o f Nottingham shire, and          unless there is a special reason for not doing so. It will be
            associate myself with the remarks o f the hon. M ember for         open to everyone to make their views and recommenda­
 is the     Liverpool, W alton (M r. Heffer). It was a m ost tragic            tions known. T hat is the proper way to proceed and then
 m e ta ^   accident and, as my right hon. Friend the Prime M inister          to reach conclusions afterw ards—instead o f gabbling with
in t 9      said, no words uttered in this place will fill the gaps in those   malice, as the hon. Gentlem an has done today.
   with     families who have lost young people who went out on a
)h 215                                                                            Sir Fergus Montgomery (Altrincham and Sale): I ask
            happy day which ended in tragedy.
mnds.                                                                          my right hon. Friend to think again about putting the
                We should recollect that more factors unite football           Football Spectator Bill on ice. Is he aware th at many of
:d it is    fans than divide them. T hat was clearly shown a t the
ae exit                                                                        the police are concerned th at if the Bill is enacted and
            Hillsborough ground when the Nottingham Forest                     crowds build up outside stadium s the same sort o f thing
people      supporters—as soon as they realised that a tragedy was             could happen again as happened on Saturday? W ould it
            taking place—behaved in an exemplary fashion and                   not be better to wait for the results o f a full inquiry and
            helped in every way. The majority of people who follow             then to bring forward a Bill that is acceptable to everyone
e face      football are united in the game’s interests. The Home
 o f the                                                                       concerned with football?
            Secretary has an opportunity to utilise that good will on all
id boy                                                                            Secondly, was my right hon. Friend, like me, nauseated
            sides. There is no shortage o f suggestions or ideas. I beg
 s and                                                                         by some of the pictures in some o f the tabloids, which must
            him not to rush ahead too far but to think carefully before
fit for                                                                        have caused enorm ous distress to some of the bereaved
            he proceeds in any direction. He should take all the advice
  grief.                                                                       families? W ould it not have been better if they had never
            given from all those o f good will who w ant the future of
                                                                               been published?
;r and      football—this country’s national game— to continue in a
Ice an      proper and rightful way.                                               Mr. Hurd: On the first point, perhaps I can add
 made                                                                          something to what I have already said. I remind the House,
:ision.         Mr. Hurd: I agree with my hon. Friend that the right           which has not yet considered the Bill, th at it is an enabling
 nade-      sequence o f action is thought, consultation, thought,             framework and my right hon. Friend the Secretary o f State
1s^^        action.                                                            for the Environment has already given a full commitment
 s, b a ^                                                                      not to implement the scheme within th at framework until
:rrible         M r. Terry Fields (Liverpool, Broadgreen): Like                the necessary technology has been satisfactorily worked
le are      thousands o f Liverpool families on Saturday, my wife and          out. My hon. Friend will agree th at the point about
            1 waited tearfully and anxiously because we had two sons           terraces that I emphasised at the beginning is also relevant.
ticket      and a nephew in that p art o f the ground where the disaster           I note w hat my hon. Friend said about newspaper
jm ent      happened. My relief on discovering th at my family was all
                                                                               photographs, and I also note that the new chairm an o f the
:rpool      right was tinged with the realisation th at thousands o f
                                                                               Press Council has said today that the Press Council should
            other Liverpool families would never see their kids come           inquire into that matter.
>rt th e    home as a result o f the terrible tragedy. After the Heysel
tick et     tragedy we were assured that the Prime M inister would                 Mr. Robert N. Wareing (Liverpool, W est Derby): I was
            leave no stone unturned in discovering who was                     a t the other semi-final on Saturday at which the other
nister      responsible. I want an assurance today from the Home               Merseyside team, Everton, was successful, but there was
>r the      Secretary that, similarly, no stone will be left unturned          no real rejoicing. W hen we came out o f the ground and
i, will     when this incident is investigated.                                learnt o f the problems at Hillsborough, we were all united
1 take         Others have said that they are not looking for                  in grief with all football fans on Merseyside.
;h the      scapegoats, but the anger th at permeates Liverpool today              Will the Home Secretary use his influence to get
 basis      reflects the tragedy that occurred in Georgia in the USSR,         football clubs to be more flexible about kick-off times? One
 been       after which the top tier o f the country’s leadership was          o f the reasons why crowds try to crush through turnstiles
            forced to resign. We need assurances because we do not             quickly into the central areas o f grounds is th at they hear
r, not      want a whitewash. The fans are param ount in this                  the roar from inside the ground when the team s run on to
jch a       incident, and must be consulted when the in-depth inquiry          the pitch and play starts. M atches in G erm any are often
ish to      takes place—no m atter how long it takes for their point of        held up for h alf an hour to ensure the safety o f the
those       view and experiences to be put across. If they were decent         spectators, which should come first.
n the       honest and honourable, the responsible M inister, chief of             When, oh when, will the G overnm ent escape from the
            police and FA officials would resign.                              “We never make mistakes” syndrome? W hen will they

              27 CD39/8 Job 2-9
35                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster          17 APRIL 1989              Hillsborough Stadium Disaster             36

[ M r . R o b e rt N . W a re in g ]                               ensure that we can genuinely call our sports grounds safe?
                                                                   Will he ensure th at all recommendations by the inquiry are
learn from their Back Benchers, not one o f whom has               legislated into action?
supported them this afternoon, and withdraw part I o f the            M r. H urd: Certainly, as my hon. Friend will have seen,
Football Spectators Bill and start from scratch?                   the terms o f reference are very wide. When we receive the
   Will the Hom e Secretary ensure th at the inquiry               report—whether it is an interim and then a final or a single
examines the location o f football grounds? I know that            report—we will need to act quickly.
there can be improvement—by relocating grounds when
necessary—only in the long term, but too many o f our                 Several Hon. Members rose ------
grounds are in built up urban areas. Because o f the war,            M r. Speaker: Order. The whole House knows th at we
Germ any and H olland have been able to build grounds in           have a heavy day ahead o f us. I shall call those M embers
open space areas in which there are far more facilities for        whose constituents have been m ost severely affected, the
controlling crowds. Will the right hon. Gentleman look             Liverpool Members, and then we m ust move on.
into that?
                                                                       M r. Frank Field (Birkenhead): M ay I, too, associate
     Several Hon. Members rose ------                              myself with the statements m ade to the families who lost
                                                                   people on Saturday? I find it impossible to express the
  M r. Speaker: Order. I ask for brief questions; long             despair th at I feel and that suggests something o f the utter
questions are unfair to other hon. Members.                        desolation that those families m ust be experiencing at this
                                                                   time. While none o f those families will today be thin! lg
   M r. H urd: 1 shall try to be succinct. I have much             about com pensation, does the Hom e Secretary think that
personal sympathy for the hon. G entlem an’s point about           we have a duty to them? Am I right in saying th at some
flexibility and timing o f the start o f matches. I am sure that   families who lost members on Saturday will receive no
that will be looked into. I have nothing further to say on         autom atic com pensation payments? Is that right or fair? If
the other m atter.                                                 it is not fair will the Governm ent change the law?
   M r. Churchill (Davyhulme): M ay I on behalf of my                 M r. H urd: I think th at the hon. Gentleman is right in
constituents and supporters o f M anchester United join in         saying that there is no autom atic compensation. O f course
the expressions o f sympathy to the families of the                I have read about the possibilities o f civil action and I have
bereaved? Will my right hon. Friend have urgent                    also read and spoken about the fund th at has been set up.
consultations w ith the football authorities to ensure that in     I should like to look further into the m atter.
future special coaches and trains for away matches do not
leave their points o f origin unless everybody on board is             M r. Sean Hughes (Knowsley, South): I represent half
already armed with a ticket? T hat would avoid thousands           the borough th at is today m ourning the deaths o f 12 young
o f fans, many o f them w ithout tickets, arriving                 people, including the infinitely tragic death o f a
simultaneously five or 10 minutes before the start o f a            10-year-old child from my constituency. As an Everton
                                                                   season ticket holder, I was at the other semi-final. As a
match.
                                                                   football supporter I share the disappointm ent o f many
  M r. H urd: T hat is an interesting suggestion and I shall       people a t the Hom e Secretary’s reply about the ID scheme
make sure th at the inquiry takes it into account.                 which dem onstrates a woeful ignorance o f the nature o f
                                                                   the football fan. Increasingly in the greatest spectator
   M r. Robert P arry (Liverpool, Riverside): I should like        sport in Britain the least im portant person is the spectator.
to be associated with the condolences and the messages o f         We feel very deeply th at the G overnm ent and the Football
sympathy to the bereaved families. I pay tribute to the            Association do not dem onstrate an awareness o f th at fact.
Liverpool supporters and the Evertonians for their tribute             Finally, in addition to the disappointm ent that has been
to Liverpool yesterday a t Anfield and at Liverpool                caused by w hat we have heard about the ID scheme, there
m etropolitan cathedral. I was present a t both o f those          will be disappointm ent about the Home Secretary’s
ceremonies and they were very moving. M y brother’s son            response to questions concerning the allocation o f tickets.
lost three friends on Saturday, all o f whom were in their         I remain absolutely convinced that the allocation o f tickets
twenties. T hat was a tragic loss o f life. I welcome the public   for big games, such as semi-finals and finals, is crucial.
inquiry and hope that there will be no cover-ups. Such a           Going to a football match is n o t like going to the theatre;
tragedy m ust never happen again, although any preventive          it is a way o f life for an enorm ous num ber o f people. Those
measures are too late for all those people who are now             people will be acutely disappointed by w hat has been said
dead.                                                              about the allocation o f tickets. The fans who turn up
                                                                   w ithout tickets, and those who pay exorbitant am ounts to
   M r. H urd: I agree w ith the hon. Gentleman and with           ticket touts, are not the ones who are intent on
the way in which he expressed himself.                             hooliganism; they are the ones who have been going,
                                                                   match in, m atch out, throughout the season, but cannot
    M r. Robert G. Hughes (H arrow , West): My con­                get tickets for the big games. Therefore, the Football
stituents are shocked th at even the London su b u rb s should     Association too m ust be thoroughly investigated.
now be associated with this terrible tragedy. Sarah and
Victoria Hicks, two teenage girls attending the match with            M r. Hurd: I agree entirely that the allocation o f tickets
their family, now lie dead. Does my right hon. Friend              —working out the totals between the two clubs—is
agree th at in the shadow o f this tragedy it w o u l d be easy    extremely im portant. W hat I was arguing against was the
to jum p to conclusions and adopt what might be                    argum ent o f the hon. M ember for Liverpool, Mossley Hill
fashionable solutions? Will he give us an assu ran ce that the     (M r. Alton), th a t this is a m atter th a t M inisters should
widest possible brief will be followed by the inquiry o            decide.

     28 CD39/9 Job 3-1
36       37                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster           17 APRIL 1989                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster              38

fe?          Mr. George Howarth (Knowsley, North): I should like              and another chief constable with a high reputation and
are      to associate myself with the sympathy that has been                  with experience in these m atters to do th at jo b on their
         expressed. At the invitation of the Merseyside fire and civil        behalf. I think that that is the right course.
         defence authority, I visited Sheffield yesterday. I was very            M r. Gerald B irm in gh am (St. Helens, South): As
sn,
         touched indeed by the response o f some Nottingham                   somebody who has constituents who are now dead, or are
the
gle      Forest supporters, who had organised a collection in their           relatives o f those who are dead as result of this tragedy,
         pub the previous evening and had come to the ground to               and as someone who lived in Sheffield for 25 years, I have
         present more than £100 towards the appeal fund. It was               a dual interest in this m atter. Will the Home Secretary take
         very helpful o f my hon. Friend the M ember for Sheffield,           one urgent step, which I hope is non-controversial? Will he
         Central (Mr. C abom ) to make arrangements so that those             arrange that all the film coverage and the pictures that
 we
         of us who came over were able to find our way around and             were taken on Saturday both by ITN and the BBC and by
iers
         could go to the appropriate places.                                  amateurs be made available to the inquiry? Unless we
the
             Having spoken to several people who came over to                 move quickly, that footage may be lost and it contains
         Sheffield yesterday to find out w hat had happened to their          evidence that may be o f great value to the inquiry, because
iate     relatives, I think it is clear that the emergency telephone          it will enable the inquiry to see the pressures both inside
iost     system simply did not work satisfactorily on Saturday. I             and outside the ground, and allow it to draw some
 the     spoke to one woman who had tried for eight hours to find              valuable conclusions.
tter     out what had happened to her son, but had been unable to
this                                                                             Mr. Hurd: I know th at there are sometimes difficulties
         get through. I understand from the fire and civil defence
                                                                              about this material, but that is a valuable suggestion, and
:in A     authority that an exercise was conducted recently—using
;h a ^                                                                        I shall pursue it.
          the Bristol exchange—aimed at dealing with precisely such
>me      problems, and that that exercise was relatively successful.             Several Hon. Members rose ------
  no      On this occasion, the provision of far more lines would
r? If                                                                           M r. Speaker: Order. I will now call two Back-Bench
          have enabled the emergency tdephone num ber to work
                                                                              Members from each side, and then we m ust move on.
          more effectively. I understand that th at system was used
^ in      for the flotation o f the British G as shares. If it was good          Sir Anthony Grant (Cambridgeshire, South-W est): I
urse      enough for the flotation o f the British G as shares, it would      shall not comment on the Hillsborough ground itself, but
lave      have been good enough as an emergency system.                       my right hon. Friend will be aware that in m any grounds,
 up.                                                                          the facilities are deplorable. Will he have discussions with
            Mr. Hurd: As the hon. M ember has indicated, there                his colleagues in the Treasury to see whether the tax system
         certainly was a problem of swamped lines, at there often is          can be adapted so that there is an incentive to invest in
 half    on these occasions. I understand absolutely the distress,            improved stadiums, and a disincentive to spend ludicrous
>ung     anxiety, and worse, caused by that, but I think that it is           sums on transfer fees? I do not expect my right hon. Friend
 f a     rather apart from the te, rns of reference of the inquiry.           to make any decision about the Football Spectators Bill
rton     Perhaps I may look into the point th at the hon. Gentleman           this afternoon, but will he say that the G overnm ent will
■Vs a    has raised and then get in touch with him.                           reflect on the views that have been expressed in the House
lany                                                                          this afternoon?
ieme        Mr. John Evans (St. Helens, N orth); In view of the fact
-e of    that fans from St. Helens died a t Hillsborough on                       Mr. Hurd: I have noted those views on the Bill. I believe
 ator    Saturday, I want to associate myself with the condolences             that the Bill, which addresses a different problem from the
 it(A    that have been expressed.                                             one that caused the tragedy a t Hillsborough, is soundly
tbaU        Can the Home Secretary confirm that the trouble                    based. There will be a pause, as I have said, and there is a
fact,                                                                          case for adding to the Bill and strengthening it. However,
         started outside the ground because o f the late arrival of
been                                                                           the improvement that we are seeking for football cannot
         fans and the inability of the turnstiles to cope with them?
 here                                                                          be total without a provision along the lines Of a national
         Will he ask Lord Justice Taylor to look into the traffic
ary’s                                                                          membership scheme. O n the first m atter, my hon. Friend
         arrangements for visiting fans, bearing in mind the
kets.    abysmal signposting and the sometimes rather odd                      is touching on a point that is sensitive in the football
;kets                                                                          industry, but he is right to say th at those in it m ust examine
         decisions o f traffic police when they are directing fans
icial.                                                                         carefully the priorities for spending their n o t inconsider­
         towards the ground?
atre;                                                                          able resources.
            Secondly, can the Home Secretary inform us that the
 hose    South Yorkshire police will reply directly to the inquiry,               Mr. Richard Cabom (Sheffield, Central): I associate
  said   and will not allow the West M idlands police to answer on             myself with all the remarks m ade by my Sheffield
n up     their behalf?                                                         colleagues on the O pposition Benches. I was a t the ground,
its to                                                                         with my hon. Friend the M ember for Knowsley, N orth
t on         Mr. Hurd: The question of traffic and signposting is              (M r. H o w arth ). I ask the Home Secretary to take action
oing,     certainly within the terms of reference of the inquiry, and          on perimeter fencing. Yesterday, I spoke to some
 nnot     I shall make sure that it is noted.                                  experienced engineers, one o f whom said th at this was an
>tball       On the second point, as I explained earlier, the chief            accid en t waiting to happen. I call on the H om e Secretary
          constable believes— and I think that he is quite right—that          to ensure that no m ajor games are played with fans kept
          since the actions of some o f his officers are obviously a           behind perimeter fencing.
ckets
          matter for the investigation, it is right, for the credibility of       Today, the media have been singled out, and the local
>s— is
          the exercise, that the police preparing the inform ation for         radio stations in Sheffield, both Radio H allam and Radio
is the
          Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry, let alone for eventual                Sheffield, played a m ajor part in helping to co-ordinate the
/ Hill
          inquests, should not belong to the same force. Therefore,            m agnificent efforts made by the Sheffield people in, for
lould
          the chief constable looked for, and found, another force             example, blood donation and other services, and the

              29 CD39/10 Job 3-4
 39                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster          17 APRIL 1989                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster            4

 [ M r . R ic h a rd C a b o m ]                                    identity card scheme, and I say that from experienc
                                                                    because I live alongside the Leeds United football grounc
 arrangem ents between the Liverpool and Sheffield                  However, if the reports are in favour o f identity cards,
 families. W hen the Home Secretary looks at the White              would be prepared to change my mind. Therefore, the Bii
 Paper on broadcasting and particularly at that part                should be abandoned until the reports are in.
 dealing with local radio, I ask him to bear that effort in
                                                                         M r. Hurd: I have listened to the right hon. Gentlemai
 mind. Local radio showed w hat magnificent assistance it
 can give in a tragedy.                                             and to others who have said this. The comments would b
                                                                    ju st if this tragedy had occurred under the new regime
    My m ain point to the Home Secretary is that he should
                                                                    [ In te r r u p tio n .] The right hon. Gentlem an knows th
 consider carefully the removal o f those fences. I think he
                                                                    origins o f this proposal. He knows the recommendation ii
 will find th at all the m ajor engineers were saying that that
 was an accident waiting to happen.                                 the final Popplewell report and the nature o f the scheme
                                                                    He knows, as I have said and as my hon. Friend th<
    M r. Hurd: I agree with the hon. Gentlem an about local         M em ber for Welwyn, Hatfield (M r. Evans) has jus
 radio. The perim eter fences are n o t there by accident. They     confirmed, th at the Bill sets up an enabling framework. Hi
 are there because local authorities, to issue safety               knows that my right hon. Friend the Secretary o f State fo
 certificates, have often required them as a form of                the Environm ent has already committed himself n o t t<
 protection against violence.                                       implement the membership scheme, which is the core o
                                                                    p art I, within the enabling framework, until satisfactory
      M r. Hattersley: N o, against hooliganism.                    arrangem ents have been worked out. H e knows w hat is ir
    M r. Hurd: The danger o f violence has not gone away.           the Bill about the m aking of those arrangements. The righ
W hat is re lired is a way to reconcile the need to protect         hon. Gentlem an is accustomed to seeing thin;, . in the
spectators against violence with the need for people to be          round and do not believe that he would argue that
able to get out on to the pitch, o r to get back in the case        because there was no violence at Hillsborough, which ]
o f emergency. T hat is tackled in the Home Office guidance,        concede, we can forget the lessons o f earlier disaster;
but it did n o t work successfully at Hillsborough. That is         where there was violence, and which were examined b\
the nature o f the problem th at the inquiry will have to           M r. Justice Popplewell.
tackle.
                                                                        M r. Denis Howell (Birmingham, Small H eath): O r
    M r. David Evans (Welwyn, Hatfield): Is not the                 behalf o f all those who were present on Saturday to face
Football Spectators Bill about separating the hooligans             first the traum a and then the grief o f w hat happened, I ask
from the football fans? It is an enabling Bill and the FM A         the Home Secretary firmly to repudiate the provocative,
and football itself will put forward a scheme for the               inaccurate and disgraceful statements m ade by represen­
Secretary o f State to approve.                                     tatives o f U EFA and FIFA . In particular, Mr. Jacques
    Are there any plans to introduce legislation to remove          George said:
the control o f football from the Football Association and              “T h is region seem s to have a p articu larly aggressive
                                                                    m e n tality .”
the Football League, which have consistently been                   He drew comparisons with Heysel, and said that the fans
incom petent and, some would say, bloody-minded in their            were “sewage”. Sepp Blatter o f F IF A said:
attitude to football spectators? C an my right hon. Friend             “W ill th e fans never learn?”
assure us th at football families will be able to go to football     Will the Hom e Secretary support us, and I speak with the
grounds in safety and be safe within those grounds?                  authority o f the Football Association and the Football
   M r. H urd: On the second point, there is evidence of             League, in totally rejecting th at suggestion th at the
thinking ahead, which I welcome. I notice that Mr.                  Liverpool supporters and fans were in any way responsible
G raham Kelly said on the television that he supports the           for this tragedy? The H om e Secretary would carry us all
move tow ards all-seated m atches in im portant stadiums,           with him if he did so.
and I notice that the hon. M em ber for Stalybridge and                 The right hon. Gentlem an is right to realise th at there
Hyde (M r. Pendry), with his experience, agrees. It is partly       is a difference between crowd behaviour control and crowd
because o f the evidence o f fresh thinking among the               safety. As one who was there on Saturday, I know that
football authorities th at we have given th at suggestion the       there was no crisis m anagement there. TTiere was no
impetus th at I have announced today.                               apparent relationship between the fears o f those outside
                                                                    the ground and the danger to those inside the ground.
    M r. Merlyn Rees (M orley and Leeds, South): At the             There was no appreciation or understanding expressed
end o f these questions, I ask the Home Secretary and the           about conditions and delays on m otorw ays and o f the
Prime M inister to reflect on the view, which has come from         effect th a t they would have on late arrival a t the ground.
both sides o f the House, that, in the light o f Saturday—we        There was no proper crowd control and no arrangem ents
all saw it on our televisions and have read the newspapers         were apparent inside the ground for dealing with the
and the views o f interested parties—the Government                disaster and with the mass o f injuries and deaths which
should withdraw the Football Supporters Bill? They                 had to be dealt with. It was not apparent th at any member
would not be losing political face, in the light o f the           o f the police force—I do not say this critically—
feelings that have been expressed. The Taylor report will          understood th at the first priority was to get the fences
look a t these m atters afresh— those are the words o f the        down and to get the 10,000 spectators on to the field, that
H om e Secretary. The police inquiry, under the chief              being the only possible place to which they could be
constable o f the W est M idlands force, is a statutory            evacuated.
inquiry. It will be looking, legalistically but carefully, a t         I turn to the controversial aspect o f the H ook
the role o f the police. W hy not w ait until those reports are    Secretary’s statem ent. Lord Justice T aylor’s appointm ent
out and ome back with a new Bill? I am sceptical about the         to conduct the inquiry is a commendable choice and I fully

   30 CD39/11 Job 3-6
     40      41                Hillsborough Stadium Disaster             17 APRIL 1989                 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                 42

nence          support it. Is he to proceed with his inquiry on the                 intervention. If they are as he stated, they are certainly
ound.          assumption that the Football Spectators Bill will be                wholly unjustified by what occurred a t Hillsborough. I am
irds, I        enacted? It will have a profound effect upon his thinking,          grateful to the right hon. Gentlem an for getting in touch
le Bill        and that is one o f the reasons why the Bill should be              with me on Saturday night. He is correct in saying that the
               withdrawn.                                                          problems o f control and communications, some o f which
leman              Many of us are distressed by the adversarial philosophy         he listed, are central to the inquiry.
aid be         that the Government practise on sport as in other matters.              I am sorry that the right hon. M ember for Birmingham,
;gime.         They never trust the Supporters’ Associations, and the              Small Heath (M r. Howell) concluded the exchanges by
 s the         Minister has not even suggested that the association be             using what happened a t Hillsborough as a stick to beat the
ion in        appointed a member o f the Football Membership                       Football Spectators Bill— [In t e r r u p tio n . ] T hat is w hat he
heme,         authority. It is my experience, having dealt with the                did. He is straining and upsetting history to argue that the
d the         association in recent months, that there is enormous                 approach o f my right hon. Friends has been arrogant or
s just        collective wisdom and good will to be harnessed, especially          adversarial. I have been present a t several meetings at
-k. He        from football supporters and their associations’ represen­           which my right hon. Friends and my hon. Friend the
ite for       tatives. Will the Minister please take counsel from them?            Minister for Sport have been straining nerves to try to
lot to        Will he listen to what they say, as should the police and the        carry football with them. They have done this year after
are o f       football authorities? The goodwill has to be tapped.                 year. W hat is the date o f the Popplewell report? The
ictory            I say to the Home Secretary as gently as I can, but I am         answer is 1986. The effort which has been m ade by my
it is in      afraid harshly, that the decision to continue with the               right hon. Friends to build support and to carry the
; right       Football Spectators Bill in all these circumstances is a             football authorities with them has been prolonged and
n tm          profound mistake. It is appalling arrogance for the                  conscientious. It is only because th at effort did n o t yield a
  th j^ T     Government to think that they know better than anyone                voluntary scheme on the lines which M r. Justice
[lich I       else. The Government never consult the Opposition on                 Popplewell recommended th at the Bill has been drafted.
asters        these matters. They never consult football generally about               I repeat that the Bill is an enabling measure. It has been
ed by         these matters. As far as I can see— [In te r r u p tio n .] It is    worked out by my right hon. Friend’s working party. The
              true. The Minister for Sport may get upset, but three times          assurances that have been given about im plem entation are
              1 have offered from the Opposition D ispatch Box to                  crucial to it. It is in the interests o f football supporters
): On         formulate a policy that would, in effect, cross the House.           —the right hon. M ember for Small H eath rightly stressed
o  face       1 have never been invited to meet the M inister to discuss           their importance and their commitment—th at there
, I ask       these matters. This is disgraceful and it is time that this          should not remain the gap in protection that the Bill is
ative,        lack o f discussion came to an end.                                  designed to fill.
resen-            1 hope that the Home Secretary will reflect on w hat he
cques         has said today. He keeps telling us that the Government                 Mr. Nigel Spearing (Newham, South): On a point of
              will proceed with the scheme because o f previous violence,         order, Mr. Speaker, arising from the statem ent. The terms
*essive       but there has been no substantial violence within football          o f reference o f Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry are clearly
             grounds for three years.                                             wide and the timing o f the report is indeterm inate. It surely
e fans                                                                            follows that the conclusions o f such an inquiry could be
                  I am grateful to the Prime M inister for remaining in her
             place throughout the exchanges to listen to w hat everyone           contrary to the views of House th at are taken in pursuit o f
             has to say, but I say to her and to the Home Secretary that          legislation o f which we have just heard. Will you confirm,
th the                                                                            M r. Speaker, that in this instance the sub judice rule does
             anyone who was present on Saturday, as I was, will know
otball                                                                            not apply? W ould n o t that be the view o f m ost persons
             that advocates o f a membership scheme th at requires
t                                                                                 with legal training?
             harassed gatekeepers, in addition to their great traum as
ns
            and problems, to inspect cards, possibly to look a t                     Mr. Speaker: I can confirm what the hon. Gentlem an
us all
            photographs, and then to put the cards into a machine, are            says. The sub judice rule does not apply to legislation.
            saying, in effect, that they wanted the disaster to be
  there
            aggravated. T hat is the essence o f the problem.                        Mr. Allen McKay (Barnsley, West and Penistone): On
;rowd
                 I ask the Home Secretary to try to achieve a consensus           a point of order, Mr. Speaker. Given the im portance o f the
v that
            within football generally and within the House so that we             inquiry to our greatest spectator sport and to thousands of
is no
            can all agree to get through this place a Bill to deal with           our constituents, can you assure us th at the report will be
atside
            football troubles, whether they be behavioural or are                 debated before any recommendations o r observations are
ound.
            related to ground safety. If we are all convinced about the           acted upon?
ressed
>f the      merits of such a Bill, we shall be happy to support it and
                                                                                      Mr. Speaker: T hat is not a m atter for me but I am sure
ound.       to secure its passage in record time. I ask the Home
            Secretary to take on board the collective view o f everyone           th a t the hon. Gentlem an’s words have been heard by those
ments                                                                             who are responsible.
h the       in the country, except the members of H er Majesty’s
which       Government, that the Football Spectators Bill should be                   EUROPEAN COMMUNITY DOCUMENTS
            withdrawn in the interest o f public safety.
;mber                                                                                Ordered,
illy—                                                                                T h at E uropean C om m u n ity D o cu m en t N o . 4092/1/89 on
               Mr. Hurd: I have not read the generalisations which the
 ences                                                                            pesticide residues be referred to a S tan d in g C o m m ittee on
            right hon. Gentleman quoted a t the beginning o f his                 E uropean C om m unity D ocum ents.— [Mr. Maclean.]
 , th at
Id be

io m e
tment
[fully
              31 CD39/I2 Job 3-9
