                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                  POLICE AUTHORITY
  SgSSSttS?                                                                             "-EESBSS
                               SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT
                                P.O. BOX 37, Regent Street, BARNSLEY, Sooth Yorkshire, S70 2PQ

  OurM COM/AH \                                Yourfm.                               a*K 7 September 1990

  Ihis matter b being dealt with by   Mr A Harrison                                  Telephone ext   611


      To:      Members of the South Yorkshire
               Police Authority


       Dear Member
       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
       A meeting of the South Yorkshire Police Authority will be held on Friday 14
       September 1990 at the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, Regent Street, Barnsley
       at 11.00 am.
       Car parking will be available for Members of the Authority at the rear of the
       building and a map showing its location is enclosed.
       Agenda below.
       Yours faithfully




#4)    R C Johnston
       Clerk and Financial Officer

       AGENDA

        1      Urgent Items. To determine whether there are any additional items of
               business which by reason of special circumstances the Chairman is of the
               opinion should be considered at this meeting (the reasons for such urgency
                to be stated).
        2      Exclusion of Public and Press. To identify items where resolutions may be
               moved to exclude the public and press. (For items marked * the public and
                press may be excluded from the meeting).

                                                                                                           /.
-   2-


3        Police Authority Certificates of Commendation. On 11 May 1990, the
         Authority resolved to award its Certificate of Commendation to
         Mr B W Bennett, Mrs D Bennett, Miss C F Bennett, Mr R Bottomley, and
         Mr K N B J McHugh in recognition of their courageous, determined and public
         spirited actions on 10 February 1990 resulting in a perpetrator of a crime
         having been brought to justice. The five recipients have all indicated
         that they will be present at this meeting of the Authority to receive the
         Certificates of Commendation.
4        Minutes of the meeting of the Authority held on 3 August 1990.
         Print attached.
5        Minutes of Committees.
         A    Accountability, Complaints and Discipline Committee - 17 August 1990.
              Print attached.
         B    Finance and General Purposes Committee - 24 August 1990.
              Print attached.                                                  ^
6        Conference - "Taking the Initiative" - AMA National Housing and Direct
         Services Conference - Birmingham, 26-28 February 1990.
         Copy letter from AMA attached.
7        Crime Summary and Statistics
         Report of Chief Constable attached.
8        Crime Prevention - Quarterly Report.
         Report of Chief Constable attached.
9        Home Office Circular 44/1990 - Crime Prevention: The Success of the
         Partnership Approach.
         Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer attached.
    10   National Crime Prevention Week.
         Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer attached.
    11   Efficiency Scrutiny - Force Driving School - Deployment of Manpower
         Savings.
         Report of Chief Constable attached.
    12   Terms of Reference of the Appeals Panel.
         Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer attached.
    13   Accounts 1989/90.
         A    Summary.
              Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer attached.
         B    Capital Receipts.
              Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer attached.
    14   Hillsborough Enquiry - DPP's Decision on Criminal Proceedings.
         Report of the Chief Constable attached.
-   3-


-3-

15         Circulars, Etc.
           A       Home Office Circular 69/1990 - Football Exclusion Orders and
                   Attendance Centre Orders.
                   Copy attached.
           B       Home Office Letter - Staff Appraisal and Career Development for Police
                   Officers in England and Wales.
                   Copy attached.
    16     List of Outstanding and/or Requested Reports.                 mutable
           Joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
           attached.
    17     To consider the exclusion of the public and press from the meeting before
           d iscuss1on takes piace on the following itenis of business, on the grounds
           that in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public
           and press were present there would be a disclosure to then, of e«n,pt
           information within the meaning of the LocalT6° vern,? ® ^ x A ^ !   as
           amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985.

    * 18 J o l n t ^ e p o r t ' o f   tBTSuf cSSSbte J S tt.   Clerk and Financial Officer
         attached.
    ★1 9       charges for Policing Football Matches and Other Special Events.
               A    Joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
                    Constable attached.
               B    Recommendations of the Finance and General Purposes Committee
                    attached.
    *20        The Police (Discipline) (Senior Officers) Regulations 1985.
               Report t o follow ?F0R POLICE AUTHORITY MEMBERS ONLY).

    NOTE: In accordance with Police Authority Minute 41(b) of 30 May 1986, the
    Force Complaints Book will be available for inspection by Members of the
    Authority upon the conclusion of the Meeting.




     WP004071/AH
