                        N O T F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as it
                        contains     exempt information
                        within para.                          of
                        Sch.l2A to the Local G o v e r n o r 1
                        Act 1972 as am? .H-             ______


 P0LET43/SW/MR                                                     21 Au9ust 1989
                     Mr S Walker                                        620

Dear Mr Addison
HILLSBOROUGH : COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
Thank you for your letter of 9 August. The Police Authority considered the
matter again at its meeting held on Friday, 18 August, and wish me to reiterate
the view that the costs incurred by the Chief Constable of West Midlands Police
at the service of the Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor are properly chargeable to
the Home Office. This view is emphasised by the remarks of Lord Justice Taylor
in paragraph 5 of his interim report.
However, your clarification of the work undertaken by West Midlands Police, and
which is subject to the special payment, has proved helpful - by way of
clarification it is assumed this work includes the recently announced criminal
investigation.
In these circumstances, the Authority is now prepared to agree that as a matter
of practical expediency, it will reimburse West Midlands Police Authority the
total costs of the Inquiry by their Chief Constable, subject to confirmation
from the Home Office that the grant arrangements set out in Lord Ferrers letter
of 27 June will apply to all such expenditure including any interest charged by
that Authority and any interest incurred by South Yorkshire Police Authority
arising from any delay between the rendering of accounts by it and receipt ot
payment from the Home Office.
Clearly the amounts involved will be large, therefore it seems to me to be
appropriate that we agree a mechanism for ensuring prompt reimbursement of
monies to the Authority. When replying perhaps you will let me have your views
on this also.
Yours sincerely


 R C Johnston
 Clerk and Financial Officer
 Mr M J Addison
 Home Office
 Queen Anne’s Gate
 LONDON
 SW1H 9AT
    P0LET49/SW/MR                    POL/89 850/4/30         23 August 1989
                     Mr S Walker                                       620
Dear Mr Addison
RE HILLSBOROUGH - COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
Having spoken to Mr Waghorn of your department yesterday, it is appropriate that
I further clarify the offer made in my letter of 21August toensure there is no
doubt as to the terms of any agreement between us regarding the payment of
expenditure incurred by West Midlands Police.
The Authority agrees subject to their financial contribution being absolutely
limited to the amount set out in Lord Ferrers letter dated 27 June 1989 whereby
the total payment should not exceed the product of the-^vPenny rate estimated at
£975,000, as a matter of practical expediency to reimburse West Midlands Police
Authority their total costs.
This is agreed on the clear understanding that the total costs of West Midlands
Police will cover their work in connection with:-
1 Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
2 The preparation of evidence for the inquests in South Yorkshire
3 The criminal investigation advised by the Director of Public Prosecutions
4    Cases taken to the criminal or civil courts and;
5 Any related matter of discipline or complaint.
This agreement is conditional upon your confirmation that all the above
expenditure, together with any interest charged by the West Midlands Police
Authority and any interest incurred by the South Yorkshire Police Authority
arising from any delay between the rendering of accounts by that Authority and
receipt of payment from the Home Office will be subject to the level of
assistance and contribution limit payable by the South Yorkshire Police
Authority detailed in Lord Ferrers letter of 27 June.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has let me have sight of a letter of 17
August from Mr Geoffrey Dear in which he confirms that it would be logical for
his Force to take on the added responsibility for any criminal aspect and any
disciplinary matters which may emerge. That Force will willingly take on these
added responsibilities to its current investigation but Mr Dear points out that
his Police Authority have asked him to seek a written assurance that expenditure
Mr M J Addison                                                     /         ...
Home Office
Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT
                                      -   2   -




incurred by his Force will be met in full by the South Yorkshire Police with or
without Home Office assistance. Obviously I cannot give this assurance at the
present time and certainly the South Yorkshire Police cannot, but I am sure none
of us would wish the criminal inquiry to be held up whilst the Home Office and
the South Yorkshire Police Authority negotiate responsibility for the
expenditure referred to earlier in this letter. I mention this because it does
highlight the need for an urgent resolution of the expenditure issue.

Yours sincerely




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer
                                                 H   ome   O   ffic e

                                                QUEEN ANNE'S CATE
                                                LONDON SWIH9AT



                                               01-273 2746




Your refs POLET43/SW/MR
Our ref: POL/89 850/4/30



R C Johnston Esq BA IPFA
Clerk and Financial Officer to the
  South Yorkshire Police Authority
PO Box 37
Regent street
Barnsley
South Yorkshire
S70 2PQ                                              31 August 1989




HILLSBOROUGH: COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

Thank you for your letters of 21 and 23 August to Mr Addison
informing us that South Yorkshire Police Authority is now
prepared to agree that it will reimburse West Midlands Police
Authority the additional costs of the investigation by the West
Midlands Police subject to clarification of some matters.
It is a matter of long-standing Government policy that Central
Government grant should not be paid on interest costs. We cannot
therefore consider paying special grant or indeed ordinary police
grant on any interest charged by the West Midlands Police
Authority. For your information we are not aware of any instance
where one police authority has agreed to pay another interest on
the costs of an investigation.
With regard to whether the special payment will cover the cost of
the criminal investigation announced recently, together with
related costs of cases taken to court, this was not included in
the original offer of a special payment. Moreover, investigation
of criminal offences is part of the force's normal function.
However, as Mr Addison's letter of 9 August indicated, we
anticipate that much of the work already completed by the West
Midlands police as part of their original investigation should
prove helpful to the new criminal investigation and will still
qualify for the special payment.
If South Yorkshire Police Authority wish to pursue special
payment for new work related to the criminal investigation we
will need to consider this separately with details of costs and
reasons why your authority considers these costs should qualify
for special payment.
Your letter of 23 August and Mr Walker in his recent telephone
conversation with us, asked for clarification of the penultimate
paragraph of Mr Addison's letter of 9 August and whether the
special payment will also apply to the costs of work undertaken
by West Midlands Police connected with the Coroner's inquest, .
discipline and complaints investigation. As Mr Addison stated in
his letter much of the work already undertaken will be relevant
to these areas with some presentational adjustment. However, I
can confirm that the additional costs of such further work
carried out on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police by the West
Midlands Police in these areas will qualify for special payment.
As Mr Addison's letter made clear, any work which is being
undertaken by forces other than West Midlands in relation to
disciplinary investigations would not qualify for special payment
and as stated above we will require more information about the
major criminal investigation costs before making a decision on
whether to include these in the special payment arrangements.
With regard to the second paragraph of your letter of 23 August
we have been advised that the product of a penny rate is
£1,026,750 rather than the estimated figure of £975,000 quoted
previously.

In conclusion, we suggest that your authority should make
arrangements for paying the outstanding amounts to avoid further
delay. We are in contact with HM Treasury to organise the method
of making special payments to you to assist with meeting the
costs and our Finance Division will be in contact with your
Finance Department as soon as possible to discuss and arrange the
mechanism for reimbursement.




                                             S W BOYS SMITH
                                                                                           p. l
  ■'8 9 -0 9 -1c: 11

                                                        SufPiE.K EtJrA L ~
                       NOT F O R P U B L I C A T I O N as it T D A tStfeM VA
                       contains   exempt information                    N3o.
                       within para           14:....... of          HOME OFFICE
                       Sch.l2A to the Local Government Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                       Act 1972 as amended.                         Direct line; 01-273
                                                              Switchboard: 01*273 £>68 3


Our reference:    POV89 850/4/30
Your reference:   POLET 43/SW/MR




  R C Johneton Esq BA IPFA
  Clerk and Financial Officer
   to the South Yorkshire
   Police Authority
  PO Box 37
  Regent Street
  Barnsley
  South Yorkshire
  S70 2PQ                                                     12 September 1989


  <1^ ■€.c-w~/

  HILLSBOROUGH x COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

  5 r*£fr          telephone conversation between Mr Waghorn of this
                  Mr-
                 MrcW?iJ?r     7 SePtem£)er  which Mr Walker informed
       f       ?y* SmithJ a letter of 31 August will be discussed at
  the forthcoming meeting of your finance and general purposes
  committee on 15th September.                      y»n«*xraj. purposes

  I T 'X *                 °ould toe some concern over paragraphs 3 and
              Smith a letter, which cover the costa of the criminal
 investigation announced recently, it may be helpful if I clarifv
               ’Jil9hl1Ky Pf ior *0 Friday By »e.tingT £UlIt w«a not o £
 intention to give the impression that we would not agree to the
 special payment on these costs, although we did consider that some
 S5J5 <'W    already undertaken by the West Midlands Police could be
 used in connection with the criminal investigation at no extra
 008 w   •




        ®oy,* s*lth ■ai. d ' th# criminal investigation costs were not
                       g       offc* of sPecial payment.   What we need
                          in^on?lltl°n     the likely scale of the new
 criminal investigation including an estimate of the number of
          .involy*d '        Possible length of time required and the
 additional cost.     Mr Walker did mention that it could be in the
         * 5° ???{ over • P**lod          ^ to 6 months at a cost of
 about half a million pounds.
’ 8 9 -0 9 -1 2 11                                                  p.;




          that til* proposed coats are rtaaonabl*, th«m th« special
 payuvnt would extend to them as part of the nactssarv
 investigations by West Midlands arising from Hillsborough.

                      w* Vt.ry„?^fh h°P® that y°ur authority can commence
           mi 1
            U£°r
                  I     ?     Midlands in respect of the costa of Lord
                                  itself which the West Midlands Police
 West MidlandM aw«
 o? f
                              ?V°  ?*? f°r*  Zt   a**tta unfair to leave the
                             f°r reimbJuraeaent of these itema. on receipt
 Sf                           cono*rnin,3 the criminal investigation costs
 possible.     y°U          “ substantive reply on this point as soon as




                                                  M J ADDISON
SOUTH
YORKSHIRE
JOINT
SECRETARIAT




              With the Compliments of
          THE CLERK TO THE SECRETARIAT



This matter is being dealt with by:
P.O. Box 37
Regent Street
Barnsley
South Yorkshire                       Telephone No. Barnsley 733222
S70 2PQ                                              Ext.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

FINANCE AND GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE - 15 SEPTEMBER 1989
                                                     NOT FOR P U B L I C A T I O N as it
CONSEQUENTIAL COSTS OF HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTEF contains exexpt          information
                                                     within para. ...IHr. . . . . of
Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer            Sch.l2A to the Local Government
                                                     Act 1972 as amended.
      Matter for Consideration
      Financing of West Midlands Police inquiry in the light of the currently
      identifiable costs flowing from the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.
2     Background Information
      The following documents were circulated as part of the Agenda for the
      current meeting:
      (a)       Report on claims for compensation (Item 14A)
       (b)      Latest correspondence with Home Office on financing of West
                Midlands Police inquiry (letters dated 21/23/31 August 1989)
                 (Item 14B)
       (c)      Revenue Monitoring 1989/90 (Item 4A)
3     Comment
3.1   The total potential charge to the Authority in respect of compensation
      claims ranges from nothing to several million £s. It is unlikely but not
      impossible that any of this will be paid in the current year. However
      irrespective of the year in which the charge falls to be paid or accounted
      for, the possible extent of the liability will need to be taken into
      account in preparing the Authority’s budget and setting the community
      charge for 1990/91.
3.2   The Home Office letter of 31 August 1989 excludes from the current offer
      of special grant aid towards the costs of the West Midlands Police inquiry
      (a)       interest charges (which will not even qualify for ordinary police
                grant). These are assessed to date at £60,000;
      (b)       new work related to the criminal investigation;
3.3   At a meeting on Monday, 11 September, officers of West Midlands Police
      Authority indicated that costs identified and quantified up to the end of
      July were just under £2m but that this figure could be substantially
      enhanced by computer and accommodation charges and claims for additional
      payments under Police Regulations by the officers concerned.
3.4   West Midlands are unable to give even an approximate indication of the
      cost of the criminal investigation. Their officers indicate that
      significant re-interviewing will be necessary because of the criminal
      nature of the new investigation but that the extent of this will depend on
      the instructions from the Director of Public Prosecutions and the advising
      Queen’s Counsel. Work on the Coroner’s inquest and disciplinary hearings
      will continue in parallel with the new inquiry and in many cases will be
      inextricably interlinked. The officers suggest moreover that it would be
      improper for them to discuss this matter in detail with South Yorkshire
      officers in the manner envisaged by the Home Office letter.
3.5   Thus only the contribution of the Authority to the accepted elements of
      the West Midlands Police inquiry can currently be estimated at a maximum
       figure of £1.03m (the product of 3/4p rate).
3.6   As shown at item 4 on the Agenda the estimated balances available to the
       Authority to meet these costs are £2.717m providing that
      (a)     there is no other call on the Operational Contingency during the
              remainder of the year; and
      (b)     that the projected budget overspend is accommodated by offsetting
              savings.
4     Conclusion
      Following the meeting with West Midlands’ officers on 11 September,
      arrangements are being made for a joint meeting at officer level with the
      Home Office with the objective of
      (a)     persuading them to accept the cost of the criminal    investigation
               for the purpose of their original offer of special   assistance;
      (b)     to challenge their stance on interest charges; and
      (c)     to discuss for the first time their attitude to the potential
               uninsured cost of claims for damages.
      Depending on the outcome of this meeting it may then be necessary to
      request a meeting at Ministerial level.




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer



P0RCJ41
                                             S uPPL£>fkf\rrAl- >€>

                                              \s)o«       \°c
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

FjNANCE AND GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE - 15 SEPTEMBER 1989

CONSEQUENTIAL COSTS OF HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
NOTES OF AND COMMENTS ON A MEETING WITH HOME OFFICE OFFICIALS ON 14 SEPTEMBER

Report of the Clerk and Financial Officer

1     Present at the meeting were:
      Mr J Addison, Home Office
      Mr S Harmer, West Midlands Police Authority
      ACC Jones, West Midlands Police Authority
      Mr R C Johnston, South Yorkshire Police Authority
2    The purpose of the meeting was to clarify the stance of various parties on
      the financing of the consequential costs of the Hillsborough Disaster.
3    West Midlands Inouirv
      The Home Office position is
      i    Criminal Inquiry - agree in principle that this should be covered by
            the offer of special assistance to South Yorkshire. Home Office
            constrained by initial level of approved expenditure (£5m) which has
            been agreed by HM Treasury. Also concerned that expenditure
            incurred by West Midlands should be tightly controlled and monitored
            by South Yorkshire. Accepted however that South Yorkshire could not
            properly do more than check the detail of the expenditure as opposed
            to commenting on its general reasonableness.
      ii   It remains a firm plank of Home Office (and Treasury) policy that
            interest charges are not acceptable for grant.
      West Midlands fully accept the need to control the costs of their inquiry
      and account in detail to South Yorkshire.   They will not however accept
      the Home Office ruling on interest but are anxious that South Yorkshire
      should reimburse expenditure as soon as possible in order to minimise
      interest charges without waiting for a decision on this point.
      I stated that, subject to agreement to this tactic at political level,
      South Yorkshire could now start meeting West Midlands accounts subject to
      deduction of any interest charges and to the ability of the Home Office to
      make immediate reimbursements. This last was confirmed by Mr Addison.
4    Future Years
      Mr Addison made it clear that the offer of financial assistance was
      confined to current year expenditure on the basis that it was exceptional
      and unexpected. Fdr future years the Authority was in a position to
      budget for further expenditure and could not expect additional grant.
     I explained the latest outlook on compensation claims and that expenditure
     on various aspects of the inquiry would carry over into 1990/91 at the
     least. I indicated that the Authority would probably make a formal
     application for further special assistance to which a response in
     principle would be needed before the end of the budget cycle.
5    Conclusions
     With the exception of the issue of interest payments the terms of the
     Authority’s resolution on 18 August are now met. It is therefore
     recommended that
     i     subject to agreement with West Midlands at member level, the
           Authority agrees to reimburse West Midlands Police Authority for the
            costs of the inquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster excluding     J
            interest; and                                                  ^
     ii    a formal approach be made to the Home Office regarding future year
            consequential costs.
     I explained the latest outlook on compensation claims and that expenditure
     on various aspects of the inquiry would carry over into 1990/91 at the
     least. I indicated that the Authority would probably make a formal
     application for further special assistance to which a response in
     principle would be needed before the end of the budget cycle.




R C Johnston
Clerk and Financial Officer
