SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
TOWN   HALL. BARNSLEY - 3 AUGUST 1990

PRESENT: Councillor Sir John Layden (in the Chair)
         Councillors: G Gallimore (Vice-Chairman), D A Axe, C J C Betts,
         J M Cromar, R Fisher, D W George, R W Gillies, R P McCormick,
         C Swindell, R Whitfield.
         Magistrate Members: Mrs B R Bullivant, K Goodall, H D Hepworth,
         J Ludlam, Dr H H Smith, D E Wilburn.
30     SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT SECRETARIAT - STAFF
       The Chairman announced that David Vaughan, Principal Administrator of the
       Committee Services Section in the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, would
       be retiring after 34 years local government service on 12 August 1990 and,
       together with other Members, thanked him for his services to the Police
       Authority and wished him well for the future.
31     URGENT ITEM
       The Chairman reported that he had agreed that an urgent item relating to the
       legal hearing held in Liverpool on 31 July 1990 on test cases in two areas
       should be considered later in the Agenda to enable Members to be kept as
       fully up-dated as possible.
32     MINUTES
       A    Annual Meeting - 22 June 1990
       RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the Annual Meeting of the Authority held on
       22 June 1990 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
       B    Normal Meetino - 22 June 1990
       The Chairman pointed out that Minute 17 (Members' Allowances) had not been
       acted upon as the introduction of the new Regulations had been deferred yet
       again by the Government to an as yet unspecified date.
       The Chief Constable reported that in relation to Minute 20.2 (Crime Summary
       and Statistics), the requested meeting with the Directors of Housing of the
       four Constituent District Councils had been arranged and was to take place
       on 9 October 1990.
       RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the normal meeting of the Authority held on
       22 June 1990 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
 33    MINUTES OF COMMITTEES
       A    Accountability. Complaints and Discipline Committee - 6 July 1990,
        The Minutes of the meeting of the Accountability, Complaints and Discipline
        Committee held on 6 July 1990 were submitted.
The Authority discussed minute 5 (Lay Visiting) and expressed concern as to
the conditions in which detainees were being kept at the Bridge Street
Charge Office, Sheffield in consequence of the South Yorkshire Police having
to house Strangeways prisoners, particularly during the current extremely
hot weather.
The Authority also discussed the intent of Minute 4.2 (Community
Consultation) relating to the approval of Urban Action Schemes costing up to
£500 per scheme.
RESOLVED
1    That, subject to the referral of Minute 4.2 to the Finance and General
     Purposes Committee for further consideration and to the maintenance of
     the status quo in the meantime, the Minutes of the meeting of the
     Accountability, Complaints and Discipline Committee held on 6 July 1990
      (set out as Appendix "A" to these Minutes) be agreed and confirmed.
2    That representations be made to the Home Secretary as to the adverse
     conditions for detainees, as well as the problems facing the police, m
     consequence of the housing of prisoners from Strangeways Goal,
     particularly during the current extremely hot weather.
B    Finance and General Purposes Committee - 13 July 1990
The Minutes of the meeting of the Finance and General Purposes Committee
held on 13 July 1990 were submitted.
RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of the Finance and General
Purposes Committee held on 13 July 1990 (set out as Appendix 'B to these
Minutes) be agreed and confirmed.
CRIME DETECTION RATE IN SHEFFIELD (NORTH) DIVISION
In accordance with Minute 20.3 of 22 June 1990, the Chief Constable
submitted a report on the crime detection rate in the Sheffield (North)
Division, including categories of crime and crime trends in the Division, as
well as steps and initiatives taken to prevent and detect crime and reduce
the fear of crime.
He considered that the Division showed total commitment and boundless
enthusiasm in its efforts to achieve the best possible results and, whilst
detection rates were one area of assessment, it was essential that they were
not seen in isolation.
 Whilst generally welcoming the report, the Authority felt that the subject
 of the priorities employed by the Police had not been addressed and queried
 in particular the resources committed to and the successes achieved by
 Operation Blue Light.
RESOLVED: -

1    That the contents of the report be generally welcomed.
2    That the Chief Constable be requested to submit up-dating reports to
     future meetings of the Authority on Operation Blue Light during its
     operational lifetime.
CRIME SUMMARY AND STATISTICS
The Chief Constable submitted the Crime Summary and Statistics for the
period January to June 1990, and pointed out that for the first time, the
Summary included comments by the respective Divisional Commanders on the
crime position in each of the six Divisions of the force.
Compared with January to June 1989, there had been an increase of 13.33% in
recorded crime, with a detection rate of 43.82% (42.19% over the same period
in 1989)
The Authority discussed possible reasons for the continuing increase in
reported crime, both in South Yorkshire and nationally, the abuses which can
occur at car boot sales and the need for the public to be more
discriminating in what they purchase at such sales, the displacement of
crime as between Sub -Division and Sub-Division, between Division and
Division and between Force and Force, as well as the recent media reports of
Home Office advice to Chief Constables as to the future policy to be applied
in cases of domestic violence.
RESOLVED;-
1    That the contents of the report be noted.
2    That the Chief Constable be requested to consider and report on the
     feasibility or otherwise of recording separately in future crime
      statistic reports the cases of domestic violence.
3    That it be noted that the Chief Constable intends tosubmit aCrime
      Prevention Strategy Report to the future meeting of the Police
      Authority.
4    That the Chief Constable be requested to consider and report on the
      feasibility or otherwise of submitting in graph form the crime trends
      over the past 5 years to enable the Constituent District Councils and
      the Police to target their sparse resources in the most effective
     manner.
5    That the Chief Constable be requested to arrange for the Divisional
      Commanders to be present at future Police Authority meetings on those
      occasions when the report on "Crime Summary and Statistics" is on the
      Agenda.
- 4 -



36      CONFERENCES
        The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on an invitation for the
        Police Authority to be represented at the 1990 International Police
        Exhibition and Conference to be held at the Barbican Centre, ILondon
        to 20 September, and recalled the previous policy of the Authority on such
        invitations.
        RESOLVED:-
        1    That, as in previous years, the Authority nominate one Police Authority
             MuterVol Sach of the Constituent District Counci Is . together w th a
             Magistrate Member (with representation Iby .dlff®rer,t     J^5tioi and
             Members on different days in view of the duration of the IExhibltion and
             Conference) to attend the 1990 International Police |xhlfjtion and
             Conference to be held in London from 17 to 20 September i990, the
             attendance of such Members to be regarded as Approved Duty .
        2    That, in view of difficulties in past years, the Conference
              be pressed to ensure that full conference papers are made available for
              the 1990 Conference.
37      FFFICIENCY SCRUTINY - FORCE DRIVING SCHOOL
        In accordance with Minute 140 of 10 February 1989, the Chief Constable
        submitted a report on the Final Report on the Driving Scl?°olf^ ! l1?J®ncy
        Scrutiny following the completion of the six-monthly review from the
        implementation date.
        Whilst savings of £728,220 had been achieved in the first year,              ^ ings
        were mainly manpower deployment savings and were not reflected in actual
        budget reductions. T h e V ^ c i p l e aim of the Scrut ny had been to ens re the
        most cost effective use of resources, and had led to more cost effective
        deployment of existing manpower and vehicles.
        Budget savings had been achieved since the S c r u t i n y b y the non-renewal of
        the Lease of the former Driving School premises at Brightside Lane,
         Sheffield, the reduced instructor complement having been temporarily
         accommodated at the Ecclesfield Training School until the ®a™ a r k e d
         accommodation in the new Attercliffe Police Station becomes available.
         RESOLVED:-
         1    That the final outcome of the Driving School Efficiency Scrutiny, as
              now submitted, be noted.
         9 That the Chief Constable be requested to submit a report to the next
              m eeting of the Authority as to the deployment of the manpower saved .n
               consequence of the Efficiency Scrutiny.




                                                    \
INSPECTIONS. ETC
A    Annual Inspection
The Chief Constable submitted a report on the Annual Inspection of the Force
by HM Inspector of Constabulary Mr Colin Sampson, CBE, QPM from 12 to 16
November 1990.
RESOLVED - That, in accordance with previous policy:-
(i) in order to permit matters of mutual interest to be discussed
    informally, HM Inspector be invited to lunch with the Authority at
    Police Headquarters, Sheffield on Friday, 16 November 1990, and
(ii) Members of the Authority be authorised to accompany HM Inspector of
     Constabulary on visits to Police premises in their area,
and that the attendance of Members be regarded as "Approved Duty".
B    Annual Review and Presentation of Awards - Special Constabulary
The Chief Constable submitted a report detailing the arrangements for the
fourteenth Annual Review of the South Yorkshire Special Constabulary and
inviting Authority Members to be present.
RESOLVED - That the Authority accept the Chief Constable's invitation to be
present at the fourteenth Annual Review of the South Yorkshire Special
Constabulary to be held on Sunday, 23 September 1990 at the Doncaster
Racecourse Exhibition Hall, and that the attendance of individual Members
who are able to attend the Review be regarded as "Approved Duty".
NO.3 REGIONAL CRIME SQUAD - CREATION OF "CONTINGENCY FUND"
The Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable submitted a report
on a request from the Honorary Treasurer to the No.3 Regional Crime Squad
Committee for the Authority to re-consider its previous decision of 15 May
1987 (Minute 200) not to support the creation and operation of a contingency
fund.
There would not be any call on the Constituent Authorities for additional
contributions over and above the normal level of contribution. The proposal
was, that, in any year in which the actual expenditure incurred by the Squad
was less than the sums recouped from the Constituent Authorities, then the
practice of repaying surplus contributions would no longer be applied and
the balance held by the Honorary Treasurer as a Contingency Fund (pending
the Regional Crime Squad Committee's approval to its utilisation and subject
to an upper limit of £100,000 on the Fund balance).
RESOLVED - That the Authority re-affirm the policy contained in Minute 200
of 15 May 1987, not to support the creation and operation by the No.3
Regional Crime Squad Committee of a Contingency Fund as it is still
considered that any shortfalls should be dealt with by that Committee's
normal budgetary process (including consulting the constituent authorities).
- 6 -


40      ITST OF OUTSTANDING AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
        In accordance with Finance and General Purposes C w m l t t w HlnMte 1.2 of
        9 June 1989, a joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
        Constable was submitted on outstanding and/or requested reports.
        In relation to item 1, (Crime Prevention Report), the Chief Constable
        reported that it was hoped to submit a report, including current issues, to
        a meeting of the Police Authority in the near future.
        In reply to a query from the Authority relating to a recent
        Circular on Crime Prevention which required a response by Octobcr, the C 1erk
        and Financial Officer reported that the matter would be submitted to the 14
        September meeting of the Authority.
        RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
41      TTFMS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE ABSENCE OF THE PUBLIC
        RESOLVED - That, under Section 100(A)(47 of    the Local Government Act 1972,
        the public be excluded from the meeting for    the following items of Jusiness
        on the grounds that they involve the likely    disclosure of exempt
        as defined in paragraphs 1, 7 or 14 of Part    1 of Schedule 12A of the Act as
        appropriate.
42      APPFALS PANEL - 20 JUNE 199.0
        The Minutes of the meeting of the Appeals Panel held on 20 June 1990 to hear
        a grading appeal were submitted.
        At the request of the Chairman, clarification was given to the Authority as
        to the actual gradings involved in the appeal.
        RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting of the Appeals Panel held on
        20 June 1990 now submitted be received.
         NOTE - At the suggestion of the Chairman and with the agreement of the
         Authority, the order of business of the meeting was amended from that shown
         on the Agenda.
 43      POSSIBLE AWARD OF FURTHER POLICE AUTHORITY CERTIFICATE OF CQMENDATION.
         The Chief Constable submitted a report detailing the circumstances «hereby
         determined and public spirited actions by members of the       1a n2
         February 1990 had ensured that a perpetrator of a crime had been brought to
         justice.
         RESOLVED - That, in the circumstances now reported, the Authority's
         Certificate of Commendation be awarded to the persons     named, and that
         arrangements be made for the presentation of the Certificates at a future
         meeting of the Authority convenient to the recipients.
NOTE - At this point, the Chairman left the meeting and took no further part
in the meeting, Councillor 6 Gallimore taking the Chair for the remaining
items.
CHARGES FOR POLICING FOOTBALL HATCHES AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS
A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
was submitted on the Authority's future policy on charging for the policing
of special events, with specific reference to the policing of football
matches.
Whilst the operational policing of such events was a matter for the Chief
Constable, the scale of charges to be applied was a matter for the
Authority.
Taking into account the recommendations of the Taylor Report and the local
conditions at and around each ground, the Chief Constable proposed to move
to a new basis whereby matches were categorised into three types ("A", "B"
and "C").
It was easy for the costs to be calculated on the proposed respective
categories, but the position had now been reached when it was for the
Authority to consider how far it was prepared to move towards recovering the
total costs of policing inside football grounds. Advice on this aspect from
the District Auditor, the Association of Metropolitan Authorities (including
a draft Home Office Circular) and the Association of Chief Police Officers
was detailed in the Report. Also detailed were the options open to the
Authority, as well as the proportion of charges for police services which
Football Clubs could reclaim from the Football Trust.
RESOLVED:-
1   That, to enable full and detailed consideration to be given to the
     matter and in view of the timescale involved, the report now submitted
     be referred to a Special Meeting of the Finance and General Purposes
     Committee to be held as soon as conveniently possible.
2    That investigations be made as a matter of urgency with a view to
     reporting at the Special Finance and General Purposes Committee as to:-
     a)   the under-writing of basic police costs incurred by individual
          football clubs by the Football Association, and
     b)   whether the 35% grant limit is to be applied by the Football Trust
          during the forthcoming 1990/91 season.
3    That the Chief Constable be requested to discuss with the South
     Yorkshire Football Clubs prior to the Special Finance and General
     Purposes Committee meeting the categorisation proposals now reported.
4   That in view of the interest of all Police Authority Members in the
     subject, a copy of the Agenda and Reports for the Special Meeting of
     the Finance and General Purposes Committee be also supplied to those
    Members who do not serve on that Committee.
45   HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
     In accordance with Minute 31 of this meeting, the Clerk and Financial
     Officer circulated to each Member present a brief report at this stage on
     the Hearing in Liverpool on Tuesday, 31 July 1990 on test cases in two areas
     (ie "remoteness" and "pre-death terror'1).
     Until the text of the judgement was received neither side intended to make a
     decision on whether to appeal.
     RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
46   COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE POLICE
     The Force Complaints Book was available for Members' inspection.




CHAIRMAN
WP003214/DV
