SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

9 April 1999

Joint Report of the Clerk and Treasurer and the Chief Constable •

OUTCOME   OF   JUDICIAL             REVIEW      IN I ^CONNECTION ^ WITH
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

1     Matter for consideration

      To provide an initial report on the judgments delivered in the Divisional
      Court following the Judicial Review hearings on 22-24 March 1999.


      2        Recommendations

      (i)      Members are asked to note this report; and

      (ii)     To defer further consideration of these matters to a future
                meeting, at which a detailed report on the issues wil! be
                submitted to members.


3     Background information

3.1   On 31 March 1999, the DivisionalCourt delivered its judgment     on:-

      (i)      the applications by theformer officers to challenge the decision
               of the DPP not to take over and discontinue the private
               prosecutions brought on behalf of the Hillsborough Family
               Support Group. (Neither the Police Authority nor the Chief
               Constable were parties to this case).

      (ii)     the application by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
               seeking clarification of the law following the decision of the
               South Yorkshire Police Authority on 5 February 1999, that the
               Authority had no power to fund the defence costs of former
               officers facing private prosecutions.

3.2   Application against DPP

      The Court decided that, except for the charge against Mr Duckenfield
      for attempting to pervert the course of justice, the applications to quash
      the DPP’s decisions were dismissed.               Therefore the private
      prosecutions in relation to the manslaughter and misfeasance charges
      will continue. The DPP has now been required to reconsider whether
      to intervene in relation to the charge of perverting the course of justice
      brought against Mr Duckenfield.                          »

3.3   Application bv the'Chief Constable

      The Court ruled that Police Authorities may in principle decide to fund
      officers’ and ex-officers’ legal representation in private prosecutions
      and Judicial Review proceedings.

      The power must be exercised for the purpose of maintaining an
      efficient and effective police force. The exercise of the power must
      also be rational, taken on relevant grounds, and in accordance with a
      fair procedure (ie “Wednesbury” principles).

      The Court emphasised that its judgment related only to the issue of
      powers; it was giving no guidance to the Police Authority on whether
      this was an appropriate case in which to make financial assistance
      available and if so, on what terms assistance should be made
      available.

      In the light of this, the Court acknowledged that the Authority would
      revisit the funding of the proceedings involving the former officers.


W J Wilkinson                                  M Hedges
Clerk and Treasurer                            Chief Constable

Officer responsible:      Bill Wilkinson, South Yorkshire Police Authority
                          Tel: 01226 772803

Background papers used in the preparation of this report are available in
the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat

Other sources:     none
