            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
            FINANCE AND GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE
            21 JUNE 1991: JOINT SECRETARIAT. BARNSLEY


            PRESENT:     Councillor Sir John Layden (Chairman)                    , u
                         Councillors: D A Axe, C J C Betts, R Fisher, D W George, R W Gillies,
                         C Swindell, C M Walayat
                         Magistrate Member: Mrs B R Bullivant

            1       URGENT ITEMS
                    The Chairman announced that he was taking an additional items dealing with
                    "Orgreave - Out of Court Settlement".
            2       QRGREAVE - OUT OF COURT SETTLEMENT
                    The Committee considered a report by the Chief Constable on the acceptance
                    of leqal advice by the South Yorkshire Police to negotiate an out of court
                    settlement in respect of claims arising from the industrial dispute at
                    Orgreave on 18 June 1984.
                    The out of court settlement amounted to payments of £425,000 damages plus
                    legal costs, which had still to be ratified by the Court.
                     The Chief Constable made a statement to the Committee dealing with the
                     events at Orgreave on the day in question, the resulting Criminal Court
                     proceedings, and decisions made by the former Chief Constable. The
                     statement then went on to deal with the consequential Civil proceedings and
                     the resulting settlement.
    A           . ' ^ T h e Chief Constable expressed his surprise at the decision of the
                       plaintiffs to disclose details of the settlement i n a d v a n c e of ratification
        ^            l.by the Court. His only advance warning had been a late night telephone
    A           » d call the previous evening suggesting that "something was to take place the
                       following day.
                     The Chief Constable drew particular attention to the reports of a rej[jest
1                    bv the Police for no publicity of the settlement. This was no more than
                     usual practice in settlements of this kind. However, as part of the
                     negotiations, once this aspect had become an issue the Police had readily
                     accepted, some 6 months ago, that it would not apply in this case.
                     The Chairman pointed out that the source of the proceedings and Civil
                     action had arisen under the previous Police Authority. T h e 1q uestions
                     involved had never been discussed by the current Police Authority. The
                     claim was against the Chief Constable. Matters had been handled
                     exclusively by the Insurers on behalf of the Chief Constable.. The
                     Authority paid a third party insurance premium of £200,000 per annum and
                     the settlement would be made by the insurers under this policy.
- 2 -

        The Chairman then referred to comments made both in the House of Commons
        and on Look North by Ivan Lawrence MP claiming that the Left Wing South
        Yorkshire Police Authority had wanted the out of court settlement and ha
        pressed the P o 1ice to "thfow in the towel". Following discussion it was
        unanimously:
        RESOLVED:
        1        That in accordance with the legal advice given to the cha|rm®J'];h® .
                Authority takes an extremely serious view of the statements about t
                Police Authority made by Ivan Lawrence MP             North Claims
                Programme in connection with the out of court settlement °f
                arising from the industrial dispute at Orgreave on 18 June 1984, and
                demands that these statements be withdrawn.
        2       That the true position be drawn to the attention of the District
                Councils.
 I      COUNCILLOR G GALLIMORE
        The Committee heard that the Vice-Chairman, Councillor G Gallimore had been
        admitted to hospital for surgery.
        RESOLVED - That the best wishes for a speedy recovery be extended to
        Councillor G Gallimore.
 I       MINUTES
         RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Committee held on 3 May
         1991 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.
 5       AMA CONFERENCF - LOCAL AND DEMOCRATIC - THE ROLE OF POLICE AUTHORITIESJ N
         THE 1990‘s
            A report by the Clerk and financial Officer referred to a conference on the
            •Role of Police Authorities in the 1990's' to be held on Wednesd y
            July 10 1991.
            RESOLVED:-
            1    That one member from each District together with a    .   ^     mber
                 be nominated to attend the AMA Conference on the Role of Police
                 Authorities in the 1990's' in London on Wednesday July 10 1991.
            2    That the Authority confirm that the attendance of members of the
                  Authority at conferences including those organised by the A
                  of Metropolitan Authorities are regarded as approved duties.

  6         PROJECT PROGRESS REPORT
            A report by the Architectural Services Officer referred to the progress
            being made on the various projects included in the Authority s        g
            Programme.
- 3 -


7        rAPTTAL MONITORING
         A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
         was submitted on the current forecast of capital spending ]n 1991/92 as
         compared with the approved capital programme. The report indicated that
         the cost of the schemes listed had decreased by £19,300 and that current
         year spending was expected to be £30,900 in excess of the provision of
         £2 479 000. However the Clerk and Financial Officer confirmed that this
         potential overspend could be contained within the provision as the
         financial year progressed.
         RESOLVED - That the current forecasted capital payments in 1991/92 be
         noted.
8        THE COMPARISON BETWEEN DIESEL POWERED VEHICLES AND THE USE OF UNLEADED
         PETROL
         A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial O f f i c e
         referred to minute 6 of the meeting of the Committee on 3 May 1991 and
         included a report on the advantages of diesel powered vehicles over lead-
         free petrol driven vehicles.
         RESOLVED - That the additional information on recommendation 4 of the
         vehicle fleet scrutiny (Diesel and Unleaded Petrol) be noted.
9        REPLACEMENT OF PORTABLE UHF BASE STATIONS
         A joint report by the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
         referred to minute 11 of the meeting of the Committee on 3 May    1991 when a
         capital estimate had been approved of £20,000 for the purchase of
         8 portable UHF radio base stations.
          Tenders had been invited from three firms but in the event only one firm
          had tendered.
          RESOLVED - That the tender from Tait Mobile Radio, Huntingdon,
          Cambridgeshire be accepted at £16,640 for the supply of 8 portable UHF
          radio base stations.
    10    VFHICLE PURCHASES
          A    Motorcycles
               A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial
               Officer referred to the provision in the capital programme for
               essential vehicle replacements.
               Eight motorcycles were in need of replacement and a price had been
               obtained direct from the manufacturer.
               RESOLVED:-
               1     That approval be given to a capital estimate of £57,100 for the
                     purchase of motorcycles.
               2     That approval be given to the purchase direct from the
                     manufacturers of 8 BMW K100 motorcycles, complete with specialist
                     equipment, at £57,067.68.
- 4 -


        B       Crime Squad
                A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial
                Officer referred to the purchase of vehicles, as replacements, for
                by the No.3 Regional Crime Squad.
                RESOLVED - That approval be given for the purchase, direct from the
                manufacturers of the vehicles referred to at a total cost ot
                £57,153.74 to be recharged to the Crime Squad.

11      DFVOLVED BUDGETING
        A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
        referred to the progress made to date toward the development of a system of
        devolved budgeting and the further work which was proposed.
        The report outlined the advantages of a system of devolved budgeting. Some
        deqree of devolved budgeting had been in place for some time and some
        slight extensions had been put in place during 1990/91 as an experiment.
        This had been successful in 1990/91 in containing a potential substantial
        overspend and had been repeated in 1991/92.
        Several options were under consideration each having differing impiRations
        for staffing, computer requirements, and costs. Whilst there would Ibe
        significant increase in staffing the need for regradings would need to b
        considered. Costs would need to be contained within the capital and revenue
        provisions available in 1991/92 and future years.
            Members of the Committee had differing views on devolved b!{d9®ting.
            reservations being expressed particularly on the additional costs and
            staffing implications.
            RESOLVED -
            1   That a further report be submitted to the next meeting of the Committee
                dealing with the monitoring of a devolved budget system.
            2   That in due course a further report be submitted looking at the
                financial consequences in future years.
 12         POLICE TRAINING CENTRE - CHARGES
            A ioint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
            referred to a proposed scale of charges for the hire of Police T r a i n I L i *
            Centre premises to outside organisations, including the provision of meals
            and refreshments.
            The Clerk and Financial Officer noted that J « * ^ r o d uct1on ■o f the scale
            of charges it would be desirable to review the level of business being
            attracted and if this was less than expected to review the scale.
            RESOLVED - That the proposed charges be approved
            basis and adjusted in accordance with movements in the retail price inaex
            between January and December each year.
PURCHASE OF BREATH TEST SCREENING DEVICES
A joint report of the Chief Constable and Clerk and Finan^ . ? ft ^ ? r
referred to the purchase of replacements for the Draeger Breath Test
screening device.
The Dresent device was at the end of its serviceability and the Lion SL2A
had been accepted as the replacement model. The equipment could be
acquired » “ Pf S . the manufacturer and a single tender had been obtained
from Lion Laboratories Limited, South Glamorgan.


ssw
Glamorgan.
                 km
RFVTSED LOCAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE FOR APT&C STAFF
A ioint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
referred to a proposed revision of the Local ConJ ltlonscof .5eJ ^ ® u . > p
APT&C staff resulting from the abolition of the former South Yorkshire
County Council and amendments and additions made since that t ™ ® * Ijj
addition a small number of specific amendments were proposed either by
officers or the Trades Unions.
 RESOLVED - That consideration be deferred to a future meeting.

 OUTSTANDING REPORTS
 A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
 was submitted on outstanding and/or requested reports.
 RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.

 FXCLUSION OF PUBLIC AND PRESS
 RESOLVED - That under section 100(A)(4) of the Local Government Act 1972
 the public be excluded from the meeting for the following items of busin
 on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure o e x e m p t
 information as defined in paragraphs 1 , 7 , 8, 10 and 11 or parx
 Schedule 12A of the Act.
  BUILDING ENGINEER - GRADING

  u s s .T r M s r t s
  be given to the grading of his post.
                                                         s m                   s        .
  RESOLVED - That the Authority-s previous decision be reaffirmed and the
  grading of this post confirmed at scale 4.
  POLICE RADTO INSTALLATION. KEPPELS RESERVOIR SITE, ROTHERHAM
  A joint report of the Clerk and Financial O f f i c e r a n d the Chief Constable
  «        ^    o    ^    £ 2 t        M    radio mast and e q u i p ^ n / r o o m at
  Keppels Reservoir, Rotherham.
RESOLVED - That approval be given to a lease with Yorkshire Water Authority
for the erection of a radio mast and equipment room at Keppels Reservoir,
Rotherham on the terms now reported.
SCENES OF CRIME - GRADING
A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk               ? K 1cer
referred to the grading of Civilian Scenes of Crime Officers of South
Yorkshire Police.
Scenes of Crime Officers had been   p   a   civilianised in South Yorkshire
                                            r   t i a   l T   y


since the earlv 1970's and the current grading of scale 4 had applied
1975 A review of this grading was felt appropriate since there was
considerable evidence thit not only was difficu ty being experienced in
recruiting these officers but that there was a steady loss of experienced
officers to surrounding forces.
A comparison with the 37 English Provincial Police Forces had shown that
South Yorkshire had the lowest grade i n C o u n t r y .                     t
proposed to improve the pay of Scenes of Crime Officers but also ™ J t i t u t e
a salary progression system under which pay would be l i ^ e d to leng
service! experience, afid success in the initial, intermediate, and advanced
courses of training.
 RESOLVED - That with effect from 21 June 1991 the revised grading structure
 described in the report now considered be approved and that ®x J ^ i n g s
 be absorbed into the new grading structure in accordance with the criteria
 of length of service and training.
 PURCHASE OF UNIFORM CLOTHING
 A joint report of the Chief constable and the Clerk and          _!fficer
 referred to a comprehensive tendering exercise undertaken by Yorkshire
 Purchasing Organisation for the supply of Police uniforms.
 RESOLVED - That having considered the tenders received for the supply of
 Police uniforms for 1991/92 including information about the tenderers
 approval be given to the acceptance of:
 a)   the tender from J Compton Sons and Webb Ltd for the supply of male
      uniforms and
 b)   the acceptance of the tender from J & S Rainwear for the supply of
      female uniforms.
  RADIO CONTROL EQUIPMENT
  A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk               O ^ e r ^
  referred to the forces comprehensive radio network. Part of the y
  reached the end of its maintainable life and needed to be replaced.
  A consultancy study commissioned by the Home Office Pol ice J J e ^ ^ e m e n t
  S u p S Unit had produced a technical spec fication based on modern
  technology. On this basis the cost of equipment to operate 6 J ^ i o n a l
  control rooms and force operations room     expected t o b e i n t h e rang
  £750,000 to £850,000. In addition some £100,000 was likely to be required
  for accommodation alterations.
RESOLVED
1        That approval be given to a capital estimate of £970,000.00 for the
        acquisition and installation of control equipment in accordance with
        the specification.
2       That Smith Associates Limited of Guildford be employed as Consultants
        to assist the force in the preparation of a specification and
        evaluation of tenders.
3       That invitations to tender be advertised in the EC Journal under the
        restricted list procedures which allow for a preliminary selection of
        companies capable of meeting the requirement from the response to an
        initial invitation.
FINANCE DEPARTMENT. PAYROLL SECTION - RESTRUCTURING
A joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer
referred to the structure and grading of the Payroll Section of the Force
Finance Department.
The vacation of a post in November 1990 had presented the first opportunity
to correct an anomaly in the staffing of the section which had existed
many years and to consider the structure of the section as a whole.
RESOLVED - That the proposed restructuring of the Payroll Section of the
Headquarters Finance Department be approved as now reported.
 POLICE HEADQUARTERS. SNIG HILL. SHEFFIELD - COMPLETION OF CHILLERS.
 REPLACEMENT
 A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
 referred to the design and specification of the chiller system at Police
 Headquarters.
    RESOLVED
    1    That approval be given to a capital estimate of £7,000 for the
         modification of the chiller system at Police Headquarters, S m g Hill,
         Sheffield.
    2    That discussions continue with Sheffield City Council for compensation
         in respect of these works.
    COMPUTERISED CRIME MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
    A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer, Chief Constable and the
    Director of Finance and Economic Development, Doncaster MBC referred to a
    computerised crime management system to supersede the crime statistic
    application currently operated for the force by Doncaster MBC.
    The report describes the developments which had lead to the present
    position including the way in which computer services were provided by
    Doncaster MBC. The current agreement expired in April 1992 and it was
    proposed that it be extended for a further      five years.
    The total scheme was anticipated to cost £617,000 of which the cost in
    1991/92 was £193,500, £13,500 in excess of     the provision.     Compensatory
    savings might be needed in other schemes.
     RESOLVED

     1    That approval be given to:
          a)    A detailed investigation of the existing equipment operated by
                Doncaster MBC to assess its ability to support the new system
                when it is introduced into operational service subject to the
                submission of a further report.
          b)    Subject to the findings of a) above issue of tenders for the
                computer hardware conforming to the Forces IT strategy.
          c)    The negotiation of a site licence with Oracle UK being the sole
                vendor of the database software required for the system, subject
                to compliance with the EEC procurement guidelines for negotiated
                tenderings.
          d)    The use of consultants as and when required to assist in the
                development and evaluation of the proposed solution up to the
                maximum £40,000.
     2   That, subject to the findings of 1 a) above, the Authority approve a
         capital estimate of £193,500 for phase I.
     3   That the agreement with Doncaster MBC be extended for a further period
         of 5 years from 1 April 1992, subject to all necessary amendments to
         reflect the revised charging method and any other consequential
          amendments necessary.
     4   That a further report be submitted with regards to staffing
          implications at a later date, for an appointment to be made if
         necessary during 1992/3.
25   CHARGES FOR POLICING OF FOOTBALL MATCHES
     (FOR THIS ITEM THE CHAIRMAN VACATED THE CHAIR AND LEFT THE MEETING.   THE
     CHAIR WAS TAKEN BY COUNCILLOR R FISHER)
     The Clerk and Financial Officer reported in relation to a meeting with the
     Football Clubs on 19 June.
     For 1991/92 agreement had been reached in respect of league games although
     cup games remained outstanding.
     In respect of 1991/92 the Authority were looking to make some progress
     towards their 5 years goal of recovering their full costs. Nevertheless
     there was some element of discretion and the Authority could take account
     of the general situation and the financial plight of the Clubs.
     The Clerk and Financial proposed that the item be included on the Police
     Authority agenda for 28 June 1991.




CHAIRMAN
WP011389/SJL
