                                tkf : ■ ? £
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                         j   I V w     i    !             k 4   j                         J ll
23 July 1999

Report of the Clerk and Treasurer                        j r v ; .r - ; r ....... ‘*3                           2 .                      07

                                                                     . it       i C .--     v *.J   V'   'til   V—'   ■■ —■ i ■' » i i



HILLSBOROUGH                                             _____ ___
                                                               i w f ________
                                                         i r\L v         c v . j ! ' ; v '___ _____



1.           Purpose of the Report

            This information is to supplem ent the report circulated with the agenda.



            2.        Recommendations

                      Members are asked to note this information.



            Information

 3.1        O utcom e of Julv proceedings at Leeds C row n Court

            In decisions of 15 July and 2 0 July, the stipendiary Magistrates dismissed
            the form er officers’ claims for an order that

             (a )      the prosecution by Ann Adlington on behalf of H F S G w as an abuse
                       of process

             (b )      there w as no prima facie case to answ er

             T h e magistrates dismissed the applications because they considered

             (i)        that it w as not unfair to bring proceedings against the police officers
                        even though 10 years has elapsed since their alleged offences, and

             (ii)       that the prosecution successfully demonstrated that it has a
                        reasonable case for the accused to answer, and w ere satisfied that
                        there w as sufficient evidence on which a reasonable jury could (not
                        would) find the dependants guilty. T h e committal hearing decisions
                        do not imply any degree of guilt on the form er police officers.


     3 .2    N ext Steps

                 T h e officers solicitors’ are to m ake an application for the abuse of process
                 issue to be dealt with as a discrete issue at the earliest time. This
                 application will be heard on 3 rd S ep tem b er by M r Justice Hooper. If he
                 agrees, he will tim etable the matter; it is estim ated that it would take 1-2
                 w eeks and would probably be timed for the autumn.

                 If the m atter should proceed beyond any consideration of the abuse of
                 process, it would probably not reach court till well into 2 0 0 0 .



                                                                                                                                          1
3 .3     Applications for funding

         It is expected that the form er officers’ solicitors will submit further
         applications for funding. T hey m ay submit applications to cover just the
         period through to the application on the 3 rd Septem ber.

         Arising out of the resolutions at the meeting on 21 May, the Authority’s
         com m itm ent to funding ceased at the end of the committal hearing. Any
         further funding needs to be the subject of a further application and must be
         specifically considered by the Authority on the basis of further legal advice.

3 .4     Costs

         On the Authority's behalf, Garretts are continuing to liaise with the form er
         officers solicitors on four matters:-

         (i)      the final figure for costs incurred in respect of the committal hearing
                   from 5 February to their conclusion on 2 0 July


         (ii)     an estim ate of their costs for the Criminal trial at Crown Court


         (iii)    (as referred to in the report circulated with the agenda), final
                   comm ents on the funding ag reem ent drafted by the Authority’s
                   advisers setting out the basis upon which the Authority is prepared to
                   fund their costs for the committal


         (iv )    review of historic costs by the appointed costs draftsman



W J W ilk in s o n
C le rk an d T re a s u re r

O ffic e r re s p o n s ib le : Bill W ilkinson. Clerk and Treasurer, South Yorkshire Joint
Secretariat, 0 1 2 2 6 7 7 2 8 0 3

B a c k g ro u n d p a p e rs used in the preparation of this report are available for
inspection at the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat, Barnsley.

O th e r s o u rc e s an d re fe re n c e s : None
