                                                                         V   .   ■




                                                                             ■c
                                                    30th March 1990
ref: H/comments


Det Superintendent S. Beechey,
West iiidland Police,
Nechells Green Police Station,
Fowler St.,
Birmingham,
E7 5DA.

Dear Stan,

I have a few comments on the following body folder summaries plus                    W
some other comments. Cases where I only have other comments but no
amendment to the summaries I will write to you about in a seperate
letter under reference of ref: H/files.


 Ko. 62    Barry Glover.

a. Small point in Summary Para 6   fourth line should not the word
"them” be "him".

b. I think we are going to need Prof Usher in this case.


 I;o. 82   Philip John Steele.

a. Surx-ary para 8. The position with regard to fir. Udall is not very
satisfactory as he does not know which bodies he transported nor
does PC harsh refer to the NGH numbering system.

I think therefore that it might be wiser to delete "including Philip
John STEELE,"

b. Summary para 9. Delete "Upon arrival at the gymnasium" and insert
” a oody which he subsequently learned was that of" after the words
"reponsibility for" .

c. I)o we have statement of                   Page 23 refers.

d. What do we know about the Major Disaster Plan Ko and documentation
referred to by Mr. Udall ? Who is the police woman who kept the record
and do we know who the six police officers he refers to are ? (Page
37).

e. I have a comment on Janet Doore but I willl make it later on one
of the other cases.

f. Page 54. Which photo please ?

g. Can 1 have a copy of the statement of PC

h. I think that we will need Prof. Underwood.
No 87. Stephen Francis 0*Neill.          :^/y ;
                                              ‘   .     - fit   <,ru,<   ■
a. Summary para 4. I think that Mr. Wardrope say on,page 17 that it is
possible that attempts at resuscitation may have taken place.
I suggest that we add "written1* before ”evidence”      substitute
"but there is evidence from the post mortem, findings! .that medical
intervention took place" for "and beli^es he, wa%,triaged as dead on
arrival". If you do not agree please let me .know.ya;|^|

b. Mr. Wardrope statement starting on page 6. Has this in fact been
signed. I ask as there are blanks in it.         r-m

c. P.8. I think Mr, Duncan is a senior registrar and not an SHO
                      ^                /'A'           vvt m i X
d. P. 11. Do we know which family he refers too.,               ^

e. P. 14. Time of 1345 is patently incorrect. What time does he
actually mean?.

f. P. 17. He refers to the NGH number as 119 for      Horrocks. Dr
Doore refers to it as 001. Which one is in fact correct.

g. P. 17. Does Mr. Wardrope know what__________ has said about
Steele. If not should it be drawn to his attention so that he may if
he thinks it'right make an amendment to his statement*

h. Page 20. Do we know which body was the one that was brought
in late ?

i. Someone must have told           phat our body numbers are. Can you
remind me how the relationship between our numbers and the hospital
numbers was established ?

j. Page 28 There does not appear to be a NHG number 65. Can we get
this sorted out if possible.

k. I think that we should warn Mr. Wardrope that I might want him to
give evidence on day 1 (April 18).


 No 94 Adam Edward Spearritt.

I have phone about a. on 29/3/90.

a. There seems to be rather a lot of confusion about this lad
Page 21. Pc. Pearson says he put him in the ambulance and accompanies
him.

Page 33 Mr, Dale says that it was a group of supporters and
does not really mention Mr. Pearson.
0    '■■■■.*   Mr       Williams says the patient was in Mr. Garrett’s care and




“ think S a t it might be worth reinterviewing Mr. William and showing
him photo’s in case he can recognise the lad.

Page 52 and 53 Mr. Garrett seems to suggest that the lad was left m
the care of the Hospital Drs.



he was dealing with Adam.
Do we          know who the junior Dr. who gave the intra cardiac injection.

    Do we      know whether Dr. Quartley is still in Sheffield                    ? Ifnot where
    is he?
    h Pnn vou nlease send as soon as possible a copy of Dr. Quartley
    b. Can you pi       ,       d   k him to consider whether he wishes
    fo «Snsid°er his s i a S H a u ^           the light of what is said
    on page 60 about the intra cardiac injection and his findings of
    severe pericardial effusion and myocardial haemorrhages.

    c. Have we any idea who the patient was whom Dr. Quartley intubated at
    the Gym ?
    d. Can we warn Dr. Clark (the anaethetist) that he might be required
    at the inquest.
    f Tn   nrrtpr not to hold up the release of the summary and in view of
    my concerns about A. Williams evidence do you                          ^
    in Summary Para 7 to delete 'Ambulanceman Anthony             and
    include him at the Inquest it we deciae tnat he m g a e d vatli Ada -

                    i     A*,*-       r\n   ur Vnnvi were the Drs involved in these hospital
     "caSTre Z             ^      c    a     S d " ^ ^        to ask any of them to come to
     the Inquests.



     Yours sincerely,



     S. L. Popper.
     H.M. Coroner.
