                                                                                 C     I     T        Y
         Telex:     265871 MONREF G (quote ref LLA 3 0 20)
                                                                                 C O       U N     C J L

Your reference:


 Our reference:      GP/262/WJD
                                                                                 Administration & Legal
                                                                                 Department
          Date: 21st May, 1991
                                                                                 Head of D epartm ent
                                                                                 Mark W ebster,   City Solicitor


              Dr. S. L. Popper                                                   Town Hall
                                                                                 Sheffield
              South Yorkshire Coroner (West District),                           s^Jhh
              c/o Medico Legal Centre,
              Watery Street,
              SHEFFIELD.
              S3 7ET

               Dear Dr. Popper,

               Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (As Amended)
               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
               Hillsborough Football Stadium - Safety Certificate

               I refer to your letter to the Chief Executive (Sheffield City Council)
               dated 3rd May, 1991, which has been passed to my Chief Licensing Officer,
               Sports Grounds (Mr. Derricott) for attention.

               The points you raise in the letter have been noted and the letter itself
               is to be placed before the next General Meeting of the Council's Safety of
               Sports Grounds Advisory Group, for discussion^

                For your information, alterations are currently being undertaken at the
                Leppings Lane End (West Stand) of the Hillsborough Sports Ground. The
                Council have approved a scheme which details a new line for turnstiles and
                a proposal to seat the lower terrace area. I enclose a plan of the scheme
                for your information.

                You will note that the new line of turnstiles allows a much greater
                freedom of movement in this area. This coupled with the lower number of
                spectators accessing the West Stand, I feel provides for improved
                spectator safety in this area.

                I will write to you again when your letter has been .formally discussed and
                r^nnrfpH tn the Licensing Panel of the.,.Council.




                 City Solicitor and
                 Head of Administration


                  MS2/AA
      Keith Trelfa                                                                                                 Elizabeth Bashforth
     Senior Assistant H ead                                                                                        A ssistant H ead (Legal)
     (Adm inistration)




                                                             734264 - Mr. Derricott
                                                      3rd May            91



  SLP/JT.




  Mrs. P. Gordon,
  Chief Executive,
  Sheffield City Council,
  Town Hall,
  Sheffield.


  Dear Mrs. Gordon,

 g.e; HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM/SAFETY CERTIFICATE.

 Tnnnpct °;LCOUr!e     aware that 1 recentl7 completed the Hillsborough
 Inquests. The safety certificate which was issued in 1979 dealt with various
 eround8                   CaPacities in different locations within the
 ground but did not deal m any way with the area immediately outside the
 turnstiles but within the curtilage of the ground.

 You will be aware that a considerable number of problems were experienced in
 this area which eventually led to the opening of large exit gates.

 1 alSi° ^°tic®d that in many respects, the area outside the turnstiles had
 remarkable similarities with the terracing in the sense that it was a
 diffeS              SpaC61wi!h narrow exits at the front.  It also of course
  iffered in that the population m this area by definition should be
 transient whereas the population in the stands and terraces is more
 permanent during the duration of the football match.


 Jo I p T w the dif5 iculties which were experienced in this area, it occurred
 to me that one ought perhaps to consider whether the safety certificate

 mav'be
 may                   ^   ^   C°ntr01
     be deemed to be appropriate m the °f nUmberS
                                        area      and the turnstiles.
                                             outside       °ther matters -hich


l ^ r8Ciatei,'hr t h i S - 1S 3 difficult Problem, as by definition the counting
mechanisms which are m place are in fact the turnstiles, but given the
history which had been experienced at the Leppings Lane end, I think it might
 e appropriate if the question was considered with a view to seeing whether
there are any practical safety matters which could be implimented to seek to
avoid a repetition of difficulties immediately outside the turnstile area
(and indeed for that matter, outside the perimeter gates).

■I.would be grateful if you could please refer this matter to the appropriate
tthiv£erS   fc/|e co^ncil for tlieir consideration and for any necessary action
which may be deemed to be necessary.

I 3m sending a copy of this letter to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in
                            2




order that they might be aware of the point which I am raising with you.

Yours sincerely,


S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
