                                                        4th October 1999




Ms. Ann Adlington,
HFSG,
1st Floor,
Central Buildings,
41 North John St.,
Liverpool,
L2 6RR.


Dear Ms. Adlington,

          The Hillsborough Disaster : Adlington v Duckenfield & Murray

I acknowledge receipt of your letters of 8th and 30th September 1999.

I am sony about the delay but I am still considering my position and will write to you
again when I have decided whether I am able to respond.



Yours sincerely,




S. L. Popper
VS B °« 0 ^




                                                                                        suppO^
                      Hillsborough Family Support Group




30 September 1999


Dr S L Popper




 Dear Dr Popper

 R v Duckenfield and Murray

 I refer to my letter of 8th September and wonder if you are yet in a position to respond to the
 matters I have raised.


 Yours sincerely




 Ann Adlington
 Solicitor




               Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
              1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
                                                                                        # . •




5(/ppO^
                   Hillsborough Family Support Group




 Dr S L Popper




 8 September 1999

 Dear Dr Popper

 R v. Duckenfield and Murray

  You will know that in July the stipendiary magistrate at Leeds, Mr Cadbury, rejected the
  arguments of the defendants that the proceedings were an abuse of process, and committed
  them for trial. I attach for your information a copy of his ruling on the abuse of process issue,
  in the course of which, as you will see, he rejected defence criticisms of the prosecution.

  On 3rd September 1999, Mr Justice Hooper ordered that the indictment be signed at Leeds
  Crown Court, and arraigned the defendants. They pleaded not guilty to manslaughter and
  misfeasance.

  The defendants have indicated that they will again raise the suggestion that the prosecution is
  an abuse of process of the court. This matter will be heard in the week of 4th January 2000.
  The defence have indicated that it will be argued again, among other matters, that the
  prosecution is in some way a collateral attack on the verdict of the jury at the inquest, and
  should be dismissed.

  In this connection, there are three matters on which you can assist the prosecution to put the
  full facts before the court:

  (1)     The first concerns the question of disclosure of information at the inquest. You will
          remember that at a “Business Meeting” shortly before the main inquest in November
          1990 you indicated that copy statements of witnesses would not be distributed. A
          recurrent complaint of the families has been that the police officers and their lawyers
          had access to statements, but the families did not. The attached letter of Trevor Hicks
          to his solicitor of 13th November 1990, and the reply of the Mervyn Jones of 15th
          November 1990, demonstrate that the West Midlands police, at the highest level, were
           suggesting that the decision whether to authorise the disclosure of statements of
          persons who had evidence as to the circumstances in which victims had died, was in
          the hands of the South Yorkshire police.
           Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151236 1936. E MaS m fo@ hfsg.oj|
          1..Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Lnrerpool L2 6BR
This is further demonstrated by a letter from Superintendent Beechey of that force to
Sandra Stringer, another bereaved parent (copy letter attached).

The statements were of course relevant to matters arising at the inquest. I should be
grateful to know whether you knew that the West Midlands police, who were acting as
Coroner’s officers, regarded themselves as accountable at this time to the South
Yorkshire police in matters such as disclosure, rather than to you.

The second matter arises from our correspondence in June this year. You indicated
that you had had a conversation with Mr Manning at the inquest as to whether he
would object to the admission in evidence of the statement of Inspector White, to
which you referred in the course of this year’s letters. I do appreciate that you freely
disclosed the fact of this conversation, but you may understand that it caused great
consternation in the HFSG to hear that you had had a private conversation on a matter
of such importance with a lawyer acting for one interested party. I invite you to give
me further information about this, and to tell me why this conversation, significant
enough to call for as file note, did not take place in open court; and whether you held
other such private conversations with lawyers acting for the South Yorkshire police,
individual officers, or other South Yorkshire public bodies.


You may be interested to know that when you first raised this matter with the Crown
Prosecution Service in 1997, South Yorkshire Police provided them with what they
said was a statement prepared by Inspector White for the inquest. (Copy enclosed).
This document in fact represents the final two pages of Inspector White’s initial
statement of 2nd May 1989. Pursuant to the further information you supplied to Mr
Croston in June of this year, a further search was made in the archives of South
Yorkshire Police which resulted in the production of a statement dated 25th February
1991 made by Mr White (copy enclosed). This was obviously the statement to which
you were referring when you contacted the Crown Prosecution Service in 1997.

You will have read of the extent o f the process by which the South Yorkshire police
and/or their lawyers edited statements of officers before they were presented to the
Taylor Inquiry. At the end of the “Scrutiny”, the Home Secretary insisted that the
edited and unedited statements be put in the House of Commons library. We have
found over a hundred examples of statements edited to remove factual statements
made by junior officers which were critical of senior officers, or their methods. Some
of the editing disclosed a deliberate policy o f excising references to the practice by
which the tunnel leading to the central area of the Leppings Lane terraces was closed
at the equivalent match in 1988. The statements of Inspector White were relevant to
this previous practice.

We now know that the Crown Prosecution Service was supplied with the statements
of several of these officers in early 1990, but only in their edited form. We also know
that the West Midlands Police report, and the same edited statements, were supplied to
you, and that you used this material as the basis for choosing witnesses for the main
inquest in November 1990.
       I should be grateful if you could confirm that you knew nothing about the editing of
       statements, and operated on the basis that you had all relevant statements from the
       witnesses listed.

      You will understand why these matters are important to us. We wish to provide the
      judge with comprehensive information about them. I should say that it is possible that
      you will be asked to give evidence at the January hearing.

Yours sincerely




Ann Adlington
Solicitor
