                                                         23rd October 1997


Mr. C.F. Bone,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 528,
50, Queen Anne’s Gate,
London, SW1H9AT

Dear Mr. Bone,
                                     Hillsborough

Thank you for your letter dated 15th October 1997 with its enclosures.

I have noted the Judge’s comments regarding meeting with the Hillsborough Support
Group and am obliged for these.

I am o f course happy to be as helpful as 1 reasonably can be to the Judge. Please let
me have a note o f the topics the Judge would wish to discuss. Please however bear in
mind that I retired as Coroner in 1991, do not live in Sheffield, and also am not
willing to re-immerse myself deeply in Hillsborough. I am also still working and for
these reasons as well as those mentioned in my letter o f 26th August 1997 I may not be
able to deal with all aspects that the Judge might wish to raise.

As I am no longer a practising Coroner I think it would be sensible and perhaps helpful
if a representative o f the Coroner’s Society accompanied me to the meeting. I have
spoken to Mr. Burgess and he agrees subject to finding a convenient date.

I confirm that I will be quite content to meet at your offices. I would be obliged if you
would arrange the meeting for a Monday as I am usually free on that day. I work on
the other days. Please give me a choice o f dates. As the date would also have to fit in
with Mr. Burgess’ commitments could you let him have a list o f proposed dates at the
same time so that a convenient date for all may be selected.

I look forward to hearing from you further in due course.


Yours sincerely,


S. L. Popper



cc. Mr. C. Dorries
    Mr. M J.C . Burgess
f
          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Dr S L Popper                                                 Your reference:

                                                              Our reference:

                                                              Date:        1ST   October 1997




Thank you for your letter of 23 September.

I apologise for this slightly delayed reply. Since you wrote, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
received a major submission on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support and had the
opportunity to discuss it with them and their legal representatives. He has been to Liverpool
and met many of the families involved.

We have also had a letter from the Coroners’ Society of England and Wales - 1 attach a copy
o f that and of our reply to it.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith takes the view that it is a matter for you whether you have any
contacts with the Family Support Group. It is not clear to him why the group should wish to
contact you. In view of the fact that they seek the quashing of the verdicts on the
Hillsborough deaths by Judicial Review or under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, you
may think it wiser not to have any direct contact with them.

I anticipate that it will be helpful if Lord Justice Stuart-Smith could see you at some point to
discuss various questions which the Support Group and others have raised about the Inquests.
If so, we would notify you by letter with full details of the topics the Judge will wish to
discuss. It would be helpful if any such meeting could take place at our offices here (we
would meet your travel expenses). If you wished to have somebody with you, such as a
legal representative or a representative of the Coroners’ Society (or both), there would of
course be no difficulty about that. We would arrange for a full shorthand note to be taken,
and would send you a copy.

Can I take it that you would be willing to meet the Judge on that basis?

I am copying this letter to Mr Dorries.
    «■


CF
Secretary to the Scrutiny

G:VHILLSBOR\MAIN\DRPOPPER. 104
       r?hh
       fit ifltu jtr)
o(4l            (,%o f
