FILE NOTE   7.11.90


Token conversation with Mr. Sturt.


Mr . Sturt said he was on the point ofringing me to check whether
they could do anything to   help me. He confirmed that if there was
anything or anyway they could help they would be delighted to do so.

I took the opportunity of outlining to him the number of witnesses
we had and the general way in whichI wanted to proceed.     I also
thought that the wording of the Act was perhaps a little wider
than the rules as to , the rules were really based on how the
verdict should be draftied. He felt that that might be so but in
any event the word HOW was a fairly flexible word, on the other
hand he didn't think it w a s right,to deal with issues of WHY
something happened we were/es?a§lish HOW the deceased came by his
death and that of course meant and investigation of the circumstances
as well as the immediate cause of death,    though one had to have
some causal connection. I said that on the whole I agreed with it
but I took the view that in the word HOW was encompass, so much of
WHY and WHOM as was necessary to establish how something had come
about.  I also said that whilst I didn't think that minor matters
of negligence might be relevent bearing in mind that an unlawfully
killed really was something which the Coroners Jury could determine
had to explore sufficient evidence to establish whether or not say
recklessness had been made out in the terms of the         direction.
Mr. Sturt agreed.
He asked whether I had had a letter from the D.P.P. to confirm that
it didn't wish me to adjourn if I were to find that there might be
something in the evidence.     I said no because I assumed it was
unnecftssary in view of the fact that he had decided not to prosecute.
Mr. Sturt felt that it would be wiser if I did obtain his confirmation
because technically once I heard any evidence which might give rise to
the possibility of a charge I ought to adjourn,(that is actually rule
28). He said that he had obtained such a letter in the Zeebrugge
case in fact he obtained two because in the middle of his case
something had come up which was rather specific to one individual.
He said that I shoiiLSS. give the D.P.P. a ring and would not anticipate
any problems.
                               ■ '■■**■>■■■— > » '■ ■   .. .   ii'-— ii'.,«.— '■ ! ) <   w   ^   )|t l > ; ^ i . i i w t e w t W ^   ^   ----


   ...;fC Ai^cpssed. .mtLhim, the scope of the inquiry in particular the events
*      k Qfi the field, .i,«^. the rescue.  He said that he had got into trouble
 :v; ,with that as. well and the way he had dealt with: it he had reserved
                         deal with the rescue but by arid-large the reason he
         had done that was so that people had an opportunity of thanking and
         acknowledging the great effort which people had done,     I explained
         tp liim that in my case I had difficulty because whereas the same
         person may be praised by one and possible condemmed by another on the
         grounds that they had left their son/ loved one too soon. Mr. Sturt
         felt that as indeed I do that even if it were true that in the heat
         of the moment and under pressure somebody had made       some error in the
         extent of the resuscitation this was not something for which they
         could be blamed.     It certainly wasn't an
         I thought that was an interesting use ■ of the word because this was one
         of the arguments which I already had in mind about this aspect.    I did
         say to Mr. Sturt that I wasn't making a definitive decision until I
        had heard the legal arguments and indeed something might be said
        which I had:lnt thought of and which would sway me.

    I then discussed jury visits, he said they had done two, but he had
    been very very careful to comply. The jury had been kept under the
    care of the Coroners Officer, very little was said, he made it quite
    clear to then that the were not to try and do a reconstruction. He
    hadn't accompanied them and he also made sure that the other parties
    were not with them.
     We discussed one or two other matters which were not relevant to
     Hillsborough.
