;.F I IiE>; NOTE'VDATED 1 2 . 1 0 . 9' 0 ^   '   5                     -,

 He wanted to know when I was having my Pre-inques.t::<Re^iew.;;.:;•
                                                                   .

 He was obviously very anxious that we should have this as

 soon as /possible.
 1 explained that'I was still worrying about the
 technicalities about it but on the whole I felt that if I
 was going to do it, it would be towards the end of'October.
 He said that that was O.K. though the sooner I did it the

 better.
 He then re-confirmed that they were-getting instructions

 direct      f r o m   the Hillsborough Family Support Group and it

 was therefore possible,to communicate with people very

 quickly.
  He-mentioned', that -there were one or two people who had some

  s m a l l - queries    on the individual inquests and was; I

  proposing to deal with these and if so when.            I said I
  hadn't really intended to do that but I would consider the

-point.        He -suggested that- they would ask the families to
  let him have in writing any points which they want to put
  to me and' it' might .be -possible for them to put these to me

.. .in writing.         ..If we could sort them out they could either be

  dealt with by correspondence and/or perhaps in the

  beginning before we got down to the generics proper.

   I said that I thought that that was a good idea.
   I then explained" -to him that I was not intending to go over
   a n the ground of the rescue.- Mr. Frazer agreed, with this.

   He said-he thought.in-his view probably 6 minutes past 3




   LESACG
was the cut-off point.   I said I felt that it might be a

few minutes beyond that but that was basically what I had

in mind.   I explained to him that although we had dealt

with "the rescue" at the interin inquests, this was because

I had felt that it was only fair that the familes should

have some idea of the amount of effort and time that had

been put into this and also that should they wish to have

this explored at another place, they would at least know

who the people were who were involved.     He acknowledged

this as having been a good and proper thing to d o .   I asked

him whether the points which were being raised were

substantial.   He said he didn't think so.    He said as far

as he could recollect they were relatively minor matters.

He said having fixed the end point, could I give him an

indication of how far back I was going to g o .   I said that

was a little bit more difficult, but I would expect to go

fairly far away back, namely including travelling

arrangements though very superficially, but that as we

approached the ground and also got nearer to the time, so

the inquiry would become more intensive.     I also said that

I was expecting to take some evidence of some previous

events insofar as that was necessary, again not in great
detail.

I said that I thought that when we got down to it he would

be quite satisfied indeed.   I had the feeling that we might

be doing a more thorough job than he was expecting.

He said one of the things that people were asking was
/                    '   '


    whether the witnesses would come in person, whether it

    would be documentary, whether they should come everyday and

    that's why they wanted to have this meeting.   I said I was

    very sensitive to his views and I would certainly be back

    in touch as soon as possible.   He said he would now wait to

    hear from me.




    LESACG
