                                     PI
                                     Pcicjs Ons




                                 Page One Press Agency
                                    11 West Avenue
                                     West Bridgford
                                      Nottingham
                                       NG2 7NN

                                  Tel: 0115 981 8880
                                  Fax: 0115 981 3133


 18/12/96

Dear Mr Popper

I am a journalist and I work for Page One Press Agency in
Nottingham.

I am sure you are aware of the continuing media interest in the events
surrounding the Hillsborough tragedy.

Today we heard that the Home Secretary is seriously considering
ordering a fresh inquiry.

We would be interested in doing an in-depth interview with you - to
give you the chance to put your impressions and ideas across. We would
then write a feature style article based on the interview which we would
place in one of the daily papers. If you want to stipulate that the
interview was not submitted to a particular paper we would be willing
to agree to that.

We would hope to produce an intelligent, reasoned article which would
serve to shed light on the whole issue of Hillsborough. Obviously we
would like to talk to you about the inquest, the recent drama shown on
television, and the campaign by relatives for a fresh inquiry.

I hope you will be willing to grant us the interview and allow us to get
some photographs. Hopefully, from your point of view, it will satisfy
some of the media interest once and for all, so that you can be left in
peace.

We would probably ask for about an hour of your time to carry out the
interview. We could easily come to your home, or you could come to
our offices in. West Bridgford if you prefer.



Simon l o w l j p y ^     f


                                VAT No. 610647072
                                                          4th January 1997


Mr, Simon Townley,
Page One Press Agency,
11, West Avenue,
West Bridgford,
Nottingham,
NG2 7NN


Dear Mr, Townley,

Thank you for your letter of 18thDecember 1996.

I have considered your letter but I do not wish to participate in the interview that you
have suggested.

I am sorry if this is a disappointment but would like to take the opportunity of thanking
you for your courteous approach and the clear way in which you have set out your
objectives.


Yours sincerely,



S. L. Popper.
