                    Office of H.M. Coroner
                     The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET

HM Coroner:                                                           South Yorkshire (West)
Christopher P. Dorries                                                     (0114) 273-8721



                                                                              05 January 1998
Your ref:
Our ref:

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON
SW1H9AT




Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Hillsborough: Kevin Williams (deceased)
Your letter of the 3rd December 1997 has been passed on to me by Dr Popper and I have
since received your letter of 10th December. The amendment in question was dealt with
in 1995/96, four years after Dr Popper’s retirement.
I do not know if you are familiar with the forms in question and some brief explanation of
the legal situation (as I understand it) may be appropriate.
At the conclusion of an inquest the jury are required to certify their findings by inquisition. I
enclose a copy of the inquisition in this case (marked A). The Coroner must then deliver to
the Registrar a certificate in Form 99 (marked B). You will note that Part I of this form
takes details directly from the inquisition. Parts II and III are not relevant here. The
Coroner’s signature concludes the formal part of the document.
These matters, including the medical cause of death, are the formal findings of the jury
and cannot be altered by the Coroner, then or subsequently.
However, Form 99 goes on to request certain other information. This is for statistical
collection purposes only and does not form any part of the official findings of the inquest.
It is my understanding that the Coroner is under no obligation to complete these further
sections of the form, although most choose to do so. It is in this section that the
requirement for the type of injury and part of the body injured were previously found.
The layout of Form 99 was revised around the end of 1991. The statistical collection
became Part V and, in my respectful submission, the new form made it even clearer that
this information was not part of the findings of the inquest. Further, the request for
information as to the type of injury or part of body injured no longer existed.




                                        Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                      CJA6226I.DOC
Turning now to the facts of this particular case, in May 1995 my office was contacted by
Mrs Ann Williams. This was certainly not the first time Mrs Williams had telephoned, as
before she spoke with my administrative assistant Mrs Linda Dale. Mrs Williams explained
that she had never registered her son’s death because she felt that certain issues on the
Form 99 handed to her after the inquest were incorrect. She had been in contact with the
pathologist involved, Dr Slater, who had now confirmed to her that in his view the part of
the body injured should have said neck rather than chest and that the type of injury was a
compression rather than a crush. Mrs Williams told Mrs Dale that if only these alterations
could be made she would feel able to register her son’s death and lay the matter to rest.
Whilst I did not particularly believe this latter point to be wholly accurate, I saw little need to
be inflexible just for the sake of it.
I was therefore prepared to make enquiries about the point in issue, an alteration in purely
statistical information seemed a very small price to pay on the chance that it would give
the mother some peace of mind. I subsequently established that in fact Kevin William’s
death had been registered by this office immediately following the inquest but, it would
seem, Mrs Williams had not been aware of this.
I note from my file that I wrote to Dr Slater in June 1995 and received his written
comments on the 17th July 1995. A copy of this is enclosed (marked C). You will see that
Dr Slater fully supported Mrs William’s contention that neck was more appropriate than
chest. He was more equivocal on the question of crush/compression and I imagine that I
was influenced by the wording “as a result of crush injuries” chosen by the jury.
Accordingly I was inclined to amend chest to neck only.
It is clear from my file that before agreeing to make the amendment I also took advice from
the Registrar General (copy reply attached marked d ) and I raised the issue with the Home
Office and the City Solicitor (who had represented this office at the judicial review). There
was agreement that it was in order to change the statistical information.
In writing to the solicitors whom I thought were acting for Mrs Williams in October 1995, I
pointed out that the amendment was of no legal significance and that the details held by
the Registrar in Sheffield would not be changed as they did not relate to the items in
question. Because of a change of solicitor, the amendment was not actually agreed and
made until April 1996.
I note Dr Popper’s comments in his letter to you of the 4th December. I have certainly not
read the full transcript but do still believe neck may be a more appropriate word than chest.
I am not medically qualified and was no doubt somewhat influenced by Dr Slater’s
unequivocal view in his letter of 17th July 1995. I note from the post-mortem report
(attached at e ) that there are several references to surface marks in the area of the
chin/neck and, more importantly, there are fractures at the larynx and thyroid.
I apologise for the complexity of this reply but there were a number of issues that needed
clarification. I would be pleased to assist you further should you so require.
Yours sincerely




C P Dorries
HM Coroner




                                         Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                        CJA6226I.DOC
