                  with compliments

                    H.M . Coroner
Christopher P. D orries
M edico-Legal Centre
W atery Street
Sheffield                 T , ,
S3 7ET                    telephone: Sheffield (0114) 273 8721
                                          Fax: (0114) 272 6247
                                                          73

                                                 T. BICHARD


                (In the presence of the Jury)

                    TREVOR BICHARD Sworn

                       By THE CORONER

Q. You are Trevor Bichard, aren't you? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. P.C. 1370, I believe? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You are one of the Control Room staff - that is not
   your only job - but you are one of the Control Room
   staff at Hillsborough Football Ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. In 1989 how many years had you been there? - A. I
   commenced those duties September, 1987.

Q. So quite a few years, and is it right that you are a
   regular team with Sergeant Goddard and P.C. Ryan and
   yourself? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You were the video operator and the VHF radio man, is
   that right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. On this particular match we are talking about. It is
   not necessary, I think, to take every single event that
   happened in the Control Room because we have heard the
   various people, but there are some items which you will
   be able to help us on. The first one is this - were
   you in Court when we showed the video just before
   lunch? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you recognise that as one of your videos or not? -
   A. No.

Q.   You didn't recognise it?- A. No.

Q.   But would I be right in saying those are the sort of
     shots one could get with your equipment if one were to
     aim it at Leppings Lane? - A. The pictures that you
     have seen this morning are greatly enhanced. What you
     must consider is that the screen we are looking at is
     only 12 inch.

Q. You are saying that that screen is very much larger? -
   A. It gave you a false impression about the accuracy of
   the picture you were seeing.

Q. Are you saying that the video, not the screen but the
   video itself is not -- put it another way, if we had
   shown that video on a 12 inch screen would it have been
   the sort of picture we would have seen with your
   cameras? - A. That is correct, yes.
                                                           74

                                                  T. BICHARD

Q. In other words you are saying it is infinitely clearer
   you can see more detail, when you look at it on a huee
   screen like this? - A. Yes and obviously it is running
   at a slower speed as well so you have a chanceto take
   m what you are seeing in that picture.

Q. I don t think we slowed it down.  I think it was played
   at the standard rate.- A. It is a little bit difficult
   to explain. It was taken on a time lapse system
   whereby basically a single photograph is taken, or a
   single frame is done every half second, rather than at
   normal speed.

Q. So you can focus onto each frame because you have got a
   little .... - A. The actual speed of that has been
   altered, yes. It is not running at the right speed as
   we would have seen it on the camera.

Q. Are you   saying that the time lapsing is different, what
   we have   seen, as to what you would have seen? - A. Yes.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, perhaps I can assist? The
   view from the Control Box is of the normal film so they
   would see it at normal speed. When one records it
   there is a facility to record it in time lapse which
   could then be used to get photographic evidence. They
   obviously don t see what is actually recorded, they see
   the film running at normal speed then after the event
   you see it at the slower rate.

        THE CORONER:    Thank you.

Q. Is that a correct explanation of what you are telline
   me? - A. That is perfect.

Q. So you are not saying that we had messed around with
   this film? - A. No.

Q. You are merely saying that the recording facility that
   happened^ to have been used was time lapse, but what you
   were seeing would have been different because it was
   continuous? - A. Yes.

Q. In the first instance, and on a very much smaller
   screen? - A. Yes.

Q* Tell me about the cameras which can look at Leppines
   Lane terracing? - A. The terracing one?

Q. Yes. - A. There were three cameras actually inside the
   Ground which could get a picture of Leppings Lane. If
   we were to deal with the camera that is at 90 degrees
   to the terracing area, that was the latest one to be
   installed and it was positioned there actually not to
                                                          75

                                                   T. BICHARD

     take general shots of the terracing, but to the
     uncovered seats area where the away fans were adjacent
     to home supporters and we had had some trouble there.

Q. Where was that camera located? Show us on the model.
   (The witness uses the model to illustrate his
   evidence) - A. The camera was under slung from 1|he
   notice board next to the Control Box.

Q.   Is that the one, the video which we saw? - A. Yes,
     definitely that camera.

Q. So we will call that camera number one, just for the
   sake of the record. That is the one which    looks along
   Leppings Lane from the Control Box, is that right? - A.
   It can take that picture but its purpose was to take
   general shots of this area.   It was the uncovered seats
   and where away supporters were next to them.

Q. So that was why that location was chosen? - A. That is
   right, yes.

Q. Where is the second one? - A. The second one moving
   further along, is in fact almost central in the South
   Stand.  It is a colour system and again the object
   behind the camera was to give a general picture round
   the Ground, an overall internal scene. The colour
   system was chosen to try and assist in the
   identification of people within the Ground should any
   incident occur.




                                 /Q. Just complete it
                                               T. BICHARD

Just complete it by telling me where the third one
was. - A. The third camera which was at the far side
of the South Stand was set up to take pictures within
the Spion Xop area. It was a black and white system
and that was its main purpose, for that area. You
could use it to take pictures inside the South Stand,
but that was its main purpose, for the Kop.

Come back. So what we have got is we have got camera
No.1 by the Police Control Box whose objective was
actually to look the opposite way than Leppings Lane?
- A. Yes sir.
But you could swivel it round? - A. Yes sir.

That gives you a sort of slightly tangential
longitudinal view along the terrace if you did swivel
it round, is that right? - A. It would give you a view
straight along the terrace.

The one in the middle, camera 2, the colour system,
that was designed to take all the ground apart from,
of course, the South Stand.  Presumably you could not
take that because it was behind it? - A. You could get
part of the South Stand. It wasn't 360 degrees, but
it was certainly high - 270 maybe.

Then the last one was at the far end of the South
Stand and that was really designed for the Spion Kop?
- A. Yes, that is right.
Just to exclude that one, did you use that one at all
to look at Leppings Lane on the day, 15th April 1989?
- A. Not as I recall.
    .   '                                            \
We saw, of course, accepting everything you have said •
about screen size, and so on, that all the cameras had
zoom facilities, is that right? - A. They did, yes.

.So you could, if you wanted to, select bits to zoom in
 on? - A. You could get closer, yes.

 You needed that, of- course, if you wanted to identify
 anybody in particular? - A. The system'as., it was set
 up was not able to create a reasonable enough picture
 for identification purposes, and this had. been
 established when a survey had been carried out by the
 Home Office.       ..      ~.
 Does that include the colour cameras as well? - A.
 That is right, yes.

      MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I am sorry, was that it could
 not produce --
                                                        •' 77

                                                  T. BICHARD


           THE C O R O N j ^ ^ s ^ ^  aid it could not.
Q.   You are quitr^'Sure about t'hatTS- A. I am quite sure.
     Taking the colour camera as an example, if you were to
     take pi/ctures of people below that camera in the
     uncover'&d seating area*- you would get identification
     because tRe^^rf^so close to the camera, but once you
     get to the end of the South Stand area, Leppings Lane,
     the magnification available on that zoom was
     insufficient to create identification.

Q.   So what was the purpose of the cameras? - A. To
     generally oversee inside the ground. That part of the
     system was installed as an original instrument for
     command and control, rather than for evidence
     gathering. Obviously identification is part of
     evidence gathering.

Q.   So it was actually designed to try and help people to
     see around the ground? - A. Yes.

Q.   But it was inadequate for, shall we say, prosecution
     purposes, that is what you are paying? - A. That is
     right, yes. But in combination with still photographs
     the video action would create an ideal picture. It
     would give you an overall scene of what took place and
     then we had systems of still photographers who would
     be able to use quality cameras to take close-ups of
     groups of the crowd that could be magnified.

Q.   So it was part of an overall system? - A. A small cog
     in a big system.

Q.   The camera in the middle, the colour one, what sort of
     a view did that get of Leppings Lane? It obviously
     was not 90 degrees, because to get 90 degrees it would
     have had to be in the centre of the pitch, but how
     good a picture could one get using maximum zoom of
     Pens 3 and 4? - A. You would get a reasonable view of
     Pens 3 and 4.

Q.   Could it get a view of the people at the front'\of the
     pen so that you could distinguish them or not? - A.
     Not to distinguish them, no. You would get a view,
     but obviously it is obscured by the fence and         "'N
     hoardings, etc.                                        y

Q.   I think I am right in saying that you did not -train
     that camera withmaximum zoom facilities-onto Leppings
     Lane terracing? - A. N o , an"incident had taken place
     on the Spion Kop where some Liverpool fans who had got
     tickets for that end of the ground had been segregated
     and several arrests had been made, etc., and the
     camera had been set there.
                                               T. BICHARD

Did it remain set on that location? - A. As far as I
can recall, yes.

But if you had been asked - I say no more - to train
it onto Leppings Lane terracing at about -just after 3,
when we know that problems were developing, would one
have been able to obtain a picture on your screens’^-,
not on this screen but on your screens, which wouldY
have enabled identification of individuals at the    I
front to be made from your experience of the quality
of that camera? - A. No, it would give you an over
picture only.

So you are saying that it would not have been possible
to distinguish individuals? - A N o .

I know that was not done. - A. I think actually it
was, but it was not recorded. There are five cameras
but only two recorders.

We will come to that. - A. I could explain if you wish
about why it did not become part of the recording.

Yes, tell me that. - A. The system operated whereby at
2.30 I should have replaced both tapes. Because of
what was taking place on the Leppings Lane end I
didn't replace those tapes, and eventually I think it
ran out just after 3 o'clock. The camera was used,
but it was not taping.

I see, but you said a moment ago that the camera was
actually trained on the Spion Kop. Are you saying
that it was re-trained onto Leppings Lane? - A. It was
on the Spion Kop, but it was not recording and it was
watching that area until later on. When things that
had developed outside the ground had, in fact, moved
inside, obviously then we moved to looking at a
different camera, we were wanting a different view,
and that was the one we would have used.

You have not understood my question.  I am either
confusing you, or you are confusing me, one or the
other. Let us talk about the colour camera. You had
loaded a tape for that - right - into the recorder? -
A. Yes.

You had trained the camera onto the Spion Kop? - A.
Yes.

What time? - A. I think it would be around 2
o'clock/2.15.

Were you recording those scenes at that time, as far
as you can remember? - A. Yes.
                                                      T.   BICHARD


 Did you at any time re-train that camera onto the
 Leppings Lane terracing? - A. Yes.                           ^

 What time did you do that? - A. It would be some time
 aiter 3 o'clock.

^ ^ - X o u know how much after 3 o'clock? - *A'. 'in,

You  are saying there is no film of it because the tape
had  run out and in the heat of the moment you did not
replace it? I am notblaming you for that in any way.
- A. No. When the colour camera came into use the
tape had expired.                               *

You  had scenes in the Control Room but we cannot look
at that today from that camera, that is right, is it
not? - A. Yes, that is it, sir.

The other camera, the   onewhere we do have scenes, in
fact the tape did not   run out because it was on time
lapse? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

And it gave an extra life, so to speak?        - A.   Yes, it
did.

You have already told me - I am still on the colour
camera — that the scenes that you could see in your
Control Room on the monitor were (a) less good than
what we would have seen because it was smaller? - A.
Yes sir.

And (b) in any event in the Control Box it would not
have enabled you to distinguish individuals? - A. No,
the quality of the reproduction on the screens, the
monitors you^have got, is far substandard in
comparison with what you have seen there.




                             /Q.   The film we saw ...
                                                   T. BICHARD

The film we saw this afternoon of the Leppings Lane end,
which came from what I have called camera 1, I don't know
the camera number. - A. I would know it as camera 5.      }

The one beneath or near, the Poli^e...JBox? -A. Yes.       ~

That scene began at about 15.02? - A. Yes, sir.        ^

Where was that camera looking before 15.02 as far as you
can recollect? - A. My recollections are that the
particular camera had been faulty and in fact you saw      \
some of the problems that occurred.      You were getting    )
what is called flare.      It is reflection of light
coloured objects and you lose the picture.      The camera /
was not really being used as much as it would normally be
because of the sub-standard picture.      It was just left
in position.   That is why the picture never really moved
at all because i t w a s set and left in that position.

-JHrair"is"~what I am coming to. Given that it started at
  15.02, let us assume I am right on that time, was that
  the time you moved it and located it and then left it to
  take that shot? - A. No, that probably would have been
  done before that.

Would it have been recording before that? - A. Yes.

So there ought to be a film of it, prior to that? - A. I
would have thought so, yes.

Of that same scene? - A. Yes.

If I tell you we cannot find it would that make any
difference to your answer? - A. I have no idea at all
where it could have gone to.   It was part of the tape
and the tapes were all sealed up at the end of the day.

You saw the beginning of the tape? -A. Yes.

We deliberately started it with a few    frames before it
flicked.   The recording on that tape    was of scenes
outside the ground.   Do you remember     that? - A. Yes,
that is right, it showed the external    view.

That did not come from that camera, did it? - A.It could
be that that shot before...   They system - I haven't the
word to describe it.   It can move from camera to camera.
If I am not viewing a particular shot it can be set so
that it will flick through cameras 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 , at
set periods.   At that particular time it is quite
possible that I was operating the external camera on
Leppings Lane and that had been on time lapse mode.       The
scene you saw outside at first was part of that sequence.
                                                             81

                                                      T. BICHARD

   I do not know for sure.   Without seen the whole original
   tape I cannot really explain how it has got where it is.

Q. You cannot be recording from two cameras at once on to
   one tape, can you? - A. No, there are two tapes and you
   are getting one scene at a time.

Q. From one camera? - A. Yes, either the one you select if
   you want a particular view to be recorded, or if you wish
   for it to flick round the other cameras.

Q. Let's leave the cameras for the time being and let's get
   back into the Control Room.   Can you recollect that at
   some point or other a radio man came into the Control
   Room to   try and fix the radios? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you recollect any request at that time to you to make
   sure that scenes outside the ground were being recorded?
   -A. I believe that was made by Mr. Duckenfield.

Q. You would have recorded that off a black and white
   camera? - A. It was a black and white camera that was
   situated on the external side of Leppings Lane.

Q. In fact   that is what was being done? - A. Yes.

Q. At some  point or other did you see agate open? -A. Yes,
   C Gate, initially.

Q. You saw that.   Did you see that gate being opened for a
   short period of time and then being closed by what looked
   like a mounted Officer to you? - A. Initially I thought
   the gates had been forced open and that Police Officers,
   including a mounted Officer, had managed to close the
   gates.

Q. Can you actually see the gate or is it just the movement
   of people, which you can see? - A. The thing that drew my
   attention to it was the sudden influx of people.

Q. You saw that and in fact did you draw people's attention
   to it? - A. I did.   I said that the gate had been forced
   open.

Q. Then the position appeared to be retrieved by the
   Officer, as far as you were concerned? - A. That is how I
   saw it, yes.

Q. Did you subsequent to that hear a request from
   Mr. Marshall couched in strong terms that the gates
   should be opened? - A. I think it was three requests, as
   I call, the initial one being more of a suggested idea to
   relieve a problem that was beginning to build up in
                                                            82
                                                    T. BICHARD


     Leppings Lane, building up to his final request which was
     very, very insistent.
Q. Did the final request come after the retrieval of the
   situation with that gate, as far as you remember? - A.
   Yes.
Q. Did the first request come before? - A. Yes, before that.

Q. We have heard about the gates opening and people coming
   in.   I do not think I need to take you through that.
   Just thinking about .Leppings Lane terracing now.   At
   what point did you first notice, either visually or by
   monitor, anything that warranted comment, if that is the
   right word? - A. I saw some people climbing over the
   fence and a situation similar to that, people climbirig to
   the stand, had occurred the year earlier.    If you like,
   those would have been my first thoughts that there was
   anything unusual about what was happening on Leppings
   Lane terrace, that people were climbing on to the
   perimeter track over the fence.

Q. That is the first time your attention was drawn to that
   part of the ground in a significant sort of way? -A. Yes.

Q.    Did you see it through a window or did you see it on a
     monitor? - A. It is very difficult to remember.    The
     view is partially obscured of what is happening out on
     the terrace because of people walking across the front of
     my position.    I am not sure.
Q.    At that point in time your impression was thatthis vas a
     repeat of the previous year's... -A. I thought it was
     some sort of pitch invasion.

Q. Was the previous year at the same time or at the end of
   the game or in the middle, or when was it, as far as you
   remember? - A. I recall it was at the end of the game,
   actually.   Quite a lot of people came on to the pitch.

Q. So it was different in that respect - timing-wise? - A.
   Yes.   It was the same scene but a different time.

Q. But you connected the two in your mind? - A. I did, yes.

Q. Did you see the match stopped? - A. No.

Q. Did you know it had stopped?   How did you find out it
   had stopped? - A. By the volume of supporters who had
   gone on to the pitch and then I realised the players had
   actually been taken off or been asked to leave.

Q. We have heard from several people that Superintendent^
   Greenwood was seen to signal and, indeed, he radioed in.
                                                            83

                                                  T. BICHARD

  Did you hear that?    You may not have done. - A. I did
  not hear the radio message but I remember seeing him
  waving his arras across.

Q. Where do you remember seeing him, as a matter of
   interest? - A. On the pitch near to the goalposts.

Q. Can you remember the ACC coming in, Mr. Jackson? - A. On
   more than one occasion, yes.




          Q. I am not interested
                                                                  84

Q. I am not interested in the first occasion which was
   early on.  I am interested in the occasion around and
   after kick-off? - A. Shortly after three o'clock?

Q. Yes.   Do you remember him coming in? - A. I do, yes.

Q . You may not have done but did you speak to him at
    all? - A. Not directly.  I was having conversations
    with other people and I think the first comment I
    recall is when operation support was called for and
    that was directed to me to use VHF radio to ask the
    Operations Room to instigate that plan.

Q. That was your second function, was it not, the VHF
   radio? - A. Yes.
Q. I think you decided at some point that that was more
   important than the cameras and you may well have been
   right. Had you decided that before o ra fte r the
   request for operation support? - A. I w ouldsay it was
   roughly about the same time.
                                                           S.,
Q. I want you to just think hard about this question of      )\
   operation support for a moment. When was it first
   requested? - A. Very early on after the ACC had come            \
   into the Control Box.           >                                \
                                                                     \
Q. So it was something that happened after the ACC came              j
   into the Control Box but pretty quickly after that? -               j

Q. The second question I want to ask you is, I know you
   were the transmitter, you were the voice? - A. Yes.

Q. But it was not your decision, was it? - A. No.

Q. Who gave you the order? - A. It was the ACC.     It
   required his authority anyway.

Q. That is the reason why I am asking you this because, as
   I understand it, a response came back some time later
   from Headquarters saying, "This has to be authorised by
   the ACC". Why was that necessary? - A. Possibly the
   first message that I passed was just a request for
   operation support and perhaps I did not explain to them
   that the request had been made by the ACC.  Obviously
   that would be recorded on tape.

 Q. Do you remember this request coming back saying,
    "Authority required" or words to that effect? - A. Yes.

 Q. What happened then? - A. I immediately told them that
    the authority had been given by the ACC who was present
    in the Control Room.
                                                                  85

                                                          T. BICHARD


Q. They accept his word? They do not want to hear his
   voice if you say it. Control will accept it, is that
   right? - A. That is the only time it has ever happened
   to me. I would assume the initial request will be
   sufficient. Obviously it is a major thing to be asking
   for and they would want confirmation to cover
   themselves.
Q. Was it you who contacted the Operations Room for
   ambulances? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. How did that happen? What happened? - A. As I recall,
   things seemed to have gone on quite a way. Again time
   is very difficult to pin down but it seemed quite a way
   into things when we realised that people had in fact
   been injured and it was not just a pitch invasion or
   the movement of people around the ground.

Q. Turn to 517A in the bundle of documents.     Have you
   found it? - A. 517A.
Q.    You can     see this  looks like a transcriptof a       logor
     part of a log? - A. Yes.
Q.    Is this anything to do with you? Would these be
     messages that you would be transmitting? - A. This
     looks like a transcript of a telephone conversation
     between Ambulance Control and Force Headquarters.

Q. In other words, not your conversations? - A. Not my
   doing, no.
Q. If you turn the page to 517B you will see at 1508.14,
   can you see that? - A. Yes.

Q.    I accept this is not your voice which is speaking but
     there is a comment there? - A. Yes.

Q. On what was required and why. Can you see it? - A. "A
   lot injured, apparently one of the gates, they've been
   pushing and pushing", that conversation.

Q . Yes. Have you any explanation as the VHF operator as
    to how that information got to Snigg Hill for them to
    pass it on? - A. No, sir.

 Q. Pardon? - A. No idea at all, sir.

 Q. You cannot recollect passing that type of information
    on to Snigg Hill? - A. No, if I had passed that
    information on to Snigg Hill it would have been part of
    the tape recording of VHF transmissions. I think that
    has been documented and transcribed.
                                                                   86


Q. You have no recollection of passing anything like this
   on? - A. No, sir.
Q. The timing of that is 1508 or thereabouts? - A. Yes.

Q. You do not know but are you able to say when you would
   have sent the message to Snigg Hill for ambulances? -
   A. Not exactly but that would be on the transcript from
   the tape.
Q. What about later on? You were in the Control Room, Mr.
   Duckenfield was there and I think various other people
   came into the Control Room, is that right? - A. Indeed,
   sir.
Q. Did you hear any conversations or explanations being
   given as to what caused the problems with which
   everybody was grappling with at the time? - A. Various
   people came to the Control Room and all wanted
   information about w h a t h a d t a k e n place. Is there any
   one particular individual?

q   . yes, when Mr. Kelly came to the Control Room was    N
     anything said? - A. The Chief Superintendent did have a
     conversation with M r . Kelly.  •

Q. That is Chief Superintendent Duckenfield so that we
   know? - A. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

Q. Do you recollect what was said in that conversation? -
   A. Not the whole of the conversation but certain
   reference was made to the initial thought about the
   gates being forced open.

Q. You recollect that that was said? - A. Yes.

Q. What you are saying is that you cannot remember the
   full extent? - A. That was only part of the
   conversation he was having.

Q. Would you be able to confirm that the main opening of
   the gates had been authorised from the Control Room? -
   A. Yes, that is right.

 Q. At what point did you yourself, never mind what anybody
    else said or did, realise that there was a major
    disaster developing in front of your eyes? - A. I think
    that is really a matter of record again on the tape
    when I passed a transmission to Headquarters saying
    that we now realised there was in fact fatalities.   It
    wasn't just a series of people who were injured.   I
    seem to recollect that would be around 3.15. Again it
    is difficult to tie things exactly down but it would be
    recorded on tape the time that conversation occurred.
                                                              87

                                                       T. BICHARD


                Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

Q. Mr. Bichard, can I first of all deal with the message
   whilst it is clear in everybody's mind, that 517B?
   What you are saying about that is that you had a
   recorder on the VHF transmitter including all the
   messages being sent out over that medium? — A. All
   messages that go into Force Operations Room by radio or
   by telephone are recorded.
Q. Therefore, you can confirm by that that was not a
   message which was sent out by you? - A. Yes, the
   transcript that is there appears to be one of a
   telephone conversation.
Q. Whatever source it may have come from did not come from
   within the Control Box? — A. Not as I recollect, no.

Q. I think that so far as the substance is concerned, the
   collapsing of the gate, that too you have checked on
   the tape. Is that right? - A. I have never had access
   to the tapes. It was seized by West Midlands.

Q. You are having to work from recollection on that part
   as opposed to the actual record on the other one. Your
   recollection is that that was not said from the Control
   Room? - A. I don't ever remember saying anything of
   that nature. If the tape was to be presented and said
   that I did....
Q. That is as much as you can say, Officer. Your
   recollection is that you do not remember that at all?
   A. No.
Q. We have established and I am not going to establish all
   over again that the Control Room was very much a team
   effort? - A. Yes, sir.
 Q. We have established also and I am sure you have sat in
    and heard the questions to Sergeant Goddard that
    although there were obvious differences in rank it was
    something of each person doing a particular job and
    drawing the attention of another person to that
    particular situation? - A. Yes, when things happened
    that I saw on screen, if they had not been seen by
    other people I would bring it to their attention. Very
    often if a message came in over the radio that made
    reference to a particular area of the ground or an
    incident I would direct the camera may be to record
    that particular incident if it seemed to be that
     important.
                                                             88

Q. These words really, "If I see an incident or notice
   something on the monitors I will bring it to the
   attention of the Control Room staff. Vice versa if
   they see something they would mention it to me". - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. In fact when the call came in from Mr. Marshall who was
   out in Leppings Lane to close Leppings Lane, did you
   take a look at the monitors at that time into Leppings
   Lane and see what it was that precipitated that request
   from him? - A. As I recollect I took a general view
   along Leppings Lane.

Q. Would it be fair to.say, PC Bichard, from that general
   view as shown up on your monitor there was nothing you
   could identify which could have necessitated Mr.
   Marshall making that request? - A. Nothing untoward at
   that stage.

Q. Of course, he was the man on the spot. He was the
   senior Officer who was well versed and able to make
   that sort of response? - A. He would have a better view
   obviously being on the ground.

Q. Can you help us please as to the view your cameras have
   so far as the wall line of the turnstiles is concerned
   at the Leppings Lane end? Are you able to see people
   at the front of the queues waiting to go into the
   turnstiles? - A. No, you cannot see the external side
   of the turnstiles.

Q. Again when a message was received from Superintendent
   Marshall as to the crushing at the Leppings Lane
   turnstiles, did you move your cameras then to have a
   look at Leppings Lane and see if you could see
   anything? - A. I think once the first request came in
   it was a continual effort of looking at Leppings Lane
   to see what was actually taking place.

Q. Can you give us any indication of when it was, having
   had the cameras lined up initially on the Spion Kop
   end, when you moved the cameras so as to take a look at
   what was going on in Leppings Lane? - A. The camera
   would have remained on the Kop obviously but my
   attention would have been brought round to Leppings
   Lane probably when the first request came in from Mr.
   Marshall regarding the closing of the road.

Q. So there is the closing of the road but the problems
   with the crowd manifested themselves over a period of
   time. There were requests for extra serials or
   reinforcement. There were requests for horsemen to go
   over. Were you watching the Leppings Lane crowd at
   that time or were you still having to focus on other
   things inside the ground and also, of course, on this
   monitor on the Kop? - A. My attention was purely on
                                                                  89

                                                          T. BICHARD


       Leppings Lane,   That is where everything seemed to be
       happening.

B|   q. Would it be fair to say in round terms that that would
       be from about five past two onwards? - A. That is about
       right, sir.

     Q. At that stage how many cameras are giving you a view of
        Leppings Lane? - A. One.

     Q. That is on to one of. these monitors and without going
        over it all again, nothing like what we have seen, just
        a small screen and not a very easy picture to
        distinguish and differentiate? - A. That is correct,
        sir.




D




                                         /Q. When you looked.
                                                         90
                                                  T. BICHARD

Q. When you looked out at half-past-2 and saw the crowd
   outside, you are an Officer experienced in looking at
   crowds outside football matches? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you form any view yourself as to whether in your
   view that crowd would not get into the Ground by kick-
   off time? - A. I was quite happy that the crowd would
   get inside the Ground within the time that we had left.

Q. Thank you. I will try to pass fairly quickly through
   that succeeding period because I have already touched
   upon the various events that were happening within the
   Control Room, and we know that the Control Room was an
   extremely busy place, at all times but particularly
   during this period, wasn't it? - A. Indeed.

Q. Mr. Marshall made three radio messages that you
   remember? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The third of those radio messages has been described as
   almost a command: open the gates or someone will get
   killed? - A. Yes, it was very positive and insistent.

Q. Were you able to give any assistance to the senior
   Officers in the Control Box as to what was going on
   then, from your camera's eye view? - A. No, because the
   view that we are getting is not of what is happening in
   front of the turnstiles, it is beyond, further back
   into the crowd beyond that point.

Q. When the decision was made that the gate should be
   opened, Mr. Marshall having asked for the gate to be
   opened, did you re-train the camera then? - A. Yes. My
   initial^thoughts were, again talking about gate, as has
   been said earlier I was thinking about Gate C. Because
   of the position of the camera the actual angle of Gate
   2 does not give you a view of it, it is looking
   directly over the top of it, and I did not realise that
   the gate was there.

Q. When you trained on Gate 3 you then saw it opened? - A.
   Yes.

Q. But your thought, I think, was that it had not opened
   voluntarily but that it had either gone or burst? - A.
   The initial opening?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes.

        THE CORONER:   I think you said Gate 3.

        MR. MANNING:   Did I say 3, sorry:
                                                         91
                                                 T. BICHARD

Q. Gate C? - A. Yes, the initial opening I thought the
   gate had been forced open.

Q. Then you saw what appeared to be a recovery of that
   gate by a mounted Officer? - A. Yes.

Q. Was it after that apparent recovery that the command
   message from Mr. Marshall came over the air? - A. There
   was another message and then shortly after that the
   insistent, the positive demand.

Q. Is it right to say that when the gate, in your mind, in
   your view as to what you could see on the monitor,
   burst or gave way, that you actually used words like
   that within the Control Room, in other words that you
   alerted everybody in the Control Room with words like,
   "The gate's burst"? - A. I did, yes, "The gate has been
   forced".

Q. In view of Mr. Marshall saying that he wanted the gates
   opened, did you keep your camera trained on Gate C? -
   A. I can't recall whether it was just an over view of
   the area or specifically Gate C.

Q. Did a time come when the camera was not trained on Gate
   C but moved to another gate? - A. Yes, shortly after
   the order had been given to open the gate a further
   request came from the C and V Serial, Sergeant Higgins,
   regarding Gate A, and he too was very insistent that it
   was necessary to open the gate because of the danger to
   people outside.

Q. You said a very short time, let me just try and press
   you a little if I may as to that, can you give us any
   idea what sort of time it appeared to you there was?

          MR. KING:   Sir, I think to be fair he said,
     "shortly after".

Q.        MR. MANNING:   Shortly after, P.C. Bichard, can
     you give us any idea how much in time, shortly after
     the opening of Gate C, you heard the request so far as
     Gate A is concerned and moved your camera? - A. I can't
     answer that question correctly again, to look at the
     video tape, my reactions were to that request and I
     moved the video tape across to Gate A. If somebody
     knew the time difference between that, that is an
     accurate timing of the occurrence.

Q. Thank you very much.  I certainly won't press you any
   further than that. In all of this did you get a chance
   at all to see what was happening on the Leppings Lane
   Terraces? - A. No.
                                                           92
                                                  T. BICHARD

Q. The first time that you got any signal that there was
   any problem so far as that is concerned was when people
   were climbing over the fence? - A. That is the first
   time that I realised that there was something untoward.

Q. You are not sure whether you saw that on the camera, or
   the monitor from the camera, or whether it was through
   the window? - A. I am not 100 per cent sure on that
   one.

Q. But you formed that view instantaneously, that at that
   time there was a pitch invasion? - A. Yes.

Q. That was the view that you took then? - A. Yes.

Q. And you had been present, I think, the year before when
   that had, in fact, been the invasion that the learned
   Coroner referred to, at the end of the match? A. Yes I
   had.                                           _    ’

Q. Is it possible to have a close up view of the centre
   pens from any of the cameras? - A. You really have to
   be careful on the definition of a close up view.

Q. I am looking to you, Officer, with probably the best
   knowledge in   the Courtto help us as to what you can
   see and what   you can’t see, and how clearly you can see
   it*   It is    right getting up close to somebody but
   if the whole image is blurred it is useless being
   there, isn t   it, so if you can help us in that sort of
   context? - A. My idea of a close up view would be no
   more than six heads and shoulders on the picture, for
   identification. That camera was not good enough to
   give that sort of picture.

Q. So it was not good^enough to give six heads and
   shoulders, and it is obvious therefore it was not
   capable of giving one head and shoulders either? - A.
   Most definitely not.

Q. What do you say, Officer, so far as the ability of a
   camera, trained from the South Stand, to give you an
   idea in your terms of overcrowding within that area? -
   A. It would not give you a view of overcrowding.

Q. Would you agree that it would not be a sound judgment
   to make any decision about overcrowding from the
   monitor that you would have in front of you? - A. I
   don t think it would be a sound judgment.

Q. In fact, part of the problem is that the position and
   angle of the camera in the South Stand, instead of
   ideally, if you like, being on the centre of the pitch,
   gives you a difficulty because of the angle itself? -
                                                                                       93

                                                                          T. BICHARD

       yes!hat COmh±ued with the inadequacy of the camera,

 Q. What you have got is a camera starting off with sn
    inherent disadvantage in that it i <3 of*-*- • •
    over a distance of what, perhaps 100 Jarts^before
    even reaches the subject matte? it wants to focus on -
    A. That is correct, that yardage is effectively „as?Id.
 Q* And it would need a verv exnpn^i uo     • *.•
    of equipment to be able to do that’sor? of t S S j ?
    That is the principle: you either move the camlra or*
    pay more money out for a more powerful lens.

 Q*    j ^ think^
                it is right to say that there had been
      w ^ Chnf10nS £eiween y°u » and 1 am not quite sure who it
      was but somebody - can you help us with regard to t L
      purchase of other equipment or different equipment? -
      and Mr"             had, taken Place with the Home Office,
      and Mr. Holdsworth, who was in charge of the
      installation of the CCTV system, and Mr. Mackrell
      regarding updating the whole of the system all rnnnH
      the Ground. Perhaps if I could quSnfy tEa? t£e
      a^o^H C        be lmProved Just by, actually moving things
              /Ire;po?1^tiomng, we could achieve a far better
      standard of picture for what we required.         Detter

Q. We have talked about what the camera can see and the
                ?ee* Just helP rae with regard to t M s it
   is right, isn t it, that the camera can^t see the ’
      t ZTsh°l ^
      uiemseives                leadin*
                 i - a. The camera      intothpth*
                                   can see       f-rrmi-
      the tunnel on the terracing when no people are there
      5 J i c o n c o u r s e f 366 t h *     - t r a n c e Po f Pt he S n S l T S i

Q. Yes, you can see it from the pitch side? - A. Yes.

Q * istright?a n't 366 lt fr°m the Concourse side? - A. That

Q * vou hilt watching Gate C on your monitor. You saw what
    you have described as the first opening and closure and
    then the second opening under orders from Mr.
    Duckenfleld. Did you as an Officer experienced in
    working m that Ground draw any connection between the
   whatsoever!^ “               ^       C and the

Q. Had you done so, Officer, is that something, if nobodv
   A      I woul^es?^               lt( th3t y°U ”°Uld have menti°ned?-

Q. Thank you very much indeed.
                                               94

                                        T. BICHARD


minutes^and^then''we J U p ^ i

                 (Short Adjournment')
                                                                                              95
                                                                            T.       BICHARD



                        mySti
                            re a ^ L ^ j e^ d
                                            ° V 1S L ^ I c s 1 "
   e s t im at e of how long I will be            hn?*T                 ®   V±Y
   the fact that »y l e f r n e d l ^ d                             “                o°nly .

         THE CORONER: Yes, I had forgotten that,


  n o t k“ ; ™ ? h e r I mymi e a i « d ’' f r L 1^   t0                    but 1 d°


         THE CORONER: Mr. Isaacs, what do you say?


  my learned^friend.^ I f L'Sill'.J on                     f t *7   grateful c<>
  stopsOUtha
  Stops thenheT,
              I "ay f.inISh
                 could      in ‘’alf-fn-hour?
                        perhaps  take the last and3i!
                                                5 o-r inhe” '
  minutes.      I will not be any more            than t L t .                   °


  as lon fafttat?'           ^      °ka7 Mr: Kln«-            He                 " « be


  from                                                       looks °f h°Pe

                 Cross-Examined by MR. K T N O

 Constable, one thing that does concern me                              Your-




'^tl?Tacin=h% n ad»ra ”hlch is at aB_a«srr'w the
 Yes!            'lesraes or so <md looks along It? - A.


 w t the °S8 ,'M c h 18 on the                    Stand which can
 that'incorrect?6         “ ‘h«                               “ L ,


JuS r « ; i :           is s s t ^ 1?.,:0? pos^ le to 2°°*"
 somebody on the^terficl^- 1 ^ C -al feat“res °«      }
enough for'Caurt- purposes, yes. X*' c« «« i?ly not^*»^d



1991 a s t h e y S e r e U
                              i n ’t h ? s cameras- * • far »*
                              i9 8 9 ? V Z “ l K ; l « “       ^3                    ......

to a s ? a 5 5 E ? 5 v 2 2 S £ ^ l l a ^ e e n ^ o                          Jh2“ d
ground and I do not intend to give evidence, but has
                                                                          T. BICHARn

   thisZ?ase?aClllty beSn demonstrated to the Jury in

           the   CORONER: No.                                  "              \

           MEMBERS OF THE JURY:                Yes.                   )           j
    ;                                                                            f
    \      THE CORONER:          I   was not           ^          ^          /
   d id   not know that.                                   tnem, of   course.         I

     \. MR. KING: I say that-   Th ■>^ j •c  '
  put questions in the li«ht *of thi<?           for me to
  was demonstrated to me,"sip*         evidence because it


  so.>    i n w a S ^ o t ^ i t h H t h e m !1 0336    U haS* ^ J»ry say
  C o n s t S i e t ^ D o y o u ^ a IntlTn tSe
                                                                so
  one so wishes to do si? - i V , . 8 1 v e ? ^ v i d u a l if\
  that comment, yes.         ’         quite happy with j
                                                                                  j
 You maintain that? - a. Yes.                                                     f
 i i s r s ' t s f j f t t 7s . i r h
                                    te
                                     h: n th *>“ •                         is you,
 equally confident about vonJ f 6          that you are
 can or cannot see on the t e r r " S fS tC what ^ ou
 you have described about not KaiS ge”®ra^1^»"the way
 overcro wdi-ng... and so forth? - A. Yes?   C° PiCk °Ut

facial features,^ o e ^ t h a ^ m e a n C th® zoom can Pick out
you could have ^ explanation v ^ 3117 that ~             W« U .
you say, that is right? - a it ?n                stlck by what
opinion.  If you were tn on * 5 c°uld be a matter of
on your own and people knlw von            and °n that terrace
photograph with that camera I a m ^ 6 ^           6 and took a
could identify you but whfn                3uite sure they

s s L a ; : " to pi‘ k o u t «

features,      can^ou^ot?            - h“    I ° d o n ’? t b ^ L ^ s i r ! 01'*1

     THE CORONER: Can we iust                           =
you saying that you cannof S i                          ! *°n® point. Are
the screens? You are not <?ai^                        °U£ facial features on
possible to take a frame 0 ? ? h ^ „ - S at U , ls n o t .
as we have done7 - A Yon no " . ^ d e o and blow it up
picture, but what yoi W e to Si"-7 Can enlarge the
the video tape, tak= a „k,,     ,     you st0P motion
            pe. take a photograph of a television
                                                                     T. BICHARD


       a c t u a n r e n l a r g e e? h r fi deSet S e t0?raph*   Y°U cannot
       o b v i o u s l y when you take a nhofo pi cJ ure itself,         and
       screen you get lines and i n t e r ^ L e V i t * ? 1" * 810"


       witness"what^one^could s " o ^ t h ^ PU“ in8 t0 the
       Control Box.                     ne scr9ens in the

             THii CORONER: That is whaf T m                 v.
                                 ^      that we are talking^about the


Q'    you, Officer?1 T e l ^ a ' l t            e v ^ any furth«       * “ >>
      briefing in your position                   fr ?art o£ ^
      sir? C° m0nlt°r the te^ a«             for°overcrowding?n-rA^ No


      yourself were J o t l f I ^ a n ^ u ^ i “n^*rstand "hy you
      day looking out for overrrnt.T^‘               this way, on the
      You « « not briefed so to do^yon'did*1 £?at b® ri8ht?
      as part of your duties did                     . .n0t re8ard that
      concerned ! didn’t s e e ^ a ^ o j ^ ' ^ ' w d i n g ? * " 33 1 ™

     was it? -SA?°IfPirhadfsJenritUtT0S C° m°nltor for it,
     something about it.              would have done

     I understand that hi^
     It, to watch out for possible IJaVer ln,your mind, was
     terraces durin. the b S i l d i ^ K ?erCr°?dlng on the
     occurred? - A.°I was wat-nh-        ^ore the disaster
     outside on Leppings Lane, r t f t \ f c o ^ e c ^ " 1118


     for it o n h e Cterraces then ‘was      ^   t0 "aCch out
     A. I was concerned about th£            ^ any sta§e? ~
     place on Leppin«s Lane th* %         ”    1 was taking
     made over the r a d i o a n d  =omments that were bein-
     was.            radl° ’ and that was where my attention

 I understand that. I just want
 moment on the terraces and whaJ    concentrate for the
 was, and can I say, Constable   y°ur attitude of mind
 Officer in the C o ^ r S " ^ ^ ^ ” ?'-";: So"? M n l "


 junior Officers?"- A?d?esbsir U ’ ”ere °n8 °f the

 things if it was”not p a r t ^ f n° C looklnS out for
 and it is the " i s ^        n V ^ a t l f 1"8 ’
                                  > cnat it was never in
                                                    T. BICHARD

 your mind that you had to watch out for overcrowding
 on the terraces when you were in the Control Box that
 day? - A. I think I would like to reverse that and say
 what was in my mind was the fact that I was watchin*
 what was taking place on Leppings Lane, the incidents
 that were occurring there. I do realise what sort of
 tack youare getting on to, but that is how I would
 like to answer that question.

 Mr. Bichard, I want, if I may for the moment, to
 remove you from the events of Leppings Lane and just
 look to what you as someone in the Control Room was
 expecting to have to do when you went in there on 15th
 April.  It was not part of your briefing that your
 function wss to monitor    tins tsirir3cinor for
 overcrowding, that is right, is it not? - A. I wasn't
 toVdo 3 SpeClflC instruction that that was what I was

I will not take that any further with you, but I can
put this to you, can I not, in the same context7 You
did have a number of briefings,*did you not, relating
to, if I can put it this way, law and order, that is
to say preventing pitch invasions and matters like
tMat. - A. Generally speaking the Control staff did
not attend briefings.

S f nr^Sry late °n in the events y°u have described to
the Coroner you saw people coming over the fence, your
 mmediate reaction was as to a pitch invasion, was it
not/ - A. It was, yes.

I°nnh?ind *   1 °an PUt 11 that way’ was switched into
a public order situation, was it not? - A. That is
what I consider was happening, yes.

To be fair to you, you had never, as part of your
training or instructions, been invited at any sta»e
had you, to look upon your role in that Control Box’to
 onitor that terracing for signs of overcrowding, that
is right, is it not? - A. That is correct.

That may explain or it may not explain it. When you
were being questioned by the learned Coroner, or it
         5e^n .myJlearned friend Mr. Manning - it was
           friend M r; Manning - and you were asked
whether during the time the Gate C request was made
and when the decision was being made whether to open
iwiTh     n lt:,was 0Pened, you got an opportunity to
fiJrran  366       W3S haPPenin2 on the Leppings Lane
terraces, your answer you said was no because you were
LaneCi c s e l -f af . That is
     lcseit!’               ”hatcorrect,
                                  "3S happenin8
                                         sir.   in LaPPi"gs
                                                                     99
                                                           T. BICHARD

 y o u Ia
 y      ass aa
             a a junior
                 i i n i f r °Officer,
                               n f P a t ’ that
                                              agaln 1 do noc did
                                                you yourself criticise
                                                                 no*-
 turn your mind to the question of what was °oing to
 happen to the people, the large group of people who
 were going to be let in through the gates, because
 that was not part of your function, was it’ - A No
        i?           circumstances would have been different'
 had the ground been full and there were a lot of
 people outside and we were considering opening the
 f3 -hSh ^             f think my mind niay well have been
 switched to what would happen to the people coming in
 but tne circumstances were that the people outside
 were coming into the spaces that were                  available in the
 Leppings Lane.                                               Uie ln tne

 Of course. The people inside could only go where
 there was space on the terrace, that is ri-ht is it
 not? - A. That is right, yes.             ° ’ 13 11

 What you told my learned friend Mr. Manning was " I
 jJr®w no connection between the people comin^ into Gate
 ,J         5U"n!r ’ but 1 would have mentioned it if I
 had noticed it". That is what you said? - A. Yes.

 Why, if you had noticed a connection between neon'll
 coming m through Gate Cand the central t u n n ^ ^ o u l d
 access ^ o ^ h e * terrace I "A ’ “     ™   ldP - ^ f ’a n ™ ^

But why would you have mentioned it? - A. For the
reason that I might mention anything elsi thSt was
£d"f 5ir?h?thi?H
               tha COntro1 Box-lf ■oi2b£d™l.e
naan t put their mind to it.

But what was it, what would it be, if you had
c e n ^ a ^tunnel
central     u ^ , P<;?PJk C°ming in ‘>-rough7G<>te <= and Che
                   at that  time, that if you had noticed
it you would have felt concerned enough to mention it?
Why would you have wanted to mention it? - A. I think'
the easy answer to that is that at the end of the dav
disaster ^ u t ^ t - ^    t^ ingS that brouSht about this
when those gates ^           ‘p S ^      th« ™

I understand that, but what you told my learned friend
Mr Manning was that if you had drawn a connection
between people coming in through Gate C and the tunnel
you.would have mentioned it, that is what you t o S us?


rhZaS L t0KeXpl°r e -W;Lt:h you why that w°uld have been
tht I     because it was simply the tunnel going onto
     hrJaCKS ’ Wh7 WOuld you have mentioned it, and you
expected the people to go on the terraces, why would
                                                            100
                                                 T. BICHARD

     you have mentioned it? - A. Because I think that
     comment is made with hindsight, that was the result of
     what happened when the gates opened because a lot of
     people went down that tunnel.

Q.   Yes, but so what?

          THE CORONER: He has just said that the comment
     was with hindsight.

Q-        MR. KING: But you have told us that the people
     outside could only go to the spaces on the terraces,
     that is right? - A. That is where they would go, yes.

Q.   Is this the case then, leaving aside that you drew no
     connection between people going to Gate C and the
     tunnel, if you had noticed it, the reason why you
     would have mentioned it would be you would not have
     wanted people to go down that tunnel because the
     central pens staring everybody in the face looking at
     the terrace, if one did, was that those central pens
     were full.

          THE CORONER: I have got to give a warning if you
     are going to ask that question.

          MR. ISAACS: With respect, he has already said
     that the comment he made was with hindsight. We all
     know now, and Mr. Duckenfield accepts and indeed other
     witnesses have accepted, that at the time
     unfortunately the central pens had so many people in
     that there was insufficient room for the people who
     did eventually go in, and I think that is what he was
     saying, with respect.




                             MR. KING:   With respect ...
                                                T. BICHARD

      MR. KING:   With respect, sir.

   ^ THE CORONER:   Let me give him the warning.   You
don't have to answer this question because it may tend to
incriminate you.   It is your privilege to say you don't
want to say anything in reply to it.   Now can you
remember what the questions was?

     MR. KING:   I will go in stages in view of my
learned friend's intervention, which, with respect, isn't
correct:

You were being asked not whether you knew that the centre
pens were full.   You weren't asked that question. What
you were being asked about was whether you drew a
connection between people coming through Gate C and the
tunnel, all right? You told my learned friend
Mr. Manning that you had not noticed it, but if you had
noticed it you would have mentioned it.   All right? - A.
Right.

Now what I am putting to you is in two stages.    First of
all, for you to give us that answer it follows that you
must have had a view at the time that down the tunnel was
not somewhere where you wanted that flow of people to go?
- A . That is something that with hindsight I know.   The
circumstances that presented themselves on that day, that
we all know about, if the people had been stopped going
down the tunnel the majority of this disaster would not
have occurred.

AIL right.   I will not take it any further with
yourself, but you see there are two quite separate
matters here which I was putting to you quite separately.
One was the connection between people going through
Gate C and the tunnel and number two was whether or not
it could be seen that the terrace was full in the centre?
All right? -A. Being a football supporter over a number
of years, there is a tendency in football culture to go
to the back of the centre of the goal.   There are a
number of occasions when the terraces have been
completely empty at either sides, but the centre pens
have been reasonably full because people like to stand
there and that is why the pens fill up earlier.

You are telling us that you yourself at the time of the
opening of the gates did not get a chance to see what was
happening on the Leppings Lane terrace?   That is what
you told us? - A. Yes, that is right.

You are telling us, therefore, that no-one in the Control
Box asked you about what was happening on the terraces or
asked you to look to see what was happening on the
                                                           102

                                                    T. BICHARD

     terraces?   That must be right? -A. My attention was on
     Leppings Lane and what was taking place there.

Q. You received no requests from anybody senior in the
   Control Box to draw your attention, to ask you about what
   was happening on the terraces?   That is right, isn't it?
   - A. Yes.
Q. Let me go back to the events at about half past two.    At
   about half past two you actually switched on the video
   system to record the scene outside, didn't you? - A. On
   Leppings Lane?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes.
Q. What was it that had caught your eye at half past two? -
   A. It was the radio request regarding the closing of
   Leppings Lane.
Q. Your attention was drawn to a build-up of the crowd
   outside at half past two? - A. Yes, that was part of the
   reques t.
Q. I think you told us, did you not, that it was at half
   past two that you should have changed one of your tapes?
   - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. And you were distracted? - A. Yes.
Q. What was it that was distracting you? - A. The events as
   they were building up outside in Leppings Lane.

Q.    Around that time do you recall any discussion going on in
     the ControlBox about delaying   the kick-off? - A. I
     cannot give you the time but there were certain comments
     made regarding policy.

Q. That would be around this time at 2.30 when you had
   videoed in on Leppings Lane and you noticed this build­
   up? - A. I cannot give you the time accurately.

Q. Wouldn't it be around that time? - A. No, I am not sure I
   can answer that at this point in time.

Q.    AIL right.   Let me tryand jog your memory about what
     was said.    What do you recall was said about delaying
     kick-off, whenever this conversation took place? - A. You
     would like me to tell you the context of the
     conversation?

Q. Yes. - A. I believe Superintendent Murray, a conversation
   did take place whereby the words were mentioned that it
   was not policy to delay the kick-off unless it was some
                                                              103

                                                     T. BICHARD

     outside intervening factor which had affected the fans'
     arrival at the ground.

Q. The word you have used is "policy".   That is what was
   being discussed? - A. That is what I remember, yes.

Q. If there wasn't a reason justifying late arrival, do you
   remember Mr. Murray saying what the policy was then? - A.
   Not specifically.   I could tell you the causes or
   reasons for considering delaying kick-off.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Tell us that. - A. Outside factors
     such as road accidents, delays, road works etc., or just
     by the pure volume of traffic that was coming to the
     event and it would mean that a large number of people
     were going to be delayed.
Q.        MR. KING:   Wasn't Mr. Murray saying that it wasn't
     "our" policy to delay kick-off for people who had just
     arrived late at the ground? - A. That would be the
     reversal of that, yes.
Q. He was saying that? - A. Yes, I am quite confident that
   that is what was being said.
Q. Do you recall where Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was
   when you had directed your camera at 2.30 onwards at the
   Leppings Lane end? - A. Whereabouts in the Control Box?

Q. Yes. - A. Stood in front of my position.

Q.        THE CORONER:    In front of your position? - A. In
     front of my position, yes.
Q.        MR. KING:    Was he looking at the monitor at the
     same time as you? - A. Yes.
Q.   Were you discussing   the general situation together? - A.
     We did, yes.
Q. That would be around the time of this discussion about
   policy and delaying kick-off took place?   It could be,
   couldn't it? - A. It could be, yes.

Q. All right.   I will not take that any further.   Just to
   deal with the opening of the gates, that is Gate C, you
   can confirm that you yourself were concentrating solely
   on Leppings Lane itself? -A. Yes.

Q. No-one in the Control Box asked you the question as to
   where Gate C, which you had your monitor on, led?   Is
   that right? - A. Yes, that's right.
                                                                  . 104
                                                           T. BICHARD

Q . I s i t right you directed the attention of Mr.Duekenfield
    to Gate C? - A. Yes, when it opened originally.

Q. Then you had the camera zoomed in on it? - A. I

Q. No-one turned your mind to what the state of the Leppings
   Lane terraces were?   That is r i g h t ? - A . T h e e v e n t s on
                            F*'oWiously get ting qui te
   serious.

Q. But no-one turned your mind?         No-one asked you a
   question about it? - A. No.

Q. The first time you say   that you turned your mind to the
   Leppings Lane terrace was when you saw people coming over
   the top? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. Before that Gate A had been opened, hadn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. I don't want to deal with your recollections as to the
   gap of time any further than what you have been able to
   tell us, but I do want to ask you this: do you remember
   an instruction being given for Serials to be sent
   somewhere to await what   washappening at Gate A after it
   had happened? - A. Yes,Serials   were sent to the North
   Stand area.

Q. That was at the time the order for Gate A was given, was
   it? - A. I think that would be after Gate A had been
   opened.   Two Serials were despatched earlier to Leppings
   Lane.   I know one of the Serials to be C&V,
   Sergeant Higgins, who then appeared at the back of
   Gate A.

Q. Yes. - A. Again, thinking about in relation to when the
   gate was opened, I certainly know that Officers were
   directed to the North Stand area.

Q. Do you remember who gave that order? - A. No.

Q. Wasn't it Mr. Duckenfield himself? - A. I am not sure
   about that.

Q. Can I just remind you of what was suggested and your
   answer given to Lord Justice Taylor on that matter, just
   to help you? - A. Certainly.

          MR. KING:   Sir, could he be shown page 62 of his
     transcript please, just above letter D, sir?

Q.        THE CORONER:   Can you find it?   Just above D? - A.
     Yes, sir.   That is right.   Chief Superintendent
     Duckenfield gave that order.
                                                            105

                                                     T. BICHARD

Q.        MR. KING:   That order was given to stop the crowd
     going on to the pitch by the North Stand? - A. Yes,
     that s right.

Q. So it is right that at that stage someone in the Control
   Box, and it looks as if Mr. Duckenfield gave the order,
   it would have been him...

          MR. ISAACS:   That is totally unfair, sir, with
     respect.

Q.          MR. KING: Mr., Duckenfield gave the order, you have
     told us? - A. Yes.

Q. That order was directed to sending Officers to the North
   Stand? - A. Yes.

Q. Gate A was entry point to the North Stand, wasn't it? -
   A. Yes.

Q. So that order was directed to the likely destination of
   the people coming in through Gate A? - A. Yes.

Q. So it is right that at that stage clearly some thought
   had been given to where the people going through Gate A
   were going to end up? - A. I think the concern would be
   that Gate A led to a seating area where everybody had
   tickets and if people entered the ground without tickets
   they would be occupying places that either were already
   occupied or that they should not occupy,      whereasthe
   terraced area was a free standing area.

Q.     Yes, the thought as regards the order in relation to
     Gate A was directed to a possible public order problem,
     wasn't it? - A. It was to deal with the people who had
     gone into that area who may not have tickets for that
     stand.

Q. Yes.   It was immediately after thatthat you saw that
   which you regarded as a pitch invasion? -A. Yes.

Q. Can I just investigate slightly further this matter, and
   I will do it very briefly, the matter as regards the
   message which apparently was being sent out from the Snig
   Hill Operation Force Room at eight minutes past three to
   the ambulance service to the effect that apparently the
   cause was the collapse of the gates?   You have no
   knowledge of that?    That is right?  That is what you
   tell us? - A. That's right.

Q. It would in fact from your knowledge not be correct,
   because from your knowledge the major opening of any gate
   when the large number of people came through, was not as
   a result of any gate being pushed open or broken open, it
                                                         106

                                               T. BICHARD

was as a result of deliberate opening on Police
authority?   That is right? - A. Certainly the second
opening of Gate C was on authority.

That is when the majority of people came through? - A.
Y bs •

The first opening, whatever you thought about it, was for
a very short period, some twenty seconds? - A. I thought
it was a bit longer than that.




       Q. It was a very short
                                                                               10"?




                                                                          T. BICHARD

 Q- It was a very short period, was it not? - A. Probably
    40 seconds which is twice as long as that.

 Q*         m e ' "hen y°u did witness the conversation you have
       told us about in relation to Mr. Duckenfield with Mr.
       Kelly, this was in the Control Box, was it not? - A.
       T h at i s r i g h t .
       C o n tr o l Box.                                          3
                                Mr. K e lly came t o t h e doorway o f t h e

 Q.     Who was Mr. Kelly, do you know? -A. He was connected
       with the FA. That is my knowledge of him.   COnnected

Q.     How close to the Control Box door were you
      positioned? - A. Perhaps three or four feet.

Q*        clearly do have a recollection of Mr. Duckenfield
      telling Mr. Kelly about a gate having been forced"3 - A
      I remember a conversation taking place and that was
      part of the conversation, yes.

Q . You do not remember any other part of the conversation’
      “ A• NO•

Q. So certainly you do not remember anything along the
   lines of, "And we, the Police, opened a gate to let a
   lot of people in"? - A. No.

Q. Just tell us again then your recollection of exactly
   what you heard Mr. Duckenfield tell Mr. Kelly? - A. Mr.
   Kelly came to the doorway. There was a conversation
    i     place between him and Mr. Duckenfield and part
   of that conversation included comments regarding the
   gate that we believed had been forced, which was gate


Q. And what happened? - A. After the Police had regained
   control of the gates?

Q. No, no , w hat d id Mr. D u c k e n fie ld t e l l Mr. K e lly a p a r t
   from s a y in g t h a t a g a t e had been f o r c e d ? - A I d o n 't
   rem em ber, s i r .

Q. Did he not say that there had been an inrush of
   supporters into the ground? - A. If that is part of the
   transcript from Lord Justice Taylor then that is what I
   said and that is what I remember at that time, yes.

Q.     Mr. Bichard, there is no ifs and buts about it is
      there? The impression you gained at that time'was that
      Mr. Duckenfield was telling Mr. Kelly of the FA that
      the cause of what had gone wrong was that the gate had
      been forced with the result that a lot of supporters
      had rushed into the ground. That is the effect of what
                                                                                             T. BICHABD

       he was saying as the cause? - a  I don '+■                                     v.
       other things were beinq said at'tho ??                                           at
       p e o p l e t h e r e were h a v in g a c o n v e rs a tio n * 5' j            t h e tw°
       o t h e r t h i n g s h ap p en in g i n t h e C o ^ c H o ™                        WSre

       fu rth S : ^               ^ i . ri9 h t' 1          « * t a k e t h a t any

                              Cross-Examined bv          mt ?   isaap.c;
      Mr. King is trying to suqqest to von         ..                      4   1


      of conversation that you heard was all that     Snip?®t
      about this matter and there in th 1 + I I - I WSS Said
      D u c H e n f ie W s whole a s s e n t "
      ?Sa?ri
      That I th.-nr-  °f Jh is
             think is what  - cause
                               being °f what was going
                                      suggested   T»t on •                                       4   .

      conversationathathyouidid°hear^wasFjust'°f ^                                     ^
      t h e r t o t a l c o n v e r s a tio n ^         SS 22? - ^                         ?L t

Q-     As I understand it, it was not a conversation that
      concerned you? - A N o     it      „ ^nversation that
                       a - n o , it was not connected with me.


Q - y o u ^ p ^ t r a f i L r t ^ ^ ^ / S L f l i ? . 9003 deal °n "


     c o n c e n tra tin g t L l S l y ^ n ^ L r S o O T e M a t i o n ^ - V ® ! "
     S i d2 a ^ t ? n T f u r t eS e?0 i S S r t ? ^ „ S0meb° dy ^                         «»

     e ls e ^ w a s                                         y° u d° “ * *no„

Q- So far as what you heard was concerned that so far- =
     S u e 0W?„feS0i1; ^ i0n Was “ “ erneS“ as                                             “
     and t h a t t h e r e h a / b e j n a ^ i n r u s h o f ^ f n j T i n t * 11?!,9**®

     that the gate had been forced.                                                ln my mind

- In so far as you heard Mr. Duckenfield sav that                                      », .  4



                                                  - »                   “ f - what


  Duckenfield was sayinq^had^ n0t *now Yhether what Mr.
  after that tvia  t     had a continuation namely "And
  after that the gate was opened on our authority"?   ?
  He may well have qualified that with furthe^ Y
  conversation.                          itner
                                                                                     T. BICHABD

 Q- S° f a r as the Snigg Hill message is concerned a «5 t
    understand it, Snigg Hill could have p?ckld ^
    information that did not come from the Control Box hv
    listening into Channel 25, is it’ - a         • Box by
    Z t i J , 0 n ? ° \ R 0 0 n at Snig9 Hil1   Monitoring a19ht’
                         ° SySte” aS “e11 as the n° ™ a l VBF

Q- Did you understand that little sninnot
   o u r E x h i b i t 517B was i n te n d e d by t h ^ n i ™ Hill 16 ^
   operator to be an in—depth analysis of what ha^ -t- i,
   place and the causes of what had taken place’ - a t ?
   seems an informed comment that somebody has made but I
   they°have?W               ^            90t th* ^ o L a J f o I T w h i c f *

Q. Again it is difficult to understand 'hnt it __ , ,
                   C£?n n e l 25? - A- * e s , I know t h e y were
   m o n ito r in g Channel 2 5 b e c a u s e when I was n q i n n w u i p           t
   c o u ld h e a r t h a t C hannel 2 5 i n t h e b a c w J f n J 9
   that were coming from the ground in effect.                           messa9es

Q- Possibly from someone who had been in
   s s -g s ^

   we had been transmitting on our hand set it hi <-»->«=
   r e c e i v i n g m essag es.   So9th e y c o n ^ e ^ L i m              ^    “



" fa ir                                  ^L T lt^ftS l op?tni"9
          t o s a y t h e a tm o sp h e re i n P?Se C o ^ r o f B o x a i t ^ a t ^
  time was one of great tension? - a. Yes?

!- Quite clearly a crisis? - A. Certainly, yes.

* roSteC?dnnteduin y°ur exPerience of being in the
  c o n t r o l Box a t a f o o t b a l l game? -   a.   Y es! d e f i n i t e l y




. You are someone, as I understand it, who has a
  5oSinTcme olfiJJhbut
            Officer Suiaasyout
                             a ofthe9rou-ndn
                               supporter?  .o
                                            tonly« a
                                            Yes.         a

 Would it be fair to say that you did not notice if

 ^ 5 .5 s ^ i ^ ^ t2-tssaj,s!        to the people you had been told
                                                           IIP



                                                      T. BICHARD

  about over the radio by Mr. Marshall? - A. The things
  that were occurring outside in Leppings Lane, yes.

Q. At that particular moment when the gate was opened
   surely the risk you had been told about of death to
   people by crushing outside? - A. Yes, outside.

Q. Of course, in your mind to alleviate that risk of death
   by crushing outside the fans outside would be able to
   go through gate C on to the concourse area? - A. In my
   mind by opening the gates we had made safe the
   situation outside.

Q. Whereas, of course, when gate A came to be opened there
   was not a concourse area. There would be somewhere
   where they would go? - A. That is right.  It is a
   narrow walkway straight down to the rear of the seated
   area.

Q. Do you recollect this at that time that somebody in the
   Control Room, not Mr. Duckenfield, said words to the
   effect, "When they come through gate A it leads to the
   North Stand. Better do something about it"? - A. Not
   that I recollect, no.

Q. You cannot recollect it? - A. No.

Q. You cannot say it did not happen. You just do not
   recollect it? - A. I do not recollect it, no.

Q. Is the position this; when these events were taking
   place you were not thinking, "I had better remember
   this, that and the other in detail because I am going
   to have to be giving evidence about it almost two years
   later"? - A. No, I thought the events would settle
   themselves when we opened the gates.

Q. Just one further point then on the opening of gate C.
   Is it right that your initial recollection was that it
   was just after gate C was opened that you heard the
   message from Sergeant Higgins and seeing this funnel of
   Officers? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. We are not talking about minutes. We are talking about
   a period of seconds? - A. Yes, I think that is fair.

Q. You are not saying that initial recollection was either
   right or not right but that was what it was at the
   time? - A. Yes.

        MR. ISAACS:   Thank you very much indeed.   I am
   very grateful.
                                                T. BICHARD

    MR. KING:       There is a very short matter, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Yes.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Your recollection as to the opening of Gate A is aided
by the fact you tell us that as soon as the request
came you directed your camera on it? - A. Yes, that is
right.

And it began to record it? - A. It was recording ....

As you were doing it? - A. It was recording what was
taking place and I moved across to Gate A and in fact
zoomed in on the back of that gate.

So if we are able to find on the video when you began
recording Gate A, it was roughly around that time that
you had just received the request? - A. Yes.

Thank you.


        Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

In case this should become a point, P.C. Bichard is
there some question mark over the timing mechanism on
that particular camera or at that particular time? - A.
Yes. When the Justice Taylor Inquiry was instigated,
or when we were coming down here, I was led to believe
that the timing and date set on the pictures we had
been taking was, in fact, incorrect with the actual
time on the day, and the actual time on the day, or the
inconsistency was spotted because of footage from the
BBC.

So we have obviously got to be cautious about that ....

     THE CORONER:   Do you know what the error was? -
A. Again, my recollections are that it was about six
minutes.  It was quite an extensive difference.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

     MR. KING:   I am not concerned with timings now,
Mr. Bichard, just relationship of events. Pretend for
the moment that we have not got any timings on the
video .... - A. Oh, no, if you want to get a stop watch
and see what time Gate C was opened, and time the time
that Gate A opened you will find the exact period, the
difference.
                                                             112

                                                     T. BICHARD


Q.    Yes, all we have to do is look at the video? - A. The
     video is running at normal time, yes.

Q.   See when Gate C is opened on that video? - A.    Yes.

Q.    And we can just time it from then onwards, as to when
     we next see Gate A, and you are telling us that when we
     see Gate A it is just then that you have received the
     request that Gate A be opened? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:   I will make a few enquiries about
     times, but my understanding is that all the times which
     were given to us by Inspector Layton at the beginning -
     that is why I did it that way - are as accurate as we
     can get them.

          We are not finishing today, I am afraid. We have
     got to stop because we have had a long day. Back on
     Monday, 10.30.

Q. Mr. Bichard, we will conclude your evidence. Remember
   not to discuss the evidence over the weekend because
   you are technically sitting in that Box until Monday
   when you come back, and we will, see you at 10.30. You
   may leave us if you wish.

                 (The Witness left the Court)

          THE CORONER:   (Addressing the Members of the
     Jury) There are two things I want to say. First of
     all in a sense the worst is over. We have got a little
     bit of evidence, but it will be much lighter.  I am not
     making any promises - every time I have said we will do
     something I have not managed it - but I am hoping that
     we will probably finish most of the evidence, if not
     all, on Monday. The rest of the week will then be
     spent in legal submissions and my summing-up to you,
     and the present plan, I am telling you this now so you
     can do a little pre-planning, is for you to retire, if
     all goes well, Monday week.

          Now, first of all I am not sure what time I will
     finish my summing-up on Monday, and the other thing I
     have no idea on is how long you are going to take, so
     it would be wise - this is not an invitation that you
     should take more than a day - but if it were to be,
     once you are empanelled you cannot go home in the
     evening, you have got to stay secluded, so it would be
     wise if on Monday week you brought an overnight bag
     with you. If it does become necessary for you to stay
     overnight we will arrange for accommodation.  I am
     telling you now because you might need to make some
     provisional arrangements in case, because once you have
     gone out you stay out until you come back with an
                                                                      i




                                                         DR. SLATER

      No, I am afraid not.   If somebody has/passed away and
      the body is moved or there is then pressure on the tummy
      the contents could be regurgitated^^

Q. After they had died? - A. Y e s y ^

Q. That was a query I was particularly interested in because
   I thought in the case o£/John that the cause of death
   could be...

          THE C O R O N E R M r s . McBrien, most of your questions
     are totally irrelevant and unanswerable, but we are not
     getting into speeches.

          MRS ^/f-lCBRIEN:    All right, I will leave it at that.
     Thank v^trn.

          THE CORONER:    Nobody else wants to ask anything.
     Dr. Slater, thank you, and thank you for your time.     We
     now turn back to Mr. Bichard.

                      TREVOR BICHARD Recalled

           THE CORONER:      Mrs. McBrien, it is your turn.

                  Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN:

Q.   Officer, you were the video operator in the Control Room
     that day, weren't you? - A. Yes.

Q. So you were concerned with cameras and pictures? - A.
   That is correct.

Q. What you see on a picture or a screen firstly depends on
   how good your eyesight is, doesn't it? - A. Yes.

Q.    Would you say your eyesight was very good? - A. Yes.

Q.    Now pictures or photographs can mean different things     to
     different people? - A. Yes.

Q. If you were shown a photograph and I was shown a
   photograph I could see different .things on it to what you
   may pick out? - A. That's true.    Different
   interpretation of what people see, yes.

Q. It would depend on what you were looking for? - A. Yes.

Q. Now you were not looking fo,r over crowding in the pens,
   were you? - A. No.

0.    Why was that?   Had you been    given no instructions or why
     weren't you to do that? - A.     It is not a question of not
                                                              8
                                                     T. BICHARD

     to do that, it is that other things were being done at
     the time.

Q. What were you looking for on the screens? - A. The things
   that were taking place outside on Leppings Lane and
   eventually when things did move inside obviously there
   were pictures being taken then. - ....

Q. Yes, when you move your cameras around what are you
   specifically looking for?   Why do you have those       ''i
   pictures there in the Control Room?   What is the purpose
   of them? - A. It is additional eyes for the people /in
   command, to give them a view from the Control Box j6f what
   is taking place in various parts of the ground. /

Q. Do you find when you are doing that job that you do
   convey information to the Commander? - A. Yes, I do.

Q. Could yougive me some examples of the type of thing you
   would convey to him? - A. Relating to this specific
   incident or on a general basis?

Q. No, on a general basis. - A. It goes across the board.
   I can think of occasions relating to traffic problems
   that occur on Herries Road, incidents that take place
   within the crowd, even deployment of Officers around the
   ground, access to the South Stand car park.    It is
   really across the board, the facilities.    It depends
   what the Commander wants or what I want to do with the
   system and it is usually dictated by what is taking place
   outside, either the messages coming in, requests being
   made, or just a general overview of what is happening on
   the day.
Q. You mentioned incidents taking place, could you give any
   examples of incidents that take place within the ground
   that you need to draw someone's attention to? - A. I
   think probably the two best examples was an incident of
   fighting that was taking place on the Kop on the specific
   day.

Q. On the Kop? - A. Yes, and a collapse that occurred in the
   uncovered seating areas on another occasion.

Q. So you were able to see that quite clearly from the
   Control Room? - A. Both incidents, or are you referring
   to a specific incident?

Q. No, both incidents. - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you have to use the zoom facility to get acloser
     view of these people? - A. Yes, that is right.
                                                          9
                                                  T. BICHARD

Q. Once you spot something you then enlarge that picture to
   get more information, is that correct? - A. Yes, if that
   is what is needed.
Q. So you are able to spot that.   Now if somebody - this is
   on any normal match day - broke their ankle or something
   like that, would you be able to detect that sort of thing
   on the terrace? - A. No. Perhaps I did not make that
   particular incident very clear.    The collapse had \
   occurred and it was indicated where it was and we were
   able to oversee the situation when directing first aiders
   to it.   It wasn't the actual man collapsing that I saw,
   but oversaw what took place when it occurred.

Q. Yes, if you saw someone who appeared to need attention
   you would draw that to the attention of the Commander? -
.. A. Yes.
Q. So you are looking out for danger or trouble in the pens
   then?   Is that right? - A. Yes, across the board,
   really, yes.
Q. On the 15th April, 1989, did you not spot any trouble or
   danger of any sort? - A. None whatsoever.




              THE CORONER:   You had better say
                                                           10

                                                   T. BICHARD

           THE CORONER:  You had better say at what time
      Mrs. McBrien. You had better ask at what time, rather.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:   Were you looking at the screens
      from 2.54, from about that time, when the players came
      onto the field? That would be an important point to go
      from; did you see the screens from that time? - A. I
      would be watching a screen but I believe at that time
      it would be, in fact, the screen that was appertaining',
      to Leppings Lane. I believe that things were still , v
      occurring outside on Leppings Lane.                 '
                             '          .
Q. JJhat time did you look at the Leppings Lane Terrace? -
    A. It probably would be after 3 o^clock, once the    \
    situation m Leppings Lane had alleviated itself. ^

     I know you weren’t looking out fOE.dispafity and that
     may not mean very muchto-you, but would you be looking
     at the direction m which the fans were facing? When
     the players are on the field people normally watch them
     playing, don t they? - A. As a spectator, yes, but
     obviously we are there as a job in connection with ....
Q. Yes, spectators are there to watch the match so once
   they appear on the field you would expect their heads
   to be facing in that direction. Did you look at Pen 2
   at J o clock and see which direction those heads were
   turned m . -A. I can t really answer that question but
   perhaps --- I didn t see anything on Leppings Lane
   Terrace that was untoward until the time when people
   appeared to be taking part in what I thought in my own
   m m d was a pitch invasion.                      y

Q* W           !e^   e -di£feronce in Pen 2 > not in numbers
   but the fact that m Pen 2 people would be looking
   i°”- d\ i he P^ch; in Pen 3 a lot of them were looking
   behind them wondering what was happening behind them,
   round?me        m       actually facing the wrong way

          THE CORONER:   I think he has answered the
     question but I will ask it again for you:

Q. Did you notice any difference in the way people were
   looking m Pen 2 and Pen 3 at around 3 o ’clock? - A
   No, sir.

               McBRIEN:   Did you use the zoom facility at
     that time to get a better close up, a better picture? -
     A. Again, I have got to be careful what I say about
     which camera I was looking at. Obviously, it is one
          °i eZeS’ and §enerally speaking I can only manage
     to look at one screen. If my attention was into what
                                                               11
                                                       T. BICHARD

      was taking place in Leppings Lane then in relation to
      that, yes, I was using the zoom facility.

     Yes, once you spotted something after 3 o ’clock did Vou
     then use the zoom facility? - A. Yes, I did. I believe
           ! f 6 waS a .Policewoman near to gate number 1 and
     lt: had been mentioned that she had left the gate ocen
     unattended, and an Officer was sent d o w n t h e r e , and I
     think that is, in fact, recorded on one of the tapes
     and the zoom facility was used.

Q. ®ut it was focussed on Pen 1, you say,        at that time? -
     A. It was really the gate and what the      Policewoman was
     doing.

Q. You concentrated on Leppings Lane, you said, because
   that was where the problems were. Now, were you
   looking at Leppings Lane turnstiles at 2.45 or
   thereabouts? - A. Yes, I would be.

Q. The numbers that you saw there outside at that time
   did you think^ they could possibly get in by 3 o'clock?
     A. At the time I did not address that thought.

Q.    _    THE CORONER:   You have got to answer it at the
             £ am n?t interested in what you think now. What
     Mrs. McBrien is wanting to know is, at 2.35 on 15th
     April, 1989, did you think they could get in, or, your
     answer seems to say that you didn't think about it, but
     just answer, whatever your answer is. - A. Not at that
     specific time, but the question had been raised a
     l i * !-bit ®arlier than that and I was quite happy at
     that time that the people would get into the Ground.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   I think you said at 2.30 that
     question was raised, wasn't it, and at that time it was
     considered that the people would get in, but things
     changed dramatically between 2.30 and 2.45, didn't
     they? - A. Yes, they did.

     J was thinking, was a further consideration given at
      ^ Ji,       °f the sl°wing down? - A. I think the fact
     or the matter was that people were concerned about
     people being injured outside at that time, rather than
     being concerned with the mass getting in to see the
     football match. The problem was the number of people
     outside and the necessity to alleviate their suffering.

Q. As you understood it did it appear that the kick-off
   would only be delayed if there had been fog on the
   Pennmes or a bad motorway accident? If it was late
   arrivals, that it would not be considered? - A. As I
   tSa? -I           t0 ¥r * King’ the general feeling was
   that it had to be an intervening factor outside just
                                                             12
                                                     T. BICHARD

     late arrivals. As I think has been explained before,
     people do come late to football matches, for whatever
     reason.

Q. So as it was such a sunny day and there were large
   numbers outside, the kick-off was still going to take
   place at 3 o'clock, it seemed, that day?

          THE CORONER:   It is not this Officer's duty to
     postpone the kick-off. He has given you an answer on
     that, Mrs. McBrien.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   When Mr. Kelly was in the Control
     Room you heard Mr. Duckenfield say that the cause of
     the disaster was that a gate had been forced, is that
     right? - A. I don't think the cause of the disaster.
     It was part of a conversation and the fact that the
     gate had been forced was something that took place
     within that conversation.

Q. And there was a sudden in rush? - A. Yes, that is
   right.

Q. You would not doubt that a sudden in rush would cause a
   disaster, would you? - A. Not necessarily, no.

Q. Would you think there would be a risk if there was a
   sudden in rush?

          THE CORONER:   No, I don't think we need to
     enquire of this Officer's opinion as to the quality of
     the risk. That is the Jury’s job.

Q*       MRS. McBRIEN:   Right, thank you very much.

                Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL
Q. Officer, canyou think back and try and recall the
   parameter of time that you were inthe Control  Box for
   that day? When did you first go there and how long
   were you there for? - A. It would be fairly early in
   the morning, maybe 10, 10.30.

Q. And when didyou leave the Control   Box?     - A. I can't be
   sure of that.

Q. Well, perhaps I can short circuit this. Were you in
   the Control Box between half-past-2 and 3 o'clock? - A.
   Yes, certainly.

Q. Did you leave the Control Box during that half hour
   period? - A. No.
                                                         13
                                                T. BICHARD

Q. In the black file in front of you there is a document
   that is given the caption C532. Could you look it u d
   please? - A. Yes, I have that.

Q. That shows the layout of the Control Box, does it not?
   - A. It is, yes.

Q. The bottom diagram is a plan of the Control Box and in
   it there is a square with your name on it? - A. Yes
   sir, that is my position in the Control Box.  *     ’

Q. To your left in the left hand wall of the Control Box
   looking at it from your position, is the door which ’
   affords entry to the Control Box? - A. Yes, sir that
   is correct.                                    ’

Q. There are no other ways into that Control Box, are
   there? - A. No, sir.

Q. Can you confirm that the plan is right, namely that the
   door opens outwards? - A. Yes, sir, that is correct.

Q. And is hinged on the side of the door furthest away
   from your position? - A. Yes, that is right, sir.

Q. So is it right that it is not possible for someone to
   come into the Control Box or even look into the Control
   Box in such a way that they are hidden by the opening
   of the door? - A. No, sir, if anybody comes to the door
   usually I do notice who it is.




                                Q. Yes.   Do you know
                                                               14

                                                       T. BICHARD

Q. Do you know Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can I just ask you to confirm this; can you confirm
   that between 2.30 and three o'clock that afternoon
   Superintendent Greenwood did not come to the Control
   Box? - A. Yes, I can confirm that.

Q. Are you sure about that? - A. Yes, sir.
          MR. RUSSELL:   Thank you.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Do you know what your call sign was
     on the day? - A. Hillsborough Ground Control.

Q. That is how you were described, so to speak? - A. Yes.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Q. Mr. Bichard, on Friday, the very last subject you were
   being asked about, related to the gap of time between
   the opening of Gate C and the opening of Gate A? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. You were asked questions about that by Mr. King and the
   Coroner said he would make a few enquiries about times.
   Mr. Bichard, are you in a position to help the Jury now
   about the interval of time between the opening of those
   two gates? - A. Yes, sir.        .... ......

Q. Off you go? - A . I knew the video was available and  \
   what I have done is I have taken the timing at 1 minute)
   40 seconds. I am quite happy that that is the time gap
   between C and Gate A, the request for Gate A to be
   opened.  I think that is the best way to put it.
          THE CORONER:   Say that again.

Q-        MR. PAYNE: Take it in stages. Do you mean to say         /
     you have re-examined the video yourself over the              I
     weekend? - A. Yes, sir.                                   f

Q. You have noted the time at which Gate C was opened? -       |
   A. That is the time that is shown on the video.             f
                                                               I
Q.        THE CORONER:   Which video are we talking about?     f
     The Police video do you mean? - A. Yes.             ’     !

Q-        MR. PAYNE: Then you have actually timed the          1
     interval between that incident and the time at which      I
     the instruction was given to open Gate A? - A. I
     realised that when the instruction came in I moved
     across to there. Obviously there is no sound or
                                                              15

                                                       T. BICHARD


   anything but I know that is why I did it and it is 1
   minute 40 seconds.

Q. Before you did what? - A. From Gate C being opened to
   me moving across to Gate A to see why the request had
   come in for Gate A to be opened because I believe
   again, looking at the video, there was a lapse from me
   going across there, the actual request being made to
   the actual gate being opened.

Q. What is the time interval between the opening of the
   two gates as recorded on the video? - A. That I didn't
   monitor.  I have took the time of me actually. The
   time from Gate C opening to the time I am sure that the
   request came in for Gate A to be opened.

Q. How is it you are sure about that? - A. Because of my
   actions on the camera.

Q. Because the film, the scene shown on the screen, can be
   seen to change? - A. That is right, sir. I moved the
   position of the camera to look at Gate A.

Q. The time interval which you have measured is from the
   view of the opening of Gate C as shown on the
   picture? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. To the time at which the camera can be seen to swing
   round, is that right? - A. That is right and, in fact,
   I zoom into the area around Gate A.

Q. You caused the camera to swing round as a result of
   receiving an instruction, did you? - A. It was as a
   result of the radio request from Sergeant Higgins.

Q. The time interval between those two events is what? -
   A. It is 1 minute 40 seconds. Perhaps I can just clear
   up something else? You have made reference to the
   opening of Gate A. Something took place then. The
   opening of the gate wasn't immediate.  It was within a
   period then.

Q. Is that something which can be seen on the film? - A.
   No.

Q. Just expand on what you are saying, something took
   place? - A. I don't know if I can speak about the
   matter but I believe that Sergeant Higgins had some
   difficulty convincing a steward that he was...

        THE CORONER:    You have no need to speak of that.

        MR. PAYNE:     Sir, is that helpful.
                                                               16

                                                       T. BICHARD


        THE CORONER:     Partially.        v

Q. Do you know the tape reference for Vthe
                                        " ' video that you
   reviewed? - A. No, sir.

Q* Is it right that the only shot of Gate A that you saw
   i s t h e shot where one sees a number of Officers lined
   up at the back of Gate A, and you cannot actually see
   the gate as such, is that right? - A. The angle of the
   camera does not allow you to see the gate.

Q. Is that the shot we are talking about? - A. The initial
   shot, yes. There were Officers behind the gate but I
   believe that I moved away from that scene again and
   looked at a general scene and in fact went back to it
   when the gate had been opened and saw people moving
   through a line of Officers.

       THE CORONER: I want to have a look at this myself
  because I thought I was reasonably clear in my mind.
  What we will do is adjourn for a few minutes and find
  it. It is all on the compilation tape. We will have a
  look to find it on the compilation tape. If we can
  find it we might show it. If need be we will put the
  segment of the tape up that deals with it. I want to
  k® clear about this. I think that is the only way to
  do it.

       MR. PAYNE:      I have no other questions.

       THE CORONER:   I might have one or two more but we
  will deal with this aspect of the tapes first. We will
  rise for a few minutes and see whether we can sort this
  out once and for all.

                        (Short Adi ournment)

       THE CORONER: We are going to have alittle look
  at a small snippet of the compilation tape andT"l want_
  you to watch it and I want you to tell us whether this
  is the video that you saw the scenes which you saw and
  whether this is the basis on which you are giving your
  svidence so that we can understand what you are saying:.
  We are not looking at the whole of the compilation
        ^ke two hours jpb, we have wound it forward to
  14.52 when Gate Copens and then we will watch for a
  few minutes. It is only short but I want to be sure
  that we have understood the evidence.

                    (The video film was s h o w n )

       THE CORONER:     Can you stop the video for a moment?
                                                                   17

                                                            T. BICHARD

Q. Is that the pan you are talking about? -      a   . Yes, sir

Q. Are you saying you panned across at that point when vou
   heard the request? - A. That is right, sir?         Y

                    (The video film confirmed

Q*      it right you then left Gate A and moved back towards
     Gate C area, the roof of the turnstiles? - A If mv
     memory serves me right I came back for a general view,


                    (The video film continupd)




                                /Q-   THE CORONER.
                                                               18


                                            T. BICHARD



Q-         THE CORONER: What is that showing us? - A. That
     is the reference I made to how I saw two lines of
     Officers behind 'A' gates with people passing through
     them to the rear of the North Stand.

Q. What made you go back to Gate 'A1, can you remember?
   You may not be able to remember it is two years' on
   because there is gap, isn't there? - A. Yes.

Q. There is almost d four minute gap between the first
   one and this one? - A. I am not sure about the reason
   for that. I am quite confident about the first look
   at that gate. Looking at the tape it is something in
   my mind, I can make reference to incidents or messages
   that were passed or things that were said in relation
   to what I did on that tape. It is like a pocket book
   to m e .

           THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, do you want to ask
     anything else arising from the video. It is more or
     less clear to me now?

           MR. PAYNE: No, I don't think there is any
     question. I am grateful sir.

           One thing which is quite clear in looking at
     the segment that we have just seen, in looking at that
     short section we have just seen, when the camera or the
     machinery was allowed to run at its normal speed one
     got quite a different impression from what was happening
     as to when we were going one frame at a time.

             THE CORONER:   I don't think we need deal with
     that.

           Mr. Fraser, I know you weren't here on Friday
     but do you want to ask any questions. You may have
     seen the transcript but the point we were discussing
     at length was the time interval between the opening
     of Gate C and the opening of Gate A and the time
     interval between the request for that to be opened as
     opposed to its effectiveness.

           MR. FRASER: No I understand that sir and that
     position has obviously been clarified this morning.
     Thank you.

Q*         THE CORONER:     I just want to ask you one other
     question.

           The recordings which you mentioned, the VHF
     recordings, those of course would not have been done
     in the Hillsborough Control Room, they would be done
     somewhere else? - A. No, the machinery is held at Force
     Control at Snig Hill.
                                                         19


                                       T. BICHARD



Q. So they would do their transcriptions from there? - A.
   I am not sure about who would actually do the
   transcriptions.

Q. It follows therefore there is absolutely no point in
   showing you transcripts of the tapes because you would
   not recognise them because you weren't in those
   locations. That is correct, isn't it? - A. The only
   transcripts of those tapes I recognise is the messages
   I passed to Force Control.

Q. Do you know which channel you were speaking on? - A.
   Normally it would be a dedicated channel, Channel 2.
   There was some speculation it might have been Channel 1.
   Had you asked me that two days ago Iwould have been
   sure it was Channel 2. I believe thereis only four
   actual channels to choose from.

Q. In fact we have not got a transcript of either 1 or 2.
   - A. And telephone conversations are also taped as well
   sir.

        THE CORONER: I see. I think we will leave it.
  We have got enough. Thank you very much indeed.
        Now the next matter we are going to deal with
  this morning is I am going to read most of, not all,
  but most of the statement from Peter Edward Smith.
  This is what is known as a Track Officer, and for
  reasons which I don't need to go into it is not
  practical for me to call him, so I am going to read
  his statement.

        I am also satisfied in the light of the evidence
  which we have already heard the statement falls within
  the ambit of Rule 37 which is the rule which deals
  with the admission of documentary evidence.

        It is the statement of Peter Edward Smith,
  Police Constable 1285 in the South Yorkshire Police
  and the date appears to be 29.4.89. It is not
  strictly a statement, it is a recollection as opposed
  to a statement but I think we won't worry about the
  technicality at this stage.

        "SEMI FINAL HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND -
        15 APRIL 1989.

        On Saturday 15 April 1989 I commenced duty
        at 0945 am at the Hillsborough Football
        Ground. At this time I was in company with
        Police Constable 417 ILLINGWORTH and we
        went straight to the North Stand for the
        1000 am briefing. The briefing was taken
