                                                       27th September        91




SLP/JT.




Mr. J.D.K. Burton,
H.M.Coroner,
77 Fulham Palace Road,
London.W.6.



Dear John,

IDENTIFICATION OF VICTIMS IN MAJOR DISASTERS.

Neither Lord Justice Taylor nor I dealt with one matter which caused
considerable concern to many of the relatives, namely, the identification of
victims following the Hillsborough Disaster.

There are two limbs to this:-

    a.    the identification and procedures at the temporary mortuary and

    b.    the further viewing/identification of victims at the Medico-Legal
          Cen tre.

You will appreciate that as far as the inquests were concerned, these matters
were strictly outside my powers and Lord Justice Taylor did not feel that it
w m necessary for him to deal with the matter either.  The complaints that I
seem to recollect (not necessarily exhaustive) were as follows

    a.    That the bereaved had to wait for 'a considerable period of time
          before it was possible to allow them to start identifying their
          loved ones.

    b.    That   the choice of the temporary mortuary was unsuitable.

    c.    That   the ..viewing of photographs caused pain to the bereaved.

    d.    That the bodies when presented for identification were in body bags
          and had not yet been cleaned up or tidied up (I believe in fact
          some attempt was made but as you will know, a sero-sanguinous
          fluid can leak from a dead body even after it has been cleaned).

    e.    That not enough time was allowed for relatives to stay with their
          loved ones and to handle and touch them.

    f.    That statements were taken of identification immediately after the
          viewing.

    g.    That there was not enough privacy.
                            2



     h.   That when the bodies came to the Medico-Legal Centre the viewing
          arrangements did not allow the touching of the bodies because
          of the glass partition which was built into the viewing room,.

     i.   That again there was not enough time with the deceased and all
          the people had to wait a long time for viewing.

     j.   That in some instances,   officers involved were rude or curt with
          people.                                               >.

Whether or not these criticims have any substance is not the purpose of this
letter. In fact I think that the viewing arrangements with the use of
photographs to save people having to look for their loved one amongst 95 dead
bodies were a very major improvement, but what I am interested in is whether
you think that the Coroners’ Society ought to consider setting up a
sub-committee with ,a view to thinking about the best possible methodology for
dealing with viewing and identification of deceased people in a major
disaster situation.

I am of course aware? that once the body is handed over to the families there
is no reason why they should not have as much time as they wish with the
deceased but in practice, however fast one acts, a few days is likely to have
elapsed and it may be too late for the people involved.

Yours sincerely,




S . L .Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
