-HELLS                         TEL:   0213596735              26,10,90   1 0 : 4 2 N o . 0 0 4 P .0



         WEDNESDAY 2* OCTOBER ld$0
         NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION, BIRMINGHAM

                      *
         PRESENT          Dr POPPER, HM CORONER
                          DCC, MR J M JONES, CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY
                          DETECTIVE SUPERINTENDENT BEECHEY
                          DETECTIVE INSPECTOR PERKINS
                          HRS D S HARPER, PAO




         1.   The court lay out and ante rooms were described by Mr Jones, with the
              positioning of the model of the ground, wide angled video camera and
              seating of the various parties.

              Mrs Harper explained the monitors and screens within the court and was
              requested by Detective Superintendent Beechey to order video tap*s for
              their use.
              It was agreed that Detective Sergeant GRIFFITHS in addition to his duties
              as having responsibility for the jury, would also swear in the witnesses,
              and indicate positions on the model as described by witnesses as they gave
              their evidence.
              Mrs Harper was requested to ensure that an overhead projector was within
              the court, which would be operated by either Mr Jones or Mr Beechey, who
              would be in possession of the overheads of the Sequence of Events and a
              plan of the ground.
              Coloured pens must also be available in the event of a witness marking the
              plan which would then become an exhibit.

              At least 50 copies of A4 size plans of the ground should be prepared for
              the hearings.
              The difference between the model of the ground and the plan of the ground
              was discussed, and it wa3 agreed that it could cause some confusion to all
              concerned. As such Mr Beechey will examine the model in Sheffield on
              30.10.90, in an attempt to rectify the problem.

              Dr Popper discussed the merits of the court hearing the taped interviews of
              Mr MACKRELL and senior police officers. Dr POPPER stated that he would
              firstly write to the individuals concerned to seek their agreement to show
              the video recordings of fch|>se interviews, but in the event of their
              refusal, he would play the audio tapes in full, albeit this would be a time
              consuming exercise.
              Mr Beechey informed the meeting that he was in possession of a portable
              replay audio machine, which would be amplified by the equipment installed
              by Sheffield Council.
               With regard to the transcripts of the daily proceedings, it was agreed that
               the whole administration, copying, charging etc of these papers would be
               undertaken by either the company providing the stenographers, or by
               Sheffield City Council.  This matter would be left with the Council to
               decide.
The minimum number of transcripts thought to be required daily was 30 but
this matter and its administration would be discussed by Dr Popper with
the legal representatives at his meeting on 30 October 1990.

Mrs Harper enquired of Dr Popper as to the payment of witness expenses. Dr
Popper stated that this task should be undertaken by Sheffield staff. Mr
Jones agreed but stated a policy decision should be made and presented to
Sheffield Council in that Dr Pop pe r ’s staff were still employed with their
normal work at the Medico Legal Centre and therefore more staff should be
delegated to carry out this work. Dr Popper stated that witness expenses
forms should be sent out with the witness warning notices.

The subject of rail warrants was raised and whilst British Rail cannot
assist Mrs Harper expressed no problems with these being issued by West
Midlands Police. It was agreed that DS Tredgoid could be issued with a
book of rail warrants, and if difficulties with travelling costs are
indicated by the witness, a warrant would be sent to him. The
administration would later be dealt with by Mrs Harper.

Mrs Harper brought to the attention of the meeting some accommodation in
Sheffield which had been offered to relatives of the deceased in cases of
travelling/financial difficulties.

Mrs Russell McSweeney   of Sheffield Social Services had contacted Nechells
recently requesting a   pre-inquest meeting. It was decided that the details
of this accommodation   could then be passed to her for her attention and
liaison as to its use   with Liverpool/other Social Services Departments.

It was also felt that Mrs McSweeney should also be aware that assistance
may be needed by some witnesses at court as to completing their witness
expense forms and as such this would take this aspect away from DS
Tredgoid.

Mrs Harper stated that there were Council meetings on 28 November 1990 and
9 January 1991 and as such the Council Chamber would not be available.
Also on 6 December 1990 the Nelson Mandela room is pre-booked for a
function.

Mrs Harper confirmed that Miss Harrison - Press Officer, Lloyd House, had
liaised with Sheffield Press Office.

There was a brief discussion as to the catering arrangements at the Town
Hall for Dr Popper and Mr Jones/Mr Beechey and the jury. It was also
generally agreed that the offer of parking facilities and the issue of
passes at the Town Hall should be accepted at this stage. Should it be
that they are not all utilised, these would be returned,

Mrs Harper then left the meeting.

Mr Beechey raised the question of copies of statements and documents
required -

It was decided that when the list and order of witnesses has been decided,
statements appertaining to those called would be placed in a bundle, of
which a copy would be available for Dr Popper and Mr Jones.
A witness who, attends to-five .evidence..will *&, «i4o#3<! to refresh, his
memory and read li s statement:prior- to entering the court, PrrFofsper;
       that it was not M s practice to provide copies of statements to
legal representatives *
Mr 'Jones suggested that Br Popper should have a daily folder during the
Inquests, This would contain a list of witnesses to be called that day?
the Ref number on U T Inquiry Transcripts! a copy of the witness statements ,
and 18 copies of any documents to he produced. Hr Jones further suggested/
that instructions should be given to the barristers that should they wish/
to introduce documents in the course of cross-examination, they should also
provide 18 copies for distribution around the court, .


With' regard to photographs used during the proceedings, It was suggested
that these should be put in transparent covers, and when introduced into
the proceedings should be given & *C* number, running consecutively from
those ’C ’ numbers‘Issued at the preliminary Inquests, .       r'

Two rotadex should be taken to the Town Ball each holding a copy of Lord
justice Taylor*# transcripts, the transcripts of the preliminary Inquests
and the body files, One rotadex will be available on the platform behind
Dr Popper, and the second in the police room.
The draft copies of plans of the location of deceased were examined and
agreed to by Dr Popper, these will be proven in the statement of Detective
Inspector Layton.

Points raised by Dr Poppers*
1*    Mr McGee being unlikely to be able to give evld'ence./due to his ill
      health, a statement will be required from Mr A d d y . (Reply; Mr Addy
      had a stroke on 5 October 1990. He has previously made a statement to
      his solicitors. Efforts are being made to obtain a copy o f that
      document.)
 2.   Can research be carried out on HOLMES as to how many people who have
      been interviewed were In Pen 3?

 3,     Are there any independent witnesses who refer to PC Smith at Gate 3?

 4.     Are there any documents relating to the staff of the sweet shop or the
      Fox Public House* (Replyt Statement from licensee faxed to Dr Popper
      25 October 1990, Questionnaires from bar staff also obtained, Ho
      staff at sweet shop have been interviewed.)

 5,   Which of the officers who were interviewed, declined to have a video
      r e c o r d i n g made. (Reply* Mr Duckenfield and Mr Greenwood,} ,
