^         Oow.<=-w,                                                                       lEfsna,
          O SA                        < g f? e .T }O A l C
                                         //)                                              Ji;£i3ig


h
    I t
             I
             / ij?           S ilverman* Livermore
        *i' /
                             S                O L                         I             C                 I            T                O                   R S
          | ,/•%                           11/13 Victoria Street, Liverpool L2 5Q Q
      ^                      Telephone: 051 227 1871.         D X : 14190.      Fax: 051 255 0216
                                                                                                                                                           DRF/SB
                                                                                                                        Our ref:

                                                                                                                         Your ref:

Dr S F Popper                                                                                                          W hen calling please ask for:
HM Coroner for South Yorkshire
Medico-Legal Centre                                                                                                                                         MR FRASER
Watery Street
Sheffield




9th March 1990

Dear Dr Popper

Following what I thought was a very useful and informative meeting on
Tuesday I have issued a letter to all members of our group who act for
bereaved families putting them in the picture and I think it might be useful
if you have a copy of the letter and the form to which it refers so that if
you get queries direct from Solicitors about anything which is said in the
letter then at least you will know what they are taking about!

I trust that the suggested procedure in terms of questions meets with your
approval, I do hope I interpreted what you said on Tuesday correctly and
although I anticipate that very few families will have any queries to raise
having seen their particular summary I think that if there is a form of
common approach by them either directly to your office or through me then it
will be easier for all concerned.

If you feel that the letter or form is not truly reflective of your wishes
please let me know as quickly as possible and I will issue an adendum.

Your^sincerely




                                                                                                                                   PS. frt. h*. d csuat
                                                                                                                                   — Ghty &U. Leitjfir
                                                                                                                                         lo          6U /Hk-IT                             ,




                   A . F . F A R R A N D L L . B . , C . P . S T E B B I N G L L . B . , E . M . S H E L V E ' / L L . B . , D . R . F R A S E R , J. L . W A L K E R L L . B .
                           A l s o at: R u t l a n d H o u s e M a l l , S h o p p i n g C i t y , R u n c o r n W A T 2 E S . T e l : 0 9 2 8 7 1 4 1 2 1 . F a x : 0 9 2 8 7 1 8 1 3 5
                                                           13 7 L e a t h e r s L a n e , H a l e w o o d , L 2 6 0 T S . T e l : 0 5 1 - 4 8 6 0 1 3 1 / 2
                             A n d in A s s o c i a t i o n w i t h L A M B E R T et A S S O C I E S B - 1 18 0 L e A v e n u e D e f r c 19 B r u s s e ls B e l g i u m .
                                           T h i s firm is r e g u l a t e d b y t h e L a w S o c i e t y i n t h e c o n d u c t o f I n v e s t m e n t B u s i n e s s .
                                                                                    V A T R e e . N o . 164 4 3 1 2 81
         1

     —                 H IL L S B O R O U G H            STEERING                  C O M M I T T E E


                                      c/o CastCc Chambers, Coof^Strcct, LivcrpooCLZ 9S ^ f
                                        red: 051 2 5 5 0 6 2 8 Jo * : 051 236 0047 ‘D X 14100




                                                                               Our ref: DRF/SB/TNQUESTS

                                                                               Your ref:
     To All Solicitors Acting For
     Bereaved Families
                                                                               Date:      9th March 1990


     Dear Sirs
     Hopefully you will by now seen Bulletin 14 issued on the 5th March, this is
     the letter to which Liz Steel refers at the beginning of the second
     paragraph on page one.
         In response to his invitation to this Committee I appeared before H.M
         Coroner for South Yorkshire Dr. S. L. Popper at the Medico-Legal Centre
         Watery Street, Sheffield on Tuesday of this week and having         heard
         representations from myself and Solicitors representing various other
         interested bodie Dr. Popper confirmed that he will resume the 95 inquests
         on a strictly limited basis on the 18th April 1990.

         H M    Coroner has been under considerable pressure from a variety of sources
         notably this Committee, the Hillsborough Family Support Group and Messrs
         Hammond Suddard acting for South Yorkshire Police on the instructions of the
         M M I     to release certain information in advance of the resumption of the
          Inquests ... the majority of that pressure relates to the release of what
»        Dr> popper calls "non-controversial information" which many of the families
T        want and which, strictly speaking, has nothing to do with any potential
          criminal proceedings.
®        As a result of their investigations into the Hillsborough Disaster for Lord
V-       Justice Taylor and then for the Director of Public Prosecutions and also for
          H M Coroner himself officers of West Midlands Police have amassed a great
          deal of information about the movements of most (but not all) of the 95 fans
          who died and    that information is contained in the statements, still
          photographs, sections of video,film etc held by West Midlands Police in
          Birmingham. It is not possible for either West Midlands Police or H.M.
          Coroner to release all the information they have at this stage because some
          of it relates to the "criminal" aspect of the investigation but it is
          possible to     summarise from each of the95      separate files    detailed
           information about the movements of each deceased from the time they left
          home until the time death was certified in the temporary mortuary at the
          ground or in hospital and such summaries are currently in the course of
          preparation.
          The  summaries are being prepared by senior officers from the West Midlands
          F o r c e are being scrutinized by other more senior officers and then by
                      a n   d


          Dr    Popper    himself before they are tobe released to ensure that they
          contain no controversial details and that they are accurate and as detailed
          as possible in the circumstances.

          The Director          of   Public    Prosecutions has confirmed to a H.M.               Coroner that
        Controversial information may be released now to the families in
       ice with a strictly laid down procedure and this procedure is as it
follows.
As soon as possible copies of the 95 summaries will be sent to this
Committee and a copy of the summary relating to each individual deceased
will be sent to the Solicitors on record with H.M. Coroner as being the
practice acting for the immediate next of kin.

No photographs or video film extracts will be issued but references to these
will almost certainly be included in the summary and if for any reason the
family particularly wants to see the photograph or video film extract then
the Coroner will consider each request for this information on its merits.
The Coroner does not feel that the supplyinyg of photographs etc is
necessary at this stage, the pictures may cause further ^ief and many of
the families have seen than anyway during discussions with West Midlands
officers.   There is also the problem of logistics and the Coroner is trying
to keep everything as simple as possible for the time being.

A "flow chart" may also to be issued (although no firm decision has been
made about this) and this chart will show movement of each deceased within
certain time bands and will indentify the individual (whether a relative, a
member of the public or police officer) who identifies the deceased at a
particular spot or time either prior to or following his or her death.

It is for you to advise your client when you have received this summary; we
strongly recommend that you do not simply send the summary to your client
without prior warning as they are likely to contain information which may
cause distress if seen without prior warning and although it is of course up
to you to decide how you impart this information to your client we recommend
that you tell your client that you have the summary available and invite
them to either request a copy or preferably see them to go through it with
them before deciding whether to release a full copy to them for their own
use.
 The summary should be read in conjunction with the Post-Mortem Report which
 we anticipate you will have already obtained.

 In our view it is likely that some families will not want to be made aware
 of the contents of the summary in detail but we feel that it is important
 that they at least have the option to choose whether they avail themselves
 of the opportunity to see it or not, at present they do not have that
 option.
 We believe that it is likely that many families having seen the summary will
 be satisfied with the factual information it contains and will not want to
 take any further action. Their summary will simply be presented in a formal
 way in open Court in Sheffield and thus taken into public record.

 For details of what we suggest you do in the event that your clients have
 queries arising from the summary or they want to attend the Inquests
 personally please see below.
 Each summary will be presented personally by the officer who prepared it to
 H M   Coroner in accordance with a timetable which will be published as soon
 as possible and it is hoped that eight summaries a day can be received by
 H.M. Coroner sitting in Open Court with a Jury.

 At the conclusion of the presentation of the 95 summaries the Coroner will
 adjourn his Jury without asking then to return any verdict.

  In the event that the Director of Public Prosecutions then subsequently
  instigates criminal proceedings against any individual or organization in
  connection with this disaster then it is likely (but not certain) that the
         s(\   npt resume the inquests again following the decision of the
     ^durt   Jury. if on the other hand no criminal proceedings were brought
           Coroner would reconvene his Jury following the announcement by
    D.D.P.    of his intention not to pursue the matter and decide what
evidence he would then call to enable him to invite the Jury to return
whatever   verdict   seemed   most   appropriate   in   the   circumstances.

Hie hearings at which these summaries will be presented will therefore be
"low key" and not afford anyone the opportunity to cross examine police
officers, club officials etc as theywill not be giving evidence.

These hearings are intended to be an exercise in distributing information to
families about precisely how their loved ones died and where and not an
attempt to discover why or who was to blame.
The hearings will take place during the period 18th April to 4th May
inclusive at the Medico-Legal Centre, Sheffield and as soon as the timetable
for the hearings is known we will circulate it to all firms who receive this
letter and it will be up to you to notify your individual clients of the
date and time upon which their Inquest will be heard.

There is no obligation on any family to attend the hearing but they are of
course more than welcome to be present when their summary is presented if
they wish.

In some cases families will have queries either on contents   of   Post-Morton
Reports or on the summary itself

As a result of our discussions with H.M.        Coroner we recommend that the
following procedure be adopted in such cases.

Families who have such queries should instruct you to set out their
questions in a short form and that form should be copied to H.M. Coroner
and ourselves.

We enclose such a form for your use.

West Midlands Police to ascertain the information required (if it is
available and felt to be appropriate) and have the details available at the
individual hearing.

In         of particular queries concerning the contents of Post-Mortem
Reports if the information cannot be supplied by letter or would be best
explained to the family by the pathologist concerned then he may be asked to
attend for that particular inquest to deal with the question from the
witness box.

This Steering Committee will be represented throughout the entire period of
the hearings and as your client's Inquest is reopened the question which you
have previously given notice of will be asked on your client's behalf by the
Solicitor present and if the information is available it will be given by
the summary presenting officer as part of his evidence. We will report that
information to you and if you wish you can bespeak a copy of the shorthand
transcript which will be available for each Inquest.

If for any reason your client is not willing to allow the member of       this
Committee present in Court to put his or her question for any reason      then
you may attend on his or her behalf and put the question yourself,        H.M.
Coroner anticipates that there will be some families who will wish to     have
their own Solicitors present to represent them.

We should however sound a note of caution about costs at this stage.

After great difficulty we have persuaded the Municipal Mutual Insurers to
fund the cost of "block representation" and this means that a member of this
      itee will be present throughout the entire period the Inquests are
     /ng but if your client wants you to appear personally you must deal with
   ^question of your costs for doing so directly with the M.M.I. They have
      said that they would not meet any individual Solicitors costs but they
  ,ve indicated that they would only be prepared to do so in exceptional
 xrcumstances and this is a matter which you must take up with the Insurers
/ourself before deciding to travel to Sheffield to represent your client.


The M.M.I have accepted the proposition that you will be entitled to recover
your reasonable costs for going through the summary with your client and
corresponding with H.M.     Coroner and ourselves prior to the Inquests .. .
these costs can simply be included as part of your general profit charges in
connection with the civil claim for damages.




We must stress that as this is an information dissemination exercise by H.M.
Coroner he is unlikely to accept any questions which might be regarded as
being of a controversial nature and he will only accept questions which
clear up any ambiguity in the summary.

Before H.M. Coroner begins dealing with the 95 individual Inquests on the
19th April he will receive a generic evidence on Wednesday the 18th April.

This generic evidence is likely to come from a variety of witnesses.

The first witness is likely to be Dr. Forest. He will formally present the
94 blood alcohol level Reports which were prepared (no sample was taken from
one very young fan) and he will explain the basis of the work he did. This
will have the effect of formally bringing into public record his Reports, we
hope to be able to obtain copies of the blood alcohol level Report for each
fan in advance and we do not anticipate that there will be any real issue
over the blood alcohol level present in any individual deceased.

A senior police officer will then give evidence to explain certain terms and
expressions used in the summaries and on the "flow charts" and again we do
not anticipate that his evidence would be controversial in any way.

It is then proposed to call Professor Usher to given an overview of the
pathology of the types of injuries which were sustained. This will again be
evidence of a general nature and is unlikely to make reference to any
individual and will for example explain what happens to the human body when
it is compressed due to pressure and unable to absorb oxygen ...         his
evidence is likely to be distressing to families but will hopefully clear up
much anxiety and show that many fans simply "went to sleep" without any
great discomfort because of lack of oxygen.

Finally, H.M. Coroner may call such further evidence of a generic nature as
he feels appropriate as the 18th April approaches.

As we have said wo will have a presence throughout the 95 Inquests and we
are more than happy to act as your "Agent" and put your client's questions
to the summary presenting officer and report back appropriately to you,
there will be no agnecy account rendered by us to you or your client for
this service.

We stress again that the next of kin and wider family are welcome to attend
if they wish to hear their particular summary being represented but they are
unlikely to be able to put quesitons to the summary presenting officer
unless those questions have previously been notified to H.M.    Coroner and
ourselves in writing, please bear in mind that the Coroner will be trying to v
     through 8 Inquests a day over a 3 week period and any timetable drawn in
    ^ c T t a t be strictly adhered to if families are t o ’
                                                           have their particular
  4 uest heard at the time previously notified.


 nv family who indicates an intention to attend and who are late for any
reason will not have their Inquest held up pending their arrival, H.M.
S S e r is very sympathetic towards all the families involved but once these
S S S s ! t 2 7 t ? T S the tinetable must te strictly adhered to if everybody
is to be satisfied.
UP are not able to tell you when you will receive your client's summary or
^ i 2       2 the rronent! they are not all prepared but you ^ e s t ^ u r ^
+-u +-    rj-i11 Kg sent to you by H.M.      Coroner as soon as they are
available       If you have not already obtained a copy of the Post-Mortem
Report from the kroner's office in Sheffield we urge you to do so
immediately.
Please return a separate copy of the enclosed questionnaire in relation to
! S ^ e c 2 ^ f o ? whoyou act to ourselves and forward a copy to H JM.
Coroner as soon as possible after you have seen the summary and in any event

no  later than Tuesday the 10th April in any event as any questions notified
after that date may not be capable of betas instigated and dealt «ith
before the Inquests begin.
For our    Dart   we   believe   that   this   move   by   H.M.   Coroner   to impart



        zliS   tr,           families in any way he can by providing this
                are    entirely genuine and we trust that those families who you
                                     ™ his behalf in the way in which we telieve
 that it is intended.
 Although the primary intention of Dr Popper is to give
 about how their        loved one died, one of the beneficial side effects ° y
 reviving these summaries now will be that you will be in a better Position
 to            the pre-death terror/pre-death pain and suffering element
 h ^ qpc ; claim and you will in due cause receive our further views on th
 aspect in a future Bulletin, together with a report on our continu ng
 negotiations with the Insurers.

 At the meeting on Tuesday H.M.Coroner was at pains to:5tr® f
 "inside information" about the intentions of the D.P.P. as regards criminal
 ^ S S i i S ^ 5   te stressed that his motives in reopening the Inquests at
 this stage were directed only at supplying information to families.

  Tt-   nnl ikelv that we will issue a general Bulletin dealing solely ^ith
  Inauests before they reopen but the writer will be more than happy to deal
  wlth^ndividual^queries J K arise either as a result of ^       contjits^of
  *.uc letter or as a result of problems raised by clients, or letters
  te dinLted to the Law Library quoting the reference shown in the heading of
  this letter.
  If there are anysignificant changes to the information set         out    above   we
  will get back to you.

  Yours sincerely
       f ?-H ' l ' L L S B O R O U G H        STEERIN              G C O MM I f T EE

                          c /o CastCe CfiamBcrs, Coo ^Street, LivcrpooC L 2 9S &
                             <TeC: 051 2 5 5 0 6 2 8 Jo * : 05l 236 0047 T>X 14100




    NAME OF DECEASED:


    NAME OF SOLICITORS:


    ACTING FOR:


    RELATIONSHIP TO DECEASED:


    QUESTIONS (please keep these
    brief and confine than to
    matters arising from the
    Summary and Post-Mortem
    Report only).




*




    If you have queries to raise please ensure that this form is returned to us
    and copied to H.M. Coroner, Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield as
    soon as possible and in any event no later than 10th April 1990.
