                                           14th May 1994



Rev. J . Turnbul1,
H.M. Coroner,
City Courts,
The Tyrls
Bradford,
BD1 1LA


Dear Jim,
Thank you very much for your   letter of 10th May.

After the conclusion of the inquest I wrote to the Home Secretary
and among other things put forward some thoughts that I had at
the time on the inter-relationship between coroners inquests and
public enquiries. I think you might find it helpful if I enclose
a copy of the letter for your information.   I did in due course
get a reply thanking me for the comments and telling me that they
would be passed onto a working party for consideration. I was
also told that officials were exploring the issues arising from
the overlap but that consideration of the matter was at a
relatively early stage. This   letter was written inJuly 1991. I
gather from the tone of your   letter that no action has yet taken
place.
I am not sure about this but I think that one organisation (I
think it was the Consumer Association but I may be wrong on this)
has suggested that there should be a disaster court which would
deal with everything connected with the disaster.  I doubt
whether this is practical if it were to include the criminal
aspects and possibly the civil aspects too.

The reasons why I say this is because:

1. A public enquiry may have no applicable rules of evidence and
an inquest on the whole has loose rules of evidence. This is no
doubt because one wants to establish both quickly and as
comprehensibly as possible what were the probable facts relating
to the incident. Both civil and criminal proceedings have strict
rules and different standards of proof. I think it would be very
difficult for one court to seek to apply say three different
rules of evidence and at least two levels of standard of proof.

2. Both inquests and public enquiries tend to be carried out as
soon as is reasonably possible after the event. Particularly in
civil proceedings there may be a long time gap before the
extent of the damage suffered has been established. There may
also be questions of contribution by various parties which may
have to be sorted out. This may not however be an overiding
objection as at least the person dealing with the matter would be
aware of the background and facts. It might however mean that
some aspects of the enquiry might have to be carried forward for
a long time. It could also be argued that Coroners are not civil
judges.
3. Bearing in mind that in criminal proceedings the liberty of
the subject is at stake it is I think wise that nothing should be
done to erode the necessity for careful and dispassionate
enquiry. There is I think even an argument that some time has to
elapse between the event and the trial. It may be that if the
criminal enquiry were rolled into the inquest/enquiry there would
be a danger that the safeguards in criminal proceedings might be
lost.
As you know I did hear evidence from many people who had already
given evidence before Lord Justice Taylor and indeed there was
inevitable duplication. I am sure that the merging of the two
functions of public enquiry and inquest is something to be
commended (subject as you say to appropriate terms of reference).
I can see no reason why a suitably qualified coroner with the
appropriate back up should not be able to undertake this task. In
fact the public expect it of him but legislative provisions as
they stand seem to be designed to limit him. There is the
further complication that in a major disaster there may be
overwhelming pressure to be seen to do something and to appoint a
senior figure to head up the enquiry. I have commented on this
in my letter of May 1991 point 4.

As I mentioned in my letter to the Home Office it is possible
to distinguish the task of the various courts and enquiries
but unfortunately from a practical point of view it is very
difficult to keep them apart. Although it might diminish the
role of the coroner there is I think a fairly strong case for
saying that section 16 of the Coroner's Act should be amended so
that whenever there is a major disaster in which a public
enquiry takes place the inquest should be adjourned in the same
way as with say a murder. It might be appropriate that in such a
case and in recognition of the expertise of the coroner in
enquiring into sudden deaths he should ex officio be appointed to
the public enquiry.

If there is a major disaster but no public enquiry then it might
be appropriate that the scope of the coronal enquiry should be
widened so that he may more readily may be able to deal with
concerns of the public.

There is a further point that occurs to me in relation to major
disasters and that is the financing of the inquest/enquiry.
It obviously is expensive to have two enquiries but even one can
be a real burden on a local authority. One also has to take into
account that with a major disaster there may be wider
implications affecting the whole of the country. The Hillsborough
Public enquiry is a good illustration as its recommendations have
affected the whole of the football world. I think that where the
inquest and public enquiry are merged the whole cost should not
fall on the local community. Even if there is no merger but a
major inquest there is I think a strong case for saying that
funding should be provided at least in part from central sources.
This is even more so when one considers that (as far as I
remember) there was not a single death of a person living
locally at Hillsborough..

The following may perhaps be outside the scope of your talk but
there was one aspect which was not dealt with either by me or Lrd
Justice Taylor. This related to identification of victims after
the disaster. I did not think that this fell within the scope of
the inquest and Lord Justice Taylor I think took the view that it
did not fall within the terms of reference.  I did write to John
Burton on this on 27th September 1991 and suggested that a
subcommittee could be set up to consider the methodology for
dealing with viewing and identification in a major disaster
area. I do not know whether this has been taken further.

I appreciate that one could not lay down hard and fast rules as
circumstances will differ but general guidelines may be useful.

I hope these thoughts are of some use to you. Please ring me if
there is anything else I can share with you or if you feel that
you wish to discuss any of these points with me.

I was pleased to hear from you. I hope that you are keeping well
and that things are going well for you in your coronal district,
your church activities and for you personally.


Yours sincerely,




S . L . Popper
HER MAJESTY’S CORONER                                                  City Courts
For the County of West Yorkshire                                       The Tyrls
        (Western District)                                             BRADFORD BD1 1LA
                                                                       Tel: 0 2 7 4 -3 9 1 3 6 2




  Dr. S. L. Popper,                                                           My ref: JAT/AP




                                                                                    10 May 1994




  Dear Stefan,

  I wonder if I may seek the benefit of your experience and opinion.

  I am shortly to give a lecture at the Emergency Planning Conference Centre at Easingwold
  on the question of public inquiries. The aim of the conference is said to be "To help those
  likely to be involved in the management of an emergency to become aware of the
  responsibilities imposed on them by post disaster public inquiries."

  Of course I can explain the role of the Coroner in major disasters, but I should like to take
  an opportunity of putting forward views in relation to the proliferation of inquiries such as
  we have both experienced, particularly yourself at Hillsborough. I have often thought that
  one inquiry, preferably an inquest, should be sufficient, so long as the terms of reference
  were wide enough. I wonder whether you agree, and even if so whether you may join with
  my cynicism in thinking that streamlining the system is unlikely to happen.

  At any rate I would very much welcome your observations if you have time to let me have
  them.

  With every good wish.

  Yours sincerely,




  J. A. Turnbull
  H. M. CORONER
