m
HM Coroner:
                    Office of H.M. Coroner
                     The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET


Christopher P. Dorries
                                                                             South Yorkshire (West)
                                                                                  (0114)273-8721



                                                                                        08 October 1997
Your ref:
Our ref:

Ms Ann Addlington
Hillsborough Family Support Group
Pioneer Buildings
65-67 Dale Street
LIVERPOOL
L69 2DH




Dear Miss Addlington

Hillsborough Inquest
Thank you for your letter of the 26th September 1997. I note that you are happy to agree a charge
of £125 for copying the mini inquests and I would be pleased to receive your cheque made payable
to HM Coroner in due course.
I note your comment about the West Midland’s Police summary of evidence. I was not aware there
was any dispute in this regard. It is quite plain that this is not a document falling within Rule 5 7 , 1
believe that in every single case the summary of evidence was given orally by an officer of the West
Midlands Police. Indeed it is on that basis that the “body files” have now been regarded by us both
as falling within Rule 57. It must therefore be entirely a matter for the police whether they release
such documentation, but it would be most unusual in my experience for a summary or document of
that nature to be released in regard to any matter.

Having said that, from my own limited reading of these summaries, they seem quite literally to
contain no more than a chronology of the evidence contained in the body files. From memory, they
are not the sort of summaries which contain comment or reference to any contentious issues. In
saying this I would stress that I have only had a very limited perusal of the summaries.

Whilst writing, Dr Popper has contacted me recently to confirm that he has not forgotten your request
to speak with him. I understand that he felt it proper to query with the Judge whether there was any
objection tolhis course of action and he has not yet had a reply. Having noted on the television that
the relatives had met with the Judge he wonders if you are still desirous of this conversation?

If you wish to telephone me I would be more than happy to speak with you, I would in any event
value the opportunity to discuss an issue relating to Granada Television approaching jury members
which has recently been brought to my attention.

Yours sincerely




C P Dorries
HM Coroner



                                            Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                              CJA5586I.DOC
