                             I
  i
NAME:           TREVOR
                             I                                             STATION


                BICHARD

ADDRESS


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH

OCCUPATION:     POL PC1370 HAMMERTON RD PSTN



          1.    On duty 10.00 am.

          2.    Ground Commander Superintendent Murray.

          3.    My duties were as static video system operator withint the Stadium

               and VHF radio control.    These duties were within the police

          control      box inside the Stadium.

          4/5.See attached notes.

          6.    No real contact with fans before/during/after incident.

          7.    No information regarding stewards.

          8.    See attached notes.

          9.    No contact with bodies.

          10. See attached sheets.



          Abbreviations on attached sheets.

          VIS    - Visual observations.

          CAM    - Video camera.

          VER    - Verbal.

          ACTION - Instruction or direction to particular task.

          HQ     - Headquarters at Snig Hill.

          HRPS - Hammerton Road Police Station.

          PR     - Personal Radio.



          CONTEXT                   OFFICER/TO OFFICER    METHOD OF OBS   TIME
BICHARD                TREVOR


On duty at ground      1370                  Action           10 am
On arrival obtain      1370                  VIS              10.15 VHF
set go into

ground, Rodger ,

Holdsworth working

on CAM 5 over LL

terrace.   Temp repair

made picture iffy.

Liverpool fans         Supt Chapman          Personal radio   10.55 am
outside5 Arches        Cont. staff

Pub Radio checks

Personal radios no

more problems than usual,

sane no replies.       PC Ryan/Sgt Goddard   Personal radio   11.20

Lots of traffic        Serials

problems city side,

Parkway Ml etc

diversions in force.     Ops room to traffic officers          bet
Inset 2x3 hr VHS                                               11.30-
video tapes, set                              2 pm

Time/date system

expect to insert

new tapes 2.30 pm        1370                Action            12.00
Turnstile open           1370                VIS               12.15
Turnstiles in

Penistone Road not

manned, spare serial

sent, turnstile

Nos missed off
  BICHARD               TREVOR
                                                                              3

 match order.           1370/Supt Murray/     VER/Personal      12.30
                                              Radios
                        Sgt Goddard
 Concern re Liverpool

 fans buying tickets    Control room staff    VER               bet.
 for Kop frcm Touts
                                                                1.00      &
 L.L.
                                                                2.30
 Problems in pubs in

 area Royal, Horse

 and Jockey etc.          Serials to control Personal Radio     bet.
 heavy drinking in
                                                              1.00    &
 streets etc.
                                                                2.30
 Watch Kop on CAM 4

 segregation of fans

on Kop, arrests           1370 - Supt Murray VER               bet
made manpower
                                                               1.30 &
low I stated that there
                                                               2.00
had been problems

on Kop previous year

question number of

officers available.     1370 - Supt. Murray VER                1.45
Check re officers
                                                               2.00
available to be

deployed on Kop         Supt Murray - Insp Personal Radio      1.45
for segregation         Sewell
purposes.

Confirm 2 coaches

40 men on each to be

on standby in           Insp Sewell - Supt   1.45
  BICHARD                 TREVOR                                           4

  Penistone Rd for          Murray

  deployment.

  Supt. Murray &            Supt. Murray/C Supt Duck                2.00
 C/Supt Duck to see

 referee.

 Complaints regarding

 transmissions             Serials to Sgt. Goddard                 1.45-

                                                                   2.15


 Problems re Liverpool

 fans travelling on

 coach with Notts,

 parking ticket displayed

 traffic dealt with        1370                  VHF &             2.00
 coach and driver.                               Personal Radio.
 Rowdy Liverpool

 fans on coach 9995 RU

                          ^1370 - Ops -          Personal Radio    2.00
, out pf order.            Persdml Radio         VHF
fMlQ. in box, expresses
 distress re liverpool
                                                                               "A


 fan on LL terrace

dropping trousers          ACC Jackson/Cl Supt   VER               2.20
and acting foolish         Duck/control I
Believed drunk.
                                         /
Set CAM 5.

Contents made that                   /
Notts, fans had all

but a few arrivedJatiE
  BICHARD                 TREVOR

  Liverpool end in

  particular North Stand

  lots of rocm.            All control room       VER               2.15
 Problems with radio staff

 gets worst.

 Civie. repair man         1370/Sgt. Goddard      Personal Radio    2.25
 attends
                                                  VER/VIS
 Estimeate 3,000 fans

 in LL outside

 turnstiles larger         C/Supt. Duck - 1370   VIS on CAM 1       2.30
 than normal crowd.

 Contact from              Serial - Control      Personal Radio    2.30
 serial LL                 roof
 turnstiles.

 Civie cannot mend         1370/Sgt/ Goddard     Personal Radio    2.35
 Personal Radio resort    VIS/VER

to back to back.

Regarding scenes

shown on cam 1 were

they bring recorded

Replied 'Yes"              C/Supt. Duck - 1370 VER                 2.35
Request for more           Serial - Sgt Goddard Personal Radio
officers to LL

2 Mounted officers

disptached from            Sgt. Sorsby/Sgt.      Personal Radio    2.40
South Stand car            Goddard
park.

Message Gates are being

forced they are bending
  BICHARD                TREVOR


  and buckling.             U j Serial/Ch.    Personal Radio    2.40
  Requests Ops sent         Supt Duck
  traffic car with

 PA also informs re         1370/0ps          VHF               2.40
 radio difficulties.

 Sgt. Goddard tries

 to use hand set (radio

 tele) doesn't work         1370              VIS               2.40
 throws hand set to

 desk.

 5/6 officers stood on

 barrier next to C gate,

 no crowd near to          1370              VIS               2.40
 them.

 SEe Gate C open and

 crowd canes in I

said, 'They've broken

down the gate'

indicated to               1370/to all in    VIS & VER         2.40
control room staff         control box
After 20 seconds

gate closed appears

that it had been

open on purpose.

Mounted officer            1370              VIS               2.42
held back crowd,

tried to create space.

Request for officers

from gym 2 serials
BICHARD                TREVOR


offered by Insp.          C/Supt.Duck/                        2.40

Sewell (1 being           Sgt. Goddard/gym

F C &V) serials sent

to LL.

Outside gates more

hectic Liverpool

fans seen climbing

wall above B gate         1370               VIS CAM1         2.40

officers could

not reach them.

"We must open gates or

someone is going to

be killed, please         Supt. Marshall/    Personal Radio   2.45

open the gates"           control

Ch. Insp McRobbie

enters control wearing

civies.                   1370               VIS              2.45

Officers wearing white

shirt on roof of          C/Supt.Duck/       CAM 1            2.45

turnstile                 control staff

C/Supt. Duck says

 'Who's that.'

Said in distressed

voice 'You must            Supt. Marshall    Personal Radio    2.50

 open the gates,           control staff

 open the gates.'

 C/Supt Duck paused

 for thought, 'right

 if lives are at
BICHARD                TREVOR


risk then open the       C/Supt. Duck,    VER              2.50
gates.'                  control staff

'Open the gates,         Sgt. Goddard -   Personal Radio   2.50

open the gates'          serials LL

There are people

being crushed outside

A gate we must open

A gate                   Sgt Higgins/     Personal radio   2.50

                         control room

Seen on camera behind

A gate two lines of

officers in funnel        1370            VIS CAM 1        2.50
effect.

Mounted officers and

foot officers seen to

close outer perimeter

gates and void appears

between them and the

turnstiles.



Liverpool fans see        1370            VIS CAM 1        2.50
gates open and rush

for ground.

Seen on CAM 1 rear of

LL crowds just milling

around not rushing        1370            VIS CAM 1        2.50
into ground.

Officers directed to

North Stand to stop
   BICHARD                TREVOR
                                                                             9

   rush onto pitch.          C/Supt.Duck/
                                                   VER                2.55
                             Sgt. Goddard          Personal Radio
  Liverpool fans seen

  climbing into uncovered

  seats, up to West

  Stand with assistance.

  All in control box        Control roan staff     vis                3.05
  belived pure

  public order.

  Officers on perimeter

  track telling fans        1370                  VIS CAM 3          3.05
 to get down frcm

 fence on LL terrace,

 crowd gathered on

 perimeter track            C/Supt. Duck          VIS/VER            3.05
 desired to move            Sgt. Goddard
 them quickly to

 wing sections.

 Officers seen to be

 standing around near

to comer of Kop and

North Stand next           C/Supt. Duck/         VIS/VER            3.05
to pitch.    C/Supt.

Duck questions why they

ace standing about.

C/Supt. questions why

WPC does not appear to be

doing anything other

than leaving              C/Supt.Duck/
                                                 VIS                3.05
  bichard                 TREVOR                                  10

 perimeter track            control staff
 gate open.

 C/Insp McRobbie sent

 to 'get things             C/Supt. Duck/        VER       3.06
 sorted out down            C/Insp McRobbie
 there.'

 Fans beginning to

 spill onto pitch

 apparent that incident

 very serious               1370                 VIS       3.06
 possible injuries.

 Gates opened               1370                 VIS       3.06
 crowd starts to

 empty frcm pens.

ACC Jackson enters

box brief conversation

with control staff

then orders me to call

Ops on VHF                 ACC Jackson/1370     VER/VHF   3.07
operation support.

Decided to concentrate

on VHF radio rather

than video,                Control staff/1370   VER/VHF
                      \                                   3.07
call for ambulance

service.

Ops asked for authority

for operational support

given again               Qps/1370/Acc          VHF VER   3.10
by ACC Jackson            Jackson
                           TREVOR


 Officer on perimeter

 track requests bolt

cutters.                     Sgt. Goddard        Personal Radio   3.15
Bolt

cutters requested

 from Claywheels

possibly from                Sgt. Goddard        Telephone        3.15
bri-mec negative

reply said to Sgt.

Goddard 'I'll contact

fire service.                1370/Sgt. Goddard   VER              3.15
Request fire service

attend LL bring              1370/0ps            VHF              3.15
cutting equipment.

Someone instructs PC

Ryan to use tannoy            Not Known/         VER              3.15
telling crowd to              PC Ryan
stay calm.

Officers in rear of

terrace LL seen

passing bodies out            1370               VIS CAM 3        3.20
towards tunnel.

Liverpool fans on pitch

charge towards Forest

end.     Officers manage

to stem fighting on

pitch.    Line of             1370               VIS CAM 3        3.25
officers formed on

pitch.
    CHARD                   TREVOR


  Fire service arrive

 LL enter ground and

 onto pitch.                  1370                  VIS CAM 1
 Message to Ops

 stating that we had

 fatal ..situation

 Hillsborough                 1370/0ps              VHF
 request further

 ambulances.

 Traffic/M/C ordered

 to cover routes to Ops/Supt. Brougham             VHF
 hosptials by Supt. Brougham

 Senior fire officer

 attends control box

 and asked for senior

 ambulance officer.

None present.     Request

made through Ops.             1370/Fire Officer/   VER

                              C/Supt. Duck
Check video tapes.     One

tape finished one on time

lapse mode.    Fit           1370
                                                   Action
new tapes and reset.

Require more than 20

ambulance to attend

and again ask for            1370                  VHF
senior ambulance

officer.

Clough/Dalgleish
 ICHARD                 TREVOR                                         13


attend police control

box, as if match off,

ask who in command

offer any service.         Clough/Dalgleish    VER            3.45

Dalgleish asked to         C/Supt. Duck

speak, on tannoy.



Supt Murray wanted

details of transport so

that arrangements could

be made for fans

to leave.                     Supt .Murray/      3.45

                                 Sgt Goddard

Supt. Murray insist that

PC Ryan pass message

over tannoy 'stay calm,

stay where you are till

the ambulances             Supt.Murray/PC Ryan VER             3.45

have left the Stadium.

Remove tapes, keep in

possession, visit HQ

with tapes see Supt. Duck,

Sgt Booth and ACC          1370                Action           5.30

Jackson.

Book tapes into             1370               Action          11.30 pm

property book at

HRPS.


                                                        ¥*■
                                                                        STATION

NAME:         TREVOR
              BICHARD

ADDRESS       HAMMERTON RD PSTN


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:   POL PC1370



          I am a Police Constable with South Yorkshire Police at present

          stationed at Hammerton Police Station, Sheffield. I am at the present

          time working beat duties on'B' group but also have responsibility

          operating the static video system which is installed at Hillsborough

          Football Stadium, Sheffield.

          On a personal level I have visited Hillsborough Stadium on many

          occasions as a spectator standing on the terrace at the Spion Kop

          end of the ground and the Leppings Lane terrace.   I have also worked

          in all parts of the ground as a Police Officer during my past 8 years

          service.

          In September 1987(000987) I took over duties relating to the video

          system working from the Police Control Box and since that time I have

          attended a 3 day course in relation to the use of video systems for

          Command and Control and as a method of evidence gathering.   The

          original system installed at Hillsborough was laid out as a Command

          and Control System giving a basic all round view both inside and

          outside the ground.    Whilst I have been involved with the duties that

          emphasis has shifted from Ccmmand and Control to evidence gathering

          and with that end in mind several improvements have been made the most

          recent being a survey of the Leppings Lane end camera, the intention

          being to move the camera from its present position attached to the

          roof of the West Stand and bringing it down to a position just above

          the turnstiles.   The survey was carried out using a hand held video




                             )
BICHARD                 TREVOR                                                   ;


camera mounted on the platform of a hydraulic lift.         Two positions

were considered, the first mounted on a pole at the far most comer of

the Leppings Lane turnstiles the second position just above gate 'B'.

It was decided that the best position would be above 'B' gate.          This

position giving good all around views along Leppings Lane, to the

turnstiles below and the courtyard at the rear of the Leppings Lane

terrace.   The system installer Roger HOLDSWORTH agreed to complete a

costing for the improvements and if the cash was available from

the football trust, he would attempt to install the camera in it's new

position in time for the Semi Final.

Unfortunately the clerical side of this operation could not be

completed quick enough and the planned move for the camera was

suspended until the simmer break. On Saturday 15 April 1989(150489), I

commenced duty at 10am(1000) attending at the Police rocm at

Hillsborough, collecting the hand held VHS radio which I used to

to monitor transmissions via Operations Room. On this particular day

channel 1 had been designated for all VHF transmission relating to the
Semi Final.

After collecting the radio I niacte my vray lSQ’the leppings Lane terrace

where I saw that Roger HOLDSWORTH was working on camera number 5
      V
which c^^.Q Q j^the''tei^in^'~L^3g@ »te^^e,,’^ ^ 'r ,’'*'Se*pi^ture.jquality!'
M d been si^standard^ftfr a number of week^and Mr HOLDSWORTH was

carrying out sane last minute alterations to upgrade the picture.                J

After he had cxxrpleted the work the pictiiife vras indeed lDetter than it

had been although not up to the correct standard.         I then made my way

to the Control box where I met With Sergeant GODDARD and PC RYAN.

After a brief conversation I began to check the video system operating

each of the five cameras in turn.      We were later joined by

Superintendent MURRAY and it was agreed between us that Sergeant
BICHARD                TREVOR                                              3


GODDARD would operate the personal radio, PC RYAN the tannoy and

telephone and I in addition to my duties as camera operator would
           fa
monitor the VHF set using it if necessary.    These duties were no

different to what would be carried out on a normal match day.

Around 10.55am (1055) that date, Superintendent CHAPMAN contact

control regarding a group of Liverpool supporters who were waiting

outside the 5 Arches Public House.    There was at this time no trouble

but the information was passed just so that Officer could be aware

that groups of supporters had arrived and were intent on getting a

drink before the match.    Several other personal radio messages were

then received regarding the same topic. About 11.20am (1120) Sergeant

GODDARD carried out radio checks some personal radios did not reply

and the sector Inspectors were asked to make checks where

appropriate.    Throughout this time various messages were ccming in

regarding traffic problems the city side of the ground, Ml motorway,

Parkway, etc, diversions were in force.    This indicated that the

Nottingham supporters were en route in numbers and could be expected

at the ground for the turnstile opening time of 12 noon (1200).

Just after noon (1200) I inserted the 2 VHS video tapes in the two
                          /'
video recorders. The time and date system was checked and set

possibly using the ground clock mounted above the North Stand or by a

time check with other Officers in the control box.     The tapes were set

to run at normal speed, my intention being that around 2.30pn (1430)

the same date I would inset 2 new tapes which would then include the

build up to the match throughout the game and the supporters leaving

the ground.     Around this time it was noticed that persons had entered

the ground.

A short time later it was discovered that some of the Penistone Road

turnstiles were not manned due to an administrative error this was
BICHARD                 TREVOR


corrected by deploying one of the spare serials.       Sane time between

1.00pm (1300^) and 2.30pm (1430) there was concern expressed regarding

the Liverpool fans purchasing Kop tickets frcm touts at Leppings Lane

turnstiles.     This would mean of course that a mixture of fans would

have to be supervised within the Kop terrace.

During this same period problems began arising in various public

houses near to the ground ones that spring to mind were the Horse and

Jockey and the Royal.     The canplaints were that fans were drinking

heavily out on the street, urinating in gardens and being a general

nuisance.     Sane time between 1.30pm (1330) and 2.00pm (1400) I began

to notice that on the Kop several Liverpool fans had been placed in

the triangle area near to theJPp&h ptand end supervised by several

Police Officers.    I set c ipjpra 4 to/monitor the situation noticing

that several arrests were inade^aM that manpower was getting low.        I

remembered that there had been seme trouble at last years match in the

same location and I questioned Superintendent MURRAY re the number of

Officers available for deployment on the Kop.

Superintendent MURRAY then contacted Inspector SEWELL regarding the

manpower situation and he confirmed that 2 coaches each containing 40

men would be on standby in Penistone Road.

Around 2.00pm (1400) Superintendent MURRAY and Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD went to speak to the match referee.      Through the afternoon

canplaints had expressed regarding the quality of personal radio

transmissions to the control staff.

Around 2.00pm (1400) I overheard on VHF that Liverpool supporters had

been spoken to on a coach which had displayed a Nottingham Forest

supporters parking ticket.       The coach and supporters were spoken to by

traffic officers and advised.

About the same time there was a report of troublesome Liverpool fans
 BICHARD                TREVOR


 on a coach registered number 9995RU.     This number was circulated ai^

 the coach was checked by one of the mobile serials.    Around 2.20pm      "

 (1420) the ACC JACKSON was in the control box when he noticed a man on

 the lappings Lane terrace south pen.   He dropped his trousers and

 began fooling about.   His behaviour was such that; it was believed that

 he was drunk ^ d the-.ACC^asked.^for :SQtethirig to begone about him.   I

 set the camera to monitor his behaviour.    About 2.45pm (1415) all the

 control rocm staff discussed that it was apparent the Liverpool fans

     not ^eguh to arrive as yet.   The North Stand had vast spaces

 although the Leppings Lane terrace was filling up at a normal rate.

 Just after this the personal radio transmissions became worse and the

civilian radio repair man came into the control box to attempt a
repair.

About 2.30pm (1430) my attention was drawn to the large crowd outside

the Leppings Lane turnstiles.    I would estimate around 3,000 people

and it was apparent that the number was increasing by the volume of
foot passengers in Leppings Lane itself.

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD asked about the large crowd and it

was said that although it was more than normal, it was no more than

was expected for such a football match.

About 2.35pm (1435) the civilian radio repair man stated that he could

not fix the personal radio system and it was necessary to resort to
using the radios on a back to back system.

About the same time Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD came to the back

of the control box and asked me if the crowd scenes at the Leppings

Lane were being recorded and I replied 'Yes'.

A personal radio on Leppings Lane requested more manpower to Leppings

Lane turnstiles.   Sergeant SORSBY despatched 2 horses from the South
Stand car park.
 BICHARD                TREVOR                                               (


 A personal radio message then came in stating that the gates were

 being forced, they were bending and buckling,    in my mind I believed

 that the gates referred to were 'C' gate and I kept the Leppings Lane
 camera set to that sort of area.

 About 2.40pm (1440) Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and

 Superintendent MURRAY requested that I contact Operations Roan so that

 a traffic car with a PA System could attend in Leppings Lane and

 advised the crowd which were by this time becoming apparently more

 hostile.    I also remember around this time that Sergeant GODDARD

 picked up the personal radio telephone style handset and after trying

 to use it, threw it down onto the desk because it was not working and

 the personal radio transmissions were very poor.    I can remsmber

 seeing about 5 or 6 officers stood on barrier duty just past the gate
 'C' towards the South Stand.

About 2.40pm (1440) I remember seeing 'C' gate open and a number of

supporters enter the ground.     I then said words like 'They've broken

dcwn the gate.' At the same time I indicated to the staff in the         -

control box to watch the lappings Lane monitor.     After about 20           )

SeGonds I noticed that the gate was closed and it seemedthata

mounted Officer alone had prevented a big rush of people through the

open gate.    I remember seeing mounted Officers trying to clear space
in the crowd.

The request for additional Officers to be sent to Leppings Lane was

made to Inspector SEWELL and I remember him offering two Serials, one

of which was the 'F' Division Crime and Vandal, they were directed to
the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

I saw Liverpool fans climbing the walls of the ground onto the

turnstile roofs and I in particular remember several being sat astride

gate 'B' with Police Officers stood below.    I think at this time a
 BICHARD              TREVOR


personal radio message was sent regarding the climbers and an Officer

replied that he could not reach than.
           *
Around 2.45pm (1445) I remember a personal radio message fran

Superintendent MARSHALL to the effect 'We must open the gates or

soneone is going to be killed, please open the gates.' At this time

Chief Inspector MCROBBIE is in the control box wearing civilian

clothing.

I remember seeing an Officer on the top of the turnstiles at Leppings

Lane end and Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD made enquiries as to the

officer s identity. Another personal radio message was received from

Superintendent MARSHALL, his voice was very distressed, 'You must open

the gates, open the gates.'     Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD seemed

to pause for thought and then said 'Right if lives are at risk, then

open the gates.' Sergeant Goddard then transmitted 'Open the gates,

open the gates.' Just prior to this I ranember seeing Officers

behind 'A' gate, they were set out in two lines forming a funnel.

Sergeant HIGGINS of 'F' C&V transmitted on personal radio 'There are

people beng crushed outside 'A' gate we must open 'A' gate.'I rananber

that about the time the gates were ordered to be opened mounted

Officers outside lappings Lane turnstiles had managed to create a void

between the the turnstiles and the outer perimeter railings, in fact,

I believed that at one time the Officers managed to close the outer

gates, however, the crowd outside forced its way through the outer

gates and ran into the ground via 'C' gate at least.    I remember

seeing crowds at the rear of Leppings Lane terrace just behind the

turnstiles, they were just stood about not doing anything in

particular .About 2.55pm (1455) Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD told

control rocm staff to get seme manpower to the North Stand to stop any

possible rush onto the pitch.    It was at this time that we began to



                                                                          c
 BICHARD                TREVOR


 notice Liverpool fans climbing up into the West Stand from the terrace

 area.    They were assisted by people in the stand and the same problem

 had occurred the previous year.    A short time later fans were seen to

 climb the perimeter track fence.    Officers on the track seemed to be

 telling the fans to get down from the fence.   At this point the staff

 in the control box and I thought that the situation was purely public

 order.    No information was ccming in to the effect that people were
 getting hurt.

A crowd gathered on the perimeter track and Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD ordered that they should be moved as quickly as possible

to the wing sections of leppings Lane terrace where it

could be seen that there was space.    Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

was angry about Officers stood around the track near to the Kop and

the North Stand.    A personal radio message was sent to the officers

and they were directed to the front of the North Stand. Around this

time Chief Inspector MCROBBIE was sent to the pitch to get things

sorted out.    One problem was a WPC stood on perimeter track just below

the control box.    she did not appear to be moving people off the track

and in fact at one stage opened the perimeter gate to the track then

walked off leaving the gate open.    Chief Inspector MCROBBIE took

charge of the Policewoman and began ushering people from the track.

By this time there were people on the pitch and the perimeter track

gates were open allowing people out of the centre pens.    Still at this

stage no one in the control box was aware that the problem was more

than a pitch invasion situation.Just after the match was stopped ACC

JACKSON was in the control box and he ordered me to contact Operations

Rocm and call operation support.    It was at this point that I decided

to concentrate on operating the VHF radio rather than the camera

system.    Very suddenly it became apparent that there were injuries and
 BICHARD                 TREVOR


 at that time I contacted Operations Room for ambulances to be sent to

 the leppings Lane end of the ground.      There were people all over the

 pitch in front of the goal mouth, persons were laid across the floor

 with persons giving mouth to mouth.       It was only then that we began to

 feel that there might be deaths. A personal radio message was sent

 to control asking for bolt cutters and Sergeant GODDARD contacted

 Claywheels Lane asking if they had cutters on the bri- mac

 transporter.    The reply was negative.    He turned to me and I told him

 that I would contact the fire service which I did via Operations Rocm.

 I made it clear that we required cutting equipment for the metal

 fences.    I remember someone instructing PC RYAN to use the tannoy

 telling people to stay calm.     I can remember seeing bodies being nerved

towards the tunnel on the leppings Lane terrace from the centre pens.

 I believe that it was Police Officers who were moving the bodies from

the area.     Liverpool fans who were on the pitch started to run towards

the Kop.     Officers managed to stop the charge and split up several

groups of fans who were fighting.     A line of Officers were then formed

across the pitch just the Kop side of the centre line.       I recall the

fire service arriving at leppings Lane and their men running onto the

pitch.     I then sent a message to Operations that we did have

fatalities at the ground although when I sent this message no details

had been passed by personal radio.     It was all done from observation.

Further contact from Operations Rocm regarding the number of

ambulance required and they said would it be more than 20 and I said

something to the effect that we need as many as possible. Traffic

motor cycles were ordered to cover the routes to both hospitals and I

made a request for the senior ambulance officer to attend the control

box.   He did not arrive.   The senior fire officer attended at the

control box and liaised with senior officers and he too asked to speak
BICHARD               TREVOR                                              If


to the senior ambulance officer.   Another request was made for that

officer to attend the control box via Operations rocm.     About 3.35pm

(1535) I checked the video tapes and discovered that one had stopped

and the second had been switched to operate in the 18 hour mode which

in effect speeds up the action of the scene being recorded, this I

can only think was caught by me whilst standing at the rear of the

video control area.   The videos are set at knee height and I believe

that as I leant forward this is how I altered the time mode setting.

I installed two new tapes and set than running at normal speed.

Mr CLOUGH and Mr DAI/3LEISH entered the control box and offered their

services once they had established that the match was off.    Mr

DALGLEISH wanted to speak to the fans and he was asked to use the

tannoy system in the DJs control box below the Police control.

Superintendent MURRAY then later asked for details of transport so

that preparations could be made for emptying the ground.     I remember

seme time after this Superintendent MURRAY saying to PC RYAN that he

wanted a message passing over the tannoy telling the Liverpool fans to

stay calm and remain where they were until the ambulances had left the

stadium. Sometime later the ground was emptied and around 5.30pm (1730)

I removed the video tapes and made my way to the gym to offer

assistance.   I was later sent to HQ with the video tapes and I there

saw Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, Sergeant BOOTH, ACC JACKSON and

Chief Superintendent DENTON.

About 11.00 (2300) Detective Superintendent MCKAY attended and he

instructed me to return to Hammerton Road, book the video tapes into

the property store and await the arrival of AVA, Sergeant FOSTER, was

to attend so that copies of the video tapes could be made.

About 11.30pm (2330) Sergeant FOSTER arrived at Hammerton Road

Police station and I explained the faults on the video tapes.      He
BICHARD                TREVOR


asked if I could get hold of the video recorder used with the 18 hour

mode setting so that he could transfer the tape action at the correct

speed.    I then went back to the ground and removed one of the video

recorders from the Police Control box taking it to ECcles field

Training School where I handed it to Sergeant POSTER.   My irrmediate

supervisor would be Superintendent MURRAY.   I had no contact with the

fans before/ during or after the incident.   I cannot relate any

information regarding the stewarding of the ground and I had no

contact with the bodies.These 4 pages are not complete but are just a
resume of the main points of the day.

END OF REPORT
                                                       v».
                                                   \S fti          Sheffield STATION
                                                  /)         y
                                                                                  J
NAME:           TREVOR
                BICHARD

ADDRESS:        Hairmerton Rd Police station Sheffield
                       *

ACT! / DATE OF BIRTH: 21 - 100

OCCUPATION:     POL PC1370 HAMMERTON RD PSTN


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110589                                                    T. BICHARD (SIGNED)

•
        I am a Police Constable with the South Yorkshire Police presently

        stationed at Hanmerton Rd Police Station.

        On Saturday the 15th of April 1989 (150489) I was posted to the Police

        control box at Hillsborough Football Ground.

        At about 10.00am (1000) the same day I loaded two VHS recorders in the

        Control Box with fresh tapes, for the Police CC/TV.

        At the same time I set the data base on the recorders, I did this by

        my watch.

        The first two tapes were running until (1) just after 3.00pm (1500)

        and the other until about 3.35 pm (1535) because it went into extended

        time lapse. I then removed these and replaced them with two fresh

        tapes which ran until about 5.30pm (1730) when I removed them and I

        marked the tapes TB1 - TB4.

        At about 11.30pm (2330) the same day I gave the tapes TB1, TB2 TB3 and

        TB4 to Sgt Foster at Harrmerton Rd Police Station.

        The reason one of the tapes went into extended time lapse is that I

        accidently knocked the wrong button during the operation.
        BICHARD                TREVOR




                      *                      T. Bichard SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:   T Bichard

          TIME:             DATE:   110589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:     T Bichard PC1370

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
NAME:           TREVOR
                BICHARD                           /
ADDRESS:        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                     )€^€A
                HAMMEKftDN RD PSTN, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 34

OCCUPATION:    POL PC1370


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 090190                                            TREVOR BICHARD (SIGNED)



        Further to my recollections dated 2nd, 5th and 11th May 1989 (020589)

           (050589) (110589), those recollections are the truth and I am content

        that it be used in any proceedings.

        I make this statement on the understanding that I can take a

        photocopy of same after I have signed it.

        Shortly before 1500 hrs (1500) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I

        was in the Police Control Box at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.

        Also in the box at this time were Chief Superintendent DUGKENFIELD,

        Supt MURRAY, Chief Inspector MCROBBIE, Sgt GODDARD and PC RYAN.

        Chief Inspector MCROBBIE was in plain clothes in fact he was wearing

        blue blazer.      About this time there was an incident where fans came

        out of the two central pens in the West Stand terraces onto the track

        and pitch and started walking along the perimeter track.

        I remember Chief Inspector MCROBBIE going down onto the pitch to

        assist WPC RICHARDSON to move these fans off the track through the

        gate into Pens 1 and 2.

        It was about this time that things became busy and the disaster began

        to unfold.    There was a lot of noise in the Police box and from
  BICHARD                TREVOR


 outside and I became busy using the VHF radio which I would normally

 only monitor and at the same time trying to monitor what was going

 on, both on the screens and outside the control box.

 I do not recall Chief Inspector JCROBBIE coming back into the control

 box but certainly about this time our ACC Mr JACKSON came into the

 box. ..Mr JACKSON and Mr DUCKENFIELD had a conversation and the only

 points I can recall are to do with getting operation support and to do

 with the public order situation with crowds coming onto the pitch from

 the rear of the cantilever stand (North) as there are no fences there.

 Certainly I heard no mention during this conversation of any gates
 being opened.

 Sometime after Mr JACKSON came into the control box, Mr Graham KELLY

 fron the FA and Mr MACKRELL, the Club Secretary, came into the box, as

 I recall it they were in the area by the door.     I can't remember

 anyone else being with them.     Mr KELLY then had a conversation with

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and during the course of that

conversation I recall him saying to the effect that a gate had been

forced and there had been an in rush of Liverpool supporters into the

ground.     I cannot now remember any other specifics of their

conversation so far as I am concerned when Mr DUCKENFIELD was talking

to Mr KELLY about this gate being forced he was relating the
circumstances.

When the concertina gate C was opened for the first time for what I

now know to be an ejection by the Police, and I saw nothing untoward
in him saying that.

During my evidence to the Taylor tribunal I was questioned about my

showing video footage to Mr KELLY and his compatriots of a gate on

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELDS instructions.     That did not take

place and furthermore it would have been impossible because unknown to
         BICHARD                TREVOR


        me one of the tapes had run out and the other would have needed to be

        stopped, rewound, in order to find the relevant part and given the

        circumstances this was not possible.   It would also have been shown as

        an interuption on the data pack on the film,   what I now believe might

        have happened is that No 1 Monitor which was showing scenes of the

        Leppings Lane turnstile area would also show Gate C.   This would have

        been in black and white as the only colour monitor was the central
        one, number three.

        T BICHARD




                                                       TREVOR BICHARD SIGNED
STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     D A WOOLLEY DS5749
