                                 Vincent Hale & Co.
                                         Solicitors

Telephone: (0742)                       Nash House                  Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                         140 Upperthorpe               Consultant:
Home 345214                               Sheffield                 Gerard Vincent Hale B.A. (Hons.)
lax    325644                             S6 3NF
                                                 29th March, 1991

       Dear Sir,

       HILLSBOROUGH - future disasters

       Ask any cricketer, footballer or tennis-player and they will all tell
       you of run-outs, penalties and line—calls that were obviously wrong.
       However, even a wrong decision keeps thegame going and avoids chaos.

       Court decisions are only different in their consequences. Apart from
       ordinary mistake, if evidence is falsified or suppressed the verdict is
       likely to be wrong. Supporters of a cause can argue the case for years
       and, occasionally, bring forward new evidence uhich leads to a
       different verdict. Even when the verdict is correct, objectors can
       continue arguing because the record for upsetting a verdict at present
       stands at sixteen years, so there is no reason for anyone ever to give
       up •                ,

      It is therefore more important than ever before that the law does not
      have rules restricting the right of anyone to call evidence and be
      represented, so that verdicts may be seen to be correct.

      There should never again be a public enquiry and inquests of the
      Hillsborough type. The Taylor enquiry was rushed through without
      separate representation for individual police officers. As a result,
      vital evidence was not heard or properly considered. When it was
      heard, or part of it, at the inquests, the result was gratifying but
      did not compensate fully for the injustice of the comments in the
      Taylor interim report.

      The coroner was scrupulously fair to all parties but the rules do not
      allow advocates to call their own evidence or address either the
      coroner or the jury on the facts and it was not possible to demonstrate
      the part played by a body of people as distinct from individuals.

      After the next tragedy - and there will certainly be one - the enquiry
      should be conducted in a very different way. The judge should have a
      coroner sitting with him and the inquests should be conducted
      simultaneously and more basically as to medical cause of death. A jury
      may not be required. Only urgent recommendations should be made,
      without fouling the waters for subsequent, more thorough, proceedings.

      Matters relating to negligence and crime, which are properly tried in
      other courts, should be handled carefully and it should be made clear
      that no finding is made on liability and contributory fault, where
      appropriate, so as not to fetter or pre-judge any other proceedings, as
      happened with thp-Taylor enquiry. ^

      VINCENT HALE

      Solicitor for a senior police officer


      The Right honourable Kenneth Baker, M.P,
      The Home Secretary,
      Queen Anne's Gate, London.
  ft*
af-
