                  OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER                                      MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE
                  SO U TH Y O R K S H IR E                                         WATERY STREET
                  (West District)                                                       SHEFFIELD
                                                                                            S3 7ET
                  H.M. Coroner
                  Christopher P. Dorries                                                         Telephone:
                                                                                     Sheffield (0742) 738721
                                                                           1 4 th May 1993


                   Dr S t e f a n P op per




                  Dear Stefan

                  Hillsborough Inquest

                  Many thanks for your letter of the 13th May together with its enclosure.


                 L r ^ aPPriSV he Home °ffice of ^ u r comments on the highlighted questions,
                 qi1J ,a   y 0 U ’ 1 remai* firmly of the view that it is inappropriate for any
                    bstantive reply to be sent whilst Judicial Review proceedings are
                 outstanding.                                                     6


                 ^ h a r t h e e "roroiitti eH SUrPrK Sed t0 866 C°UnSel f° r the A PPlicants indicating
                 that the Coroner had no objection to the Application" then I can assure you
                 for an o H i c J a ? if 7 8;aggered* X .haVe m0st certainly never been approached
                 for an official view and you are quite right in saying that the proceedings
                 were ex-parte so consent is nothing to do with it anyway.      Although I h a v f
                    y seen the press report I believe that the comments made by Counsel were
                 grossly misleading and have caused a number of people to express surprise
                 that we were m favour of a Judicial Review etc.

                 Nothing could be further from     the truth and indeed I cannot actually think of
                          k § m °re    ’ftlle thantheProceedings that are currently taking place
                 s° ? ° t     y °U S h 0 r t l y have an   opportunity to read the Affi davit evidence
                 sent to us       the arguments are (in the main) weak and illogical.     For example
                 it is put forward at one point that there must have been a lack of care
                 because the South Yorkshire Police have settled civil proceedings
                 subsequently.                                                         5

                 Nonetheless the proceedings must be dealt with and you will no doubt be
                 p eased to hear that the Local Authority are prepared to instruct a silk.
                  ■ ut* 1 might have mentioned to you in earlier correspondence that Judith
                 might deal with the legal work if it was felt that there was a conflict of
                 interest with the Local Authority. In discussions it was generally agreed
                 m v h h ifB r  n° ^    confllct andso Judith’s role will simply be              to act on
                 my behalf when any decisions are to be made about proceedings




        SS5AEG
R8606
                                                  Fax: (0742) 726247
I have also had some correspondence from John Burton and Mr Sturt (the Dover
Coroner).  I think they both feel that this would be a classic case to get
the law on "lack of care" sorted out once and for all and there is a
suggestion that an application will be made by the Society to the Attorney
General for the appointment of an Amicus Curiae.


due coirse° d°Ubt      fr°m ^   Bashforth at the Legal & Admin Department in

Best Wishes
