                                 OFFICE O F H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                   WATERY STREET
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                   SHEFFIELD
                                              (West District)
                                                                   S3 7ET
    STEFAN L. POPPER, LLB., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                 CORONER


                             Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                       19




Our Ref: Hills/Sol/4/SLP/JT                                       17th September 1990



Dear Sirs,

Re: RESUMED INQUESTS 19th NOVEMBER 1990.


If you are not already aware, I intend to resume the Inquests into the deaths
of the 95 people who died at Hillsborough, one or more of whom you represent,
on the 19th of November 1990 at 10.a.m.  Details of venue will be notified in
due course.

I do not have to remind you of the -fact that a considerable amount of
evidence has already been taken, nor of the nature and limitations of a
coronal investigation which you will recollect is not adversarial but
inquisitorial in nature, and which of course has only limited objectives.

Subject to the Coroners’ Act 1988 and the Coroners’ Rules, the Inquest is
under my control, and in particular, it is my responsibility to select the
witnesses who wish to give evidence.  I am at present engaged in considering
this and in determining who I wish to invite to attend.

Without prejudice in any way to my rights in the matter, I am writing to you
to give you an opportunity to draw to my attention the names and other
appropriate details of any witness or witnesses whom you would like me to
consider calling to give evidence at the resumed Inquests.

May I please ask you in considering whether you wish to draw any names to my
attention, to bear in mind the scope and limitations of an Inquest.

I also want to make it absolutely clear that the submission of a name or
names for consideration is nothing more than that, and that the decision as
to who to call to give evidence is and remains a matter for me.

I would be grateful if you could respond as soon as possible. If I have not
heard from you by the end of September I will assume you have no names to
submit.

Yours faithfully,
                            OFFICE O F H.M. CORONER FOR      MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                             WATERY STREET,
                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                          (West District)    SHEFFIELD
                                                             S3 7ET
STEFAN L POPPER. LLB., B.MED. Sci., B.M.. B.S., M R.C G P
                                             CORONER


                      Telephone: SHEFFIELD   (0742) 738721
                                                                      October..   19   ..9.0




                                                                 Our Ref: Wit/1




  Dear


                                 Hillsborough Inquests

  You will by now be aware that I am resuming the Inquests on 19th
  November 1990 into the people who lost their lives at Hillsborough
  stadium. My intention is to sit until about 20th December 1990 and if
  the hearings are not completed by then to adj ourn over the Christmas
  and New Year period. I would expect to resume on about 7th January
  1991.

  I am at present considering who I might wish to call to give evidence.
  I realise that this is something which you might not wish to undertake
  and I would therefore be grateful if you could please let me know
  whether if I felt you should be heard you would be willing to attend
   and give evidence.

   I would be grateful if you could please reply as soon as possible. To
   assist you I enclose a pro- forma which also asks for certain
   additional information.  Please return it to my coroner’s officer
   (listing) in the envelope provided.

   If you have any questions regarding this matter please contact my
   coroner's officer (listing):

       Det. Sgt. M.J. Tredgold,  c/o West Midland Police,
       Hillsborough Inquiry, Nechells Police Station, Birmingham B7 5DA.

   His telephone number is 021 359 3820. Please do not phone him unless
   it is really absolutely necessary.
                             OFFICE O F H. M. CORONER FOR
                                                              MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                              WATERY STREET,
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                            (West District)   SHEFFIELD
                                                              S3 7ET
STEFAN l_ POPPER. LL.B., B.MED. Sci., B.M., B.S., M R.C G P
                                               CORONER


                       Telephone: SHEFFIELD 107421 73 8721
                                                                       Octcjber. _1 9   ,90




                                                                  Our Ref: Wit/2




  Dear Sir/Madam,

                                  Hillsborough Inquests                                 ^

  I am actively considering the names of the people who I may wish to
  attend to give evidence at the resumed Inquests which are scheduled to
  commence on the 19th November 1990 and to continue thereafter until
  about 20th December 1990.  If the hearings are not completed by then
  there will be a break for Christmas and New Year and I am planning to
  resume on about 7th January 1991.

  It is my normal practice not to issue subpoenas or summonses to
  witness who I wish to attend at Inquests as I find that most people
  are perfectly willing to come to Inquests by invitation.

  You will appreciate that with Inquests of the size and complexity
  associated with the Hillsborough Disaster it is very important that
  the attendance of witnesses should go as smoothly as it is possible to
  arrange.  I therefore would like to have your confirmation that if I
  were to request you to attend as a witness you will in fact do so
  without a subpoena or summons being served upon you.

   When replying, would you please also let me have certain other
   information which I have set out on the attached pro-forma. Please
   return this immediately to my coroner's officer (listing) in the
   envelope provided.

   If you have any questions regarding this matter please contact my
   coroner's officer (listing):

       Det. Sgt. M.J. Tredgold,  c/o West Midland Police,
       Hillsborough Inquiry, Nechells Police Station, Birmingham B7 5DA.

   His telephone number is 021 359 3820. Please do not phone him unless
   it is really absolutely necessary.

   You will of course be contacted again with further details if your
   attendance is going to be required.



   Y o u e 6 faithfully.



   S ^ L . " Popp*
   H.M. Coron?
Our Ref: Wit/3



Please complete this pro-forma and return it to:

     Det. Sgt. M. J. Tredgold,
     c/o West Midland Police, Hillsborough Inquiry,
     Nechells Police Station, Birmingham, B7 5DA




                         Re: Hillsborough Inquests



1.   Name:

2.   Address. Please include
     post code.              :




3.   Home telephone Number    :

4.   Works Number including extension       :

5.   If you are not on the phone is there
     any one else who we could contact who
     would be able to get in touch with you
     quickly if that were necessary ? If yes
     please give:

         a. their name                  :

         b. their telephone number(s)   :

6.   Are there any days or dates which would be
     particularly inconvenient for you to attend
     as a witness. Please specify precisely      :

7.   Is there anything about you personally that
     you feel I ought to know about eg physical
     disability stammer etc. This enquiry is to
     try and help us to make your attendance if
     called as a witnesses as comfortable as
     possible :

8.   I confirm that if invited I will attend the Inquests without
     the necessity of a subpoena or summons being served upon me.

9.   If you cannot make the statement in paragraph 8 above please
     delete that sentence before signing the form.




Signed                                          Date
