                                                          7th July 1997

Mr. Christopher P. Domes,
HM Coroner,
The Medico Legal Centre,
Watery St.,
Sheffield,
S3 7ET

Dear Chris,

Further to our meeting on 16th May when I returned various papers to you. I have
only just got round to looking at the paper work again.

1. I recollect that you wanted a copy of the summaries of the evidence which I
prepared or were prepared for my use. I think that you in fact have the originals of
these and the set I have is not complete. I had intended to photocopy these but on
reflection I do not feel I need to retain a copy and so I am enclosing my set.

2. I also enclose a copy of my copy of Mr Hale’s letter to Kenneth Baker MP dated
29th March 1991 which you wanted.

3. You wanted a copy off was the transcript of the opening proceedings when Sir
Harry Livermore attended. I enclose a copy of my copy

4. I have also spoken to Pauline and she confirms that she has a copy of the file Index
and I have asked her to show it to you. I am retaining my copy and have not
photocopied it for you in the circumstances.

5 .1 also enclose a bundle of photocopies the facing sheet of which reads Lists &
Schedules. List/Schedule 13 seems to be missing. I cannot remember if I left you with
a copy of this but in case I did not I am enclosing the set I have (I have copied it for
myself). In addition to the lists mentioned there are four more lists in this bundle
which are headed Barrier; Supporters in Pen 4; Witnesses in Stands; and finally two
pages of Dr. Forrest’s transcript and a list headed Alcohol levels and related matter
selection.

6. There were a few post retirement letters (mainly linked to the judicial review) which
you thought it would be wiser to retain. I think you meant for the time being but not
necessarily indefinitely and that is how I intend to interpret you advice. I propose to
retain these for a further period but unless I hear from you to the contrary will destroy
them in due course when I think it appropriate to do so. You will recollect that the
bulk of the papers which I had for the judicial review I have returned. I have found
two typed versions of the judgement (in fact I thought I had three). I have returned
one of the typed version of the judgement.

The objective which I had and have was to get to a position where any papers or
documents I had were of such a nature that you did not object to me having
them and more importantly that there was no objection to destroying them if I
feel that I have no further use for them. Please let me know by return if I have
misunderstood the position.



Yours^incff-ely,


£sG3-PopperT
