  J Kilbey Esq
  Deputy Solicitor
  Legal & Valuation Services Department
  Civic House
  Great Charles Street
  BIRMINGHAM B3 3HN


JMJ/WO’D/20            2091                 G178/K/SJP             10th December 1992




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY AND CORONER’S INQUEST

I refer to your letter of 14th October 1992, and your subsequent reminder.

I have now had the time to consider the papers which you usefully enclosed with your
letter.

My opinion is that many of the points raised were well aired in the inquests and most, if
not all, can be answered. There are also some aspects which are not fully explained in the
application and which, if they had the answers, would be self-evident. There are other
aspects which question the Coroner’s decisions which, I know, were well thought through
by him before he took the action he did. However, my response is my opinion of what I
saw and heard go on and assumptions I have made about the Coroner’s actions. It would
be quite improper, I believe, for me, acting throughout as the Coroner’s Officer, to make
a response formally about matters which rest and have always rested in the Coroner’s
domain. I quote from Jenis on Coroners:

                       "...the officer is not the coroner, and
                       he must never appear to assume more than
                       transitory responsibility for what is
                       being done, ordered or arranged. He must
                       report to and receive instructions from
                       the coroner      "

                       Para 4.40 (Page 40, 1986 edition).
                                            -   2   -




I would recommend therefore that you respond by saying that the fit and proper person to
respond is, and can only be, the Coroner, who, incidentally, I believe will be able to
provide the appropriate explanations.

As a matter of interest, the Coroner at the time has since retired from the post and I
believe that, until quite recently, he personally had not been contacted on the matter.

There is one matter which does give me concern and does affect the Chief Constable of
West Midlands, as opposed to me as the Coroner’s Officer. I refer to the Humble
Memorial, Page 29, paragraph 2 1 ,1 quote: -

                        "Subsequent investigations have revealed that
                        considerable pressure was put on both Special
                        Constable MARTIN and P.C. BRUDER to
                        retract or qualify their evidence as to the
                        signs of life they described in Kevin Williams.
                        These are set out more fully in the statement
                        of Kevin Williams’ mother, appended herewith".

My observations are these; first of all, a copy of Mrs Williams’ statement was not
attached to my papers, did you receive a copy? Secondly, Mrs Williams’ account can
only be hearsay unless she was present at the time of the interviews with Special Constable
MARTIN and P.C. BRUDER. Thirdly, the officer who interviewed P.C. Bruder is
identified at Page 28, paragraph 20 (i), as Inspector Robert SAWERS, now serving as a
detective inspector at Coventry, is the one alleged to have applied considerable pressure.
However, in my view, it would be worth contacting Mr SAWERS to establish his account
of what went on. He may also be in a position to identify who saw Special Constable
MARTIN. (As you are probably aware, West Midlands Police no longer hold the
HOLMES database, so it may be difficult to obtain early identification of the officers
involved).

On receipt of the account(s) you may care to respond accordingly, refuting or otherwise
the allegations. Before you take this action, however, you may consider it appropriate to
contact the Assistant Chief Constable responsible for Complaints and Discipline as there
may be implications for him.
                                             -   3   -




I hope this letter is of assistance. If there is any further way in which I can help please do
not hesitate to make contact. In West Midlands Acting Detective Chief Inspector Caroline
PERKINS is still engaged on HOLMES duties at Nechells, she was one of the office
managers on the Inquiry and she may be able to help with more detail.

With best wishes.
