                                                C ^ rz^ J <y>

                                               7(0                  NBCHEUS S’
                                                                             lSBOTGH
HHMB:            HWERSSSEH CftRPOCSftMr
                 CUHFEH
MXWESS:

HOS / DBfFE GT EXECCHs
OOCORSQCICW: DOClQR

Who states i- Hiis stataanent oonBistimg of 005 mcpg, eacti signed
by me* ia true to the best of nqr knowledge andl belief and I snake
it knowing that if it ig. tendered In evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I has<& wilfully stated In It anything w U d h 1 Imow
to fee false or db not believe to be true.

DKTBHs 270489                                                   N C GURUS# (5I(MBD)


        On Saturday 15th .April 1999 (150489) together with four friends l
        attended the F a cup semi final football natch at HilIstoo3X»ugh?
        Sheffield, to hmbch a football match between Liverpool EC and
        Nottingham R an m t EC.
        1 went to the match to support Liverpool PC, the tickets for the
        match wece obtained ftxMi Aiifiald through the season ticket
        holder scheme. The ticket 1 think is -valued at #14 and I was seated in
        the Nocth Stand.
        the people who I travelled to the game with aase*-

        1.                                                          a medical

               repfesenitative fa r Msy and Baker.

        2.                             a GP in Hiiyton St Hsiang.

          i-                        a &   in HatydBdc.

        4. Ian CMSffiGHD
        We travelled to the game bf car-        It was Me           car.   lie stopped
        en route the ground and had lurch at one of the netaarway service
        statJjons and we arrived in Sheffield for about. 1.30 jn (1330}.
        Wte parked about, a mile from the gtound,. I do not know the locaticm aa
otpem                     w a m se sm asm ocm fm

It was HSf fliBt time in Sheffield,
Having parked the car we walked the rgminsiesr of the way and! arrived
at the ground at about 2 pm (1400). There vm m slight delajfs cm the
motorway due to road worfcs,        I db not recal l seeing any parscaw
consuming alcohol en routs to the match*
The*® was no reqaireanent for JPolice diracrtijcra or escort to the
gnamd a s Hr             knew the ground and the area.     I did not
trouble between the point of arrival and entrance to the gnognd.
Thera           JBtJt    mony jpoc^pJUB about*
On arrival at the p o n d I entered via the turnstiles on tie
Benintane Hoad. There were no queues on the turnstiles acid the pecpte
I w b with were searched by Police on entry.
On reaching the seating area wu 'were told fcy a sbtMaxd «h»se to         90   .
Them was no difficulty in finding the entry point anti ym had no
difficulty M enticing the ground.
1 did not see any gates open other than the turnstiles, nor did I eee
any unauthorised entry into the ground*          £ handed the ticket in ait    1

entered,    1    did not witness any consumption of alcohol inside the
ground,
I was not involved in any cxush whilst attending the football mwteh-
It would hove been about 3*10 pn (1510) when I saw the crowd standing
on the tracxaces on the W m t Stand surging fbrwarai. "Etta movement
steamed from the rear of the croud towards the front. I das't Tono**
what caused the sttwanenfc-
1   did not receive any injuries ngnelf from the football natch.          The
next tiling I saw was that people in the terracing wene being lifted
into the seating area of the Mast Standr by supportens atxwe them,
people vents also clistung over the fences to the front of the
tegcmdng onto the pitch area.




                                                                                   23
OTFEM                   raOBRASSBN CARPnGRaHY

it appealed to be at this time that the terracing wss too overciassdsd
and people waace escaping the crush.    & nunber of psc|da        being
carried away on stretchers fm n the pitch siea.,
Jls a result, ny two nollegues and myself wertt d a m to the ream: of the
Month Stand to see if w could assist; with angs-thing. thin «gauld be
about 3.30 pa f!530j.
qhi arrival at. the rear of the Marth stand w» spote to a Police
Officer and having told him wa wen® Doctors we nwe© told to go
downstairs, which to did.     Race we spoke to an officer with a radio
and again told M m that ws «era Doctors.    Xhis officer ahmed us into
the gymnasium, wtvLch was being used for a makeshift casualty centre.
             went tOMirdka the ploying area -whilst

n^nself remaind at the gpnasitait.
Inside the gymnasium, I saw taso dead bodies on the floor. I felt for
a pulse or these two peqple and these mas not one.
lying on the ground at the same point 'Has another n n aged about
thirty, he mbs conscious and appeared to be in shock.     X got him up
and sat him down.    Two nrae bodies were then brought into the ansa.
I checked them again and confixmed that thaw were dead.
At this stages I heard another person was In pain.    Ihiii raw* was
behind a partition which was inside the gymnasium.     He complained to
me of injuries to his legs.
Vtiis man was with a friend and I ashed him to rip the mans trousers
so I could examine him, which he did.    1 saw that the leg was bine
from the tap of his left leg to his toes.
There was no medical equipment available and so I just told M m to
take deep breaths*
Next to hist was another nan wto had been bcougfrit: in, ha had crush
injuries to his <3xast and J» was 'bine' through lac* of oaggen.       Ha
CURPffl*                     CtftDBRASSElt OW OQBfm

was pointing out that hia chest was injured.             I mmr that M s chest
m e bine,          Tliere mb nothing that I could do ejBoepfc frallf to Mis,
until help arrived.
Eknrlng thia time mows todies «ere heijig bnu^it in on the other sM&
of the partiticn.-
I went back over and aesw that t*e*» were anothea: theee or four more
bodies who were dead.
I returned to the man with the cheet injuey, whilst I mm talking
to him f i m e n came in carrying oxygen.             I took one and gam it Sites
man with the dies*, injuries and left him in the otnce of the finmam
1 then went to see another man who was lying on the ground vfto wm
in pain.     This rant had injuries to M e left shoulder but otherwise
he has alright.
It Mas about this time that a team raf paramedics arrlvad fxem.
Sheffield Hospital and they started to administer first                to the
ca&ulties.
At about 4 pm (1600} I hub approached ky an Inapactwr who ashed me
together with three other Doctors to oonfium the deaths of peaeaoae
present. in the gymasiuii,
lie took a section of the bodies each and csertifieri their ifeatts, A
Kilice offioer w e with eadh body and tie took the details feem me of
the time of certification and aty nane and address.
I can't xanenter how many people I certified as dead but it i«as at
least eight.
I do not hanre any details of the dead people, their details are with
the Police.         I remember that the first tody certified as dead w b at
4 pm (1 6 0 0 ).
Me stayed until about 4.40 pn (1640) the sane date. Mf cmii personal
observations axe that medical assistance should have been, requested
       omraer                             cflKPOOSMfir

        on the loud speater ayBten* imediately casulttos were noticed. Up to
        the »•«■«> that I erttiseed the gymnasium no request had been made on the

        pufclie sqaeatasir system-
        Ifcece mbs no first aid equipswnt available insitfe the gyranasiuan.         It
        is Off Opinion that at anadh stadiums as Hillsboeaii^i where large
        att^KAanoes are CE^ient, a m a n should he set aside                    to deal

        with eBEtgenciee,
        The last thing I *o*iM MJte to say Is that now hwrim examined a imp
        of the ground 1 am n o t sum s ats to which gate we entered.         It m ay have
        fceen the Lappings u n e tutnstile. Uifi pescsoo t i c wjislrt know fee

        dsfiAite would be




                                            n m sr r ssek   CKRPOosntor   curfew sxghed


sraaswEHr taken
          PWCB:
           TiWi               DH3K:

WITNESS TO SICMKTORK:       B DAVIES

OFFICERS SlC3fflT0RBi
