          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 528
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
m         Direct Line 0171 273 4347   Fax 2703



C P Domes Esq                                                Your reference:
HM Coroner
Medico-Legal Centre                                          Our reference:
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD S3 7ET                                             Date:        *T      August 1997



              k\r
HILLSBOROUGH


Thank you for your letter of 5 August and for our helpful telephone discussion.

2.     As you know, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been appointed by the Home Secretary to
conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. I
am acting as Secretary to the scrutiny.

3.      It might be helpful if I explain that the obj ective of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
scrutiny is to establish whether there is any significant new evidence which was not
previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police
disciplinary authorities. If there is significant new evidence, he will aim to see if it would
have affected the outcome of any of the proceedings.

4.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith hopes to report his findings to the Home Secretary by the
end of the year. I attach a copy of his terms of reference.

5.     In the course of this exercise we will need to have access to the documents about the
incident and the proceedings arising out of it which are held by the various authorities
involved, including your office. I was grateful for your offer of assistance on this. I assume
that your Archive contains a full record of the proceedings at the Inquests and of the evidence
which was available at them. But it would be helpful to have a summary in some form of
any other material relating to the disaster which they contain.

6.     I am sure that would be useful to us as the scrutiny continues. As I said, the Judge has
specifically asked at this stage to see Dr Popper’s summing-up to the jury. Would you be
able to supply a copy of that, please? I would also be grateful for some material about the
inquest on the 96th Hillsborough victim, Tony Bland. I am not clear about when it took
place. Was it also held before a jury? If so, could we see the summing-up for that case also?

7.      We are of course in contact with the police, DPP, Attorney General and so on as well
as with the Hillsborough Family Support Group and others. As his scrutiny of the evidence

G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\CORONER.O28
proceeds Lord Justice Stuart-Smith may wish to interview some witnesses directly. He is
also willing to consider interviewing individual witnesses at their request. These interviews
will be private.

8.      I am of course happy to discuss arrangements with you or Dr Popper if you or he
wish. Please note that the telephone and room numbers shown above are temporary - we will
notify you of our permanent address and telephone as soon as we have them.


                 £l




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\CORONER.O28
