File Note

16.55        24th June 1999

Tel conversation with Mr. Croston at about 16,30 onward

He had phoned and left a message on the answer phone to say that Ms Adlington
wanted a copy of my letter to him but he was inclined t o refuse. I phoned him and said
I thought so too as I had written to him exactly as she had requested.


 We then continued the conversation and Mr. Croston said he had not been able to find
a statement which indicated that Insp. White had spoken about Mr. Murray. I turned
to the copy file note dated 5th march (which I had retrieved from the files on 18.8.97
according to my hand written note on it). In this file note I specifically refer to a
statement of 25.23.91 with reference to Supt. Murray in the first 7 lines on page three.
On looking at the date again I was surprised that it is dated 91 and wondered if this
was an error for 90 but I could not o f course remember this now.

Mr. Croston said this was obviously an important point and would I be prepared to
speak to Ms. Adlington. I demurred from this but we decided that it might be best if
we disclosed my correspondence with him to Ms. AdJington on condition that she
agreed that copies were provided for the other side as I thought that was only fair. He
said that was their standard practice anyway.

I again said that I had reminded him of our earlier correspondence as it was important
in my view if this thing came before the court that all was before the court so that
whichever way the case went one could not say that they court was not informed.




Mr. Croston commented that LJT had taken the view that the senior officers had not
known about this but this might indicate that they had known before the match. I said
that it was my recollection that the statement indicated prior knowledge but 1 could
not now say whether this was on the day or at some previous occasion.

I ran Mr. Croston back (he returned the call) and told him that the reason why I had
not mentioned the file note when I wrote to Mr. Pearson in April 1997 was because I
had not obtained the copy file not till 18.8.97. Presumably I found it when I was
searching through the papers for something for LJ Stuart Smith.
