From Hon. Secretary                                             Coroners’ Society of England & Wales


Michael J. C. Burgess
ff.M . Coronerfo r Surrey - <£ - SoBator o f the Supram Cmsrt


21 October 1997
Dr. Stefan Popper,




Dear
re:           The Hillsborough Scrutiny
1 am sorry that, to date, we have not spoken. However, thank you for your letter of 20
October, with its enclosure. I wrote to the Inquiry, as per copy attached, and have had a
reply in which they say that they are expecting to speak with or see you and that if either you
or the Society can help further, they will let me know.

With kind regards,

 Yours sincerely,
From Hon. Secretary                                                  Coroners’ Society of England & Wales

Michael J. C. Burgess                                                                 44, Ormond Avenue,
ff.M . Coronerpr Sarny - <S - Solicitor o f the Supreme Court                         HAMPTON, M l d d X .
                                                                                              TW12 2RX
4 October 1997

C.BoneEsq.,
Secretary to the Scrutiny,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 528,
50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                                                - Copy-

Sir,

re:           The inquiry following the Hillsborough disaster
I understand that yours is one of a number of inquiries, recently ordered by Ministers into
events and/or matters leading to or following deaths, the other inquiries being those into
matters surrounding the death of Stephen Lawrence and the DPP’s decision not to prosecute
in certain other cases. In each case, of course, because the deaths concerned were either
violent or unnatural or occurred in prison, there has already been an inquiry in the form of
a coroner’s inquest, when evidence hits been aired and tested and an empanelled jury
returned, on the basis of that evidence a conclusion.
 In each case, I am sure that the coroner will make available the material he has and his
 record of the inquest proceedings. What may not be so readily available or obvious is that
 in each of these cases, the coroner was beset with very serious problems which caused him
 great difficulty in trying to ensure that, in the course of his inquiry, in the words of Bingham
 MR,(ft v Coronerfo r Humberside ex pJam eson - Court of Appeal)".. .the relevantfacts are
fully, fairly and fearlessly investigated. ... He must ensure that the relevant facts are
 exposed to public scrutiny, particularly if there is evidence o f foul play, abuse or inhumanity.
 He fails in his duty if his investigation is superficial, slipshod or perjunetory. But the
 responsibility is his. He must set the bounds o f the inquiry.
In each case of these cases, use was made of the various media with talks, interviews and
articles, often based on totally spurious and attention-seeking statements. In some instances,
there were processions, "vigils" or pickets by placard waving and chanting groups in the
immediate vicinity of the coroner’s court. Sound bites were made to the TV and other media
stating "we thought it was going our way ...", "we thought we were getting the verdict [of
unlawful killing] we w a n te d .and even "the coroner was with u s...”
 Despite this, the coroner had to try, day after day, to direct the jury to pay no heed and to
 ignore these insidious pressures. These pressures have been the subject of judicial comment
 and mention in the past. As mentioned by Woolf, J (R.v H.M. Coronerfo r Inner London,
 ex p. Chambers (1993} - ”... It is to be remembered that the decision at the inquest is to be
 given by a jury and it is quite wrong that the jury should be subject to undue pressure. The
problems which can occur when large numbers o f the public attend an inquest at which
feelings run high have been recently demonstrated and it is perfectly properfo r the coroner
From Hon. Secretary                                    Coroners’ Society of England & Wales

 not to want to run the risk o f a repetition o f the sort o f situation which existed at the Deptford
fire inquest which was the subject o f the Divisional Court given on 8th July 1982."

 In the Deptford fire inquest case, (R. v S.Landon Coroner, exp. Thompson [1982]), Lane LCJ
 said A coroner’s task in a case such as this is a formidable one, and no one would dispute
 that; that is quite apartfrom the difficulties which inevitably arise whenfeelings are running
 high and the spectators are emotionally involved and vocal. Once again it should not be
forgotten that an inquest is a fact finding investigation and not a method o f apportioning
 guilt. The procedure and rules o f evidence wluch are mutable fo r one are unsuitable fo r the
 other. In an inquest it should never be forgotten that there are no parties, there is no
 indictment, there is no prosecution, there is no defence, there is no trial, simply an attempt
 to estabtishjdcts. It is an inquisitorial process, a process o f investigation, quite unlike a trial
 where the prosecutor accuses and the accused defends, the judge holding the balance or the
 ring, whichever metaphor one chooses to use”
We are also concerned that some of these difficulties lay with those who, really, should have
known better. On occasions, assertions or representations were made by lawyers who must
have known that, at best, the statement uttered was unclear, and on occasion, quite untrue.
Quite improper questions are asked and then disallowed. However, they have been uttered,
the idea has been put about and the refusal of the coroner to permit the question to be
answered comes across as the coroner being oppressive, as trying to "hide" things. It gives
the impression of partisanship.

In one case, the coroner has told us that those representing some of those having a "proper"
interest, deliberately interposed themselves between the coroner and potential witnesses,
strove to give the impression that it was their (i.e., on behalf of their clients) that the inquest
was being held and the witness attending court, and that their statement or proof of evidence
should conform to, or could be, effectively re-written to support one or other of the
contentions being made. In the course of the coroner’s examination of such witnesses, it
became clear that this had occurred.
We believe that too often there is an expectation, ill-founded but nevertheless fostered by
pressure and campaign groups, that the inquest can make criminal findings, that it can in
effect, indict despite the Criminal Law Act 1977, the Coroners Act 1988 and the Coroners
Rules 1984. Indeed, the conclusion of "Unlawful Killing" requires the jury to assimilate
evidence and reach conclusions on the same basis ands to the same standard of proof as that
in a criminal trial and yet, because of the prohibition on naming the person they believe to
be responsible, their conclusion might well be ill-founded or misunderstood. The inquest jury
has to formulate answers to a whole series of questions, it is not for them simply to say
"Guilty" or Not guilty". Again, I quote from the judgment of Bingham, MR, in Jamieson -
  It is not the junction o f a coroner or his jury to determine, or appear to determine, any
question o f criminal or civil liability, to apportion guilt or attribute blame. This principle is
expressed in Rule 42 o f the 1984 Rides. The Rule does, however, treat criminal and civil
liability differently: whereas a verdict must not be framed so as to appear to determine any
question o f criminal liability on the part o f a named person, thereby legitimating a verdict
o f unlawful killing provided no one is named, the prohibition on returning a verdict so as to
appear to determine any question o f civil liability is unqualified, applying whether anyone is
named or not.
From Hon. Secretary                                Coroners’ Society of England & Wales

This prohibition in the Rules is fortified by considerations o ffairness. Our law accords a
defendant accused o f crime or a party alleged to have committed a civil wrong certain
safeguards rightly regarded as essential to the fairness o f the proceedings, among them a
char statement in writing c f the alleged wrongdoing, a right to call any relevant and
admissible evidence and a right to addressfactual submissions to the tribunal o ffact. These
rights are not granted, and the last is expressly denied by the Rules, to a party whose conduct
may be impugned by evidence given at cm inquest.
A11 too often we find that the same few persons legally represent the (usually unsuccessful)
applicant at any judicial review of the coroner’s decisions. They are seeking, normally, to
obtain from the inquest more than it ever can deliver. Although representation at an inquest
is not covered for legal aid, if there is a judicial review then legal aid will (subject to the
usual conditions) be available.

In some of these cases, after (or even in the course of) the whole inquest process there has
been a judicial review before the Divisional Court. In this instance, under the name R.v
Coronerfo r South Yorkshire, ex parte Stringer, the Divisional Court had, in the course of 5
days, a veritable replay of the issues which, it was asserted, had led to a flawed inquest. The
Court examined each in detail and, in effect rejected, these assertions, finding that the
applicants had foiled to demonstrate that the inquest was anything but the inquiry that it set
out to be. Despite this, the grounds of that judicial review, rejected by the Divisional Court,
re-surfaced in the various campaigns and are now enshrined in drama and believed or
accepted as what did happen.
So the truth is intermingled with partial truth and patent untruths making it extremely difficult
to unravel, and for thejury, unaware of these matters, impossible. The inquest, whether with
or without a jury, cannot find answers to questions in the absence of evidence. We believe
that the inquest process should be, and can quite properly be, used for dispelling the rumours
or widespread ideas by demonstrating that there is no evidence to support them.
Unfortunately, this does not always happen because the coroner and his jury may, in some
way, be prevented from pursuing their inquiries.
 Our concern, then is that you will receive either a misrepresentation of the coroner’s inquest
 and his inquiries surrounding it or fail to appreciate the difficulties which the coroner had to
 face in trying to conduct his inquest. All too often the coroner has been faced with those
 whose every effort has been put into ensuring that the inquest was anything but full and fair.
 If they fail to get the result they seek from the inquest, then they pursue it, through the
judicial review process. The inquisitorial process is thus usurped and the result may well be
 a distortion. As Bingham, MR said (Jamieson) - Despite the rulings given by the appellate
 courts, problems continue to arise both fo r coroners seeking to conduct inquests and direct
juries in accordance with the law as they understand it andfor those interested in the death
 o f a deceased person seeking to explore thefu ll circumstances o f the death and draw lessons
 which may prevent repetition. Coroners do their utmost to confine the proceedings before
 them within the bounds o f what they consider to be proper. Interested parties not infrequently
 strain to pursue their quarry well beyond the bounds set by the coroner.

It may be that in the course of your inquiry, you will receive representations critical of the
coroner or his inquest. In that event, we hope that you will afford the coroner (and this
Society should you and he so wish) the opportunity of addressing those concerns and placing
them into context.
From Hon. Secretary                              Coroners’ Society of England & Wales

If there is any other information or further detail which you might like on any of the above
issues, we would be happy to provide it to you.

Yours faithfully,
