                                                                                                                                                                                              .
                                                         D A          V.l          E S              W A L L I S -
                                                                                                                                                      r~
                                                                           F O Y S T E R                                                                 “^ ■ - nIL0r?i7r
                                                                          S    O    L   I   C   I   T    O   R    S
                                                                                                                                                        ■' '■ U ^            :1S 3 0          1

                                                                                                                                                - ^ srsi3 trcn 5 i

           Hillsborough Streeing Committee,
           Castle Chambers,
           DX 14100 Liverpool                                                                                                                 PAB.CC.JOYNES

                                                                                                                                              12th   November                1990
           For the attention of Mrs Wright



           Dear Sirs,

           Re:       Nicholas Peter Joynes (deceased)
                    Our Client - Gillian Joynes__________

           We are instructed by the above named in relation to                                                                                whom    you       have been
           dealing direct in relation to the adjourned inquest.

           She has telephoned us and asked to write to you in relation to the
           Coroner's decision to take evidence only as to matters arising before
           3.15pm on the day of the disaster .

           Nicholas Joynes was pronounced dead at 16.00hrs. at the temporary mortuary
           in  the  gymnasium  at Hillsborough  stadium by Dr. Byrne.     Our client
           therefore wishes evidence to be given as to what happened upto, say 4.15pm
           or 4.30pm.   Our client understands that the adjourned inquests are in
           relation to why the disaster occurred and what its cause was but it seems
           to us that a question of how the emergency services coped on the day and
           whether more lives could have been saved is of relevance and therefore
           evidence should be given in relation to matters arising upto 4.15pm or
           4.30pm at the very least.  We trust that our client's views will be given
           due consideration.

            In addition, we understand that you now have a list of doctors that
            attended the dead and injured during the afternoon.    Our client has been
            given to understand that her late husband was attended to by a student
            doctor and our client therefore wonders whether you have available in your
            possession information in relation to student doctors which m a y assist our
            client in tracing the particular doctor who treated her late husband.

            She does of course know the identity of the doctor who pronounced her
            husband dead but she would very much like to meet the student doctor who
            treated her husband.




         5 CA STLE STREET, LIVERPOO L L2 4XE TEL: 051-236 6226 TELEX: 627685 FAX: 051-236 3088 DX: 14128 LIV ERPO O L
James CM . Davies. G uy St. J. Wallis. Mark I. O 'Connor. A ndrew J. Green. Christopher R.J. Sorrell. David N. Clay, ian Titchmarsh. Michael P. Jennings. J. Bnan Rhodes. Richard C. Holman
Gerald F. Power, Anthony R. Catterall. Christopher R. D urrant. T. Duncan S. C haddenon. Barry K. Holland, Jonathan S. Bramley, Jennifer A. GemmelL John Gower-Jones. Alvin R. Pinder.
      Elaine H um . H. Andrea McWatt. R. Anthony H indie. Edward T. Boot land. Nigel B. Wallis. Mark Selwvn. Graham Sidlow, David L. Wood, Richard Jacldin. A. David Blaquiere,
           Nicholas H, Dickinson. L Christopher Smith. Susan K. Parker. Michael Fetherstone. Robert F, Coward. David K. Sherlock, A ndrew J. Uvesey. David Davidson Lund
                                                             R. Jane Janvier. Susan M.C. Frankland. Graham P. Small. Paul Berry
       Associates: Peter Gelling. Gwyneth Heritage Consultants: J. Aylmer Johnson. Barry J.K. Guyer. David M. Hallwonh. Ken Shaw Partnership Secretary: Richard H. Evans F.C.A.

                                                   Offices at Manchester Tel: 061-228 3702 and Blackburn Tel; 0254 56333
                                                                 Authorised by The Law Society to conduct investment business
                                                     Davtes Wallis Foyster is the merged firm of Dodds Ashcroft, Foysters and Davies Wallis
      A
/ '   ■ ■


            1 *J   '
            Any information that you can give us will assist and we trust that
            client’s views in relation to the _ content of the inquest will also
            considered and acted upon if appropriate.
                                                         -




            Yours




                                                                                   ■
