PRE/INQ/REV                      dated 6th March 1990
                                                                        w
Mates of ground to be covered at;Pfe Inquest Reviewjan 6th March       .
1990 at 2 pm at the Medico                    St; ^Sheffields  '       A


1► Refer to Previous meeting on 28.02.90 with Mr. Kennedy,
 Hammond Suddards, Solicitors for SYP and Mr. Frazer of the
Hillsborough Steering Committee Mr. M. Jones ACC WMP and SLP.


2. DPP.                a. Definitely No information as to DPP decision
                       b. in any case No decision yet taken
                       c. All papers not yet submitted and therefore not
                          possible for decision to be taken..
                          Present time scale would not permit DPP final
                          report to be submitted until after commencement
                          of proposed resumed limited inquests.

3.Possible Scenarios:
  a. Prosecution -                             Sec. 16 CA 1988.
  b. No Prosecution but Private Pros.          Sec. 16 CA 1988
  c„ No Prosecution -                          Inquest
                       (
4. Pre Inq Rev. has arisen as a direct result of letter from Miss
Steel outlining certain difficulties, correspondence from Hammond
Suddard, previous thinking about matter natural anxiety for
information.

5. Resumed Inquest to be of limited scope. Under no circumstances will
we deal at this stage with How and even less with Why or Whom to
blame.

In particular no attack or criticism of any individual(s) or body(s)
Nothing that may be detrimaental to DPP enquiry.

This is necessary
a. DPP has only agreed to limited inquest at this stage
b. In the interests of justice not least that of the bereaved..

6. Scope of Inquest.

    Medical Evidence Alcholol levels will be revealed for each person
    for whom they are available.

    Evidence of movement of the deceased as far as possible.
    In particular we will try where that is possible to .indicate
    where the deceased was seen in a particular pen.

    Identifications are more satisfactory for some than others
    ofcourse.

    At the end of the hearing bereaved should hopefully know where
    it has been possible to establish it the when and where of death.

/.Method of producing the evidence.

   a. Post Mortem Reports, subject to representations I think
      it may be possible to deal with many of these without
      calling the Pathologist.
                                  Page   1
     b. We will not call Drl Forrest/to each inquest to prove
        alcohol levels feut will.have him present at the beginning
        to deal with his findings. In any individual case where
        I think it necessary I will ofcourse call him.
     c. We will not call any SYP officers of any rank
     d. In each case a WMP officer will have prepared a summary
        of each individual file which together with the file
        will be submitted to me. The officer will present his
        summary. It will to the best of ability be factually correct
        but will be non adverserial in tone and content.
     i. I will have seen the summaries and the complete files before
        each inquest and it is my intention to have read each of the
        95 files before the inquest.
     ii. The summaries will be circulated to HSC and probably to
        Hammond Suddard before the hearing but not to others but
        not to others who will ofcourse hear it at the Inquest.
     iii. The purpose of early circulation is:
         1. to enable Sol to indicate
         whether they are content with summary or whether anything is
         not clear so that if it is possible that can be elaborated at
         the hearing.
         2. To enable solicitors to share information with families
         so as to give pre warning of the evidence and lessen if
         possible distress

     e. We will also have available Annacappa reports which are a
        different form of summary but it may not be possible to
        circulate these.

     f. I do not intend to use Video at this hearing.

     g. I will avoid using photographs or video stills whereever
        possible. Instead I intend to use either the summarising
        officer or other police officers to indicate on plans the
        positions where deceased where seen either alive or dead.

        Most families have already seen the photographs and confirmed
        the identifications.

       Relevant stills will be available if needs must.

     h. I may use other evidence from witnesses either viva voce or
        documentary if I think that it is necessary but do not expect
        to do so often as the summaries should give the information
        in adequate form.

8.   I intend on the opening day to take evidence from some witnesses
      eg Dr. Forrest, Prof Usher Insp. Layton which will help with
      understanding of the generality of the evidence and the method of
      presentation. It may also help with the length of the
      proceedings.

9. Listing. This is going to be difficult. We are starting off with
   pathologist order but we anticipate that there are many factors
   which will influence the order eg two deceased in one family.
   Listing will appear random but will in fact have had considerable
   thingking put into it. Whilst we would not wish to deliberately
   incovenience anyone the listing will be done by me/or undr my
   authority.

                                   Page   2
        We are aiming to do 8 Cases per day.

 10. Jury We will sit with one. Not much that they will be able to do
  -4-v, 6fe eari^§s but I think that it would be unwise to proceed
 without them. It must be remembered that Inquest are by definition
 non adversarial and these limited hearings even more so.

  11. Location. Medico Legal Centre.

 ^ \ TranS^ PtS* Wl11 be available- Not next day service.         Will have
 to De paid for.


 l b £ l l 1Su ° r0U£ ST ° rt gr°Up* Aware of the ^ o l v m e n t of social
 rh ltl      W® V^ 11 endeavour to inform a liason person in the group of
 donp fhr°Sef ^ St^ng         WOuld exPect that detailed liason will be
 Coroner-^Ic/Sol               fam*ly's s u i t o r s or HSC. ie Communication
 coroner- ttbL/bol      Social workers etc and others.

 i S ? ® will endf v°ur to give as much warning as possible but it may
 be difficult and there may have to be last minute changes.
 knoi  We wilin^     S?llcitors wh0 we exPect will let their clients
        ; w1H also endeavour to warn at least one family member direct
 either by post or viva voce.                                       ecL

1 1 ' J i T USe of Pres®ure on time if some one does not turn up on time
we will proceed without them.

16. We will endeavour to have coffee and biscuit facilities on site.

17. Press will be entitled to attend, but because of space constrains
press passes will probably have to be issued.              constrains

18. Comments from floor.

19. Representation of interested parties.

20 Any other business.

21. Date for resumed inquest.

22. Starting time of resumed inquests.




                                    Page    3
