7J-.
                                                        $A
                   ■■' ;'
                        1
                        -      ■

                     ATTENDANCE NOTE
                                                         *   ^ r - 1*


                                                             S3   0 9   ^
 Conference with Dr. M. Powers,                                2 *■///<)
                  2nd July. 11.Ou a.m.

 Present:   Dr. Popper;     Dr. Powers; R. B. Hammond



         Dr. Powers opened the Conference by assuming that
 the D.P.P. will prosecute over the Hillsborough disaster.
 The D.P.P.'s decision is still not known, but it was thought
 that he was interviewing formally at the present time and
 would make a decision in the near future.   Dr. Popuer
 thought that the D.P.P. will not prosecute.

         Dr. Popper said he was under no present pressure
 to resume the inquest.  By and large the families were
 happy with the initial inquest which he had held which was
 a major diffusing job.

         On the interpretstion of Section 16 (l) (a) of
 the Coroners Act 1988, Dr. Powers agreed with Dr. Popper's
 conclusions as set out in the instructions.    The problem
 was one of interpretation of an unclear section. Although
 under Section 16 (l) (a), where a Clerk to the Magistrates
 would give notice that a person has been charged with, for
 example, manslaughter, the Coroner could adjourn an inauest
 into the death of a particular person, did this present
 problems with adjouring the inquest for the other people
 whose deaths were connected with this deceased.    It was
 assumed that in these circumstances the D.P.P. will then
 give the Coroner notice under Section 16 (l) (b) which
 would allow the Coroner to adjourn the inquest into the
 deaths of the persons not covered by the Section 16 (l) (a)
 notice.  (The problem centred around the use of the word
 "'or " at the _end of Section 16 (1) (a) (i) (ii) and (iii)).
 The use of this word led to some possible confusion as to
 whether Section 16 (l) (a) and Section 16 (l) (b) were to
 be taken as complementary or as operating separately to
 each other.    Dr. Powers thought that the right interpraa-
 tion was that Section 16 (l) (a) would cover an adjourn­
 ment of a particular inquest into a death, and then the
 D.P.P. would be able to adjourn inquests into connected
 deaths by use of Section 16 (1) (b).    The purpose of the
 Section was to stop duplication of notices and there were
 three separate categories allowing adjournments of inquest
 within Section 16. These were:

      1.     Section 16(3) (a) allowed an adjournment on the
 instructions of a magistrates' clerk where the Coroner is




                                1.


                                               continued
