OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER                                 MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE
                                                            WATERY STREET
SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                                  SHEFFIELD
(West District)                                                       S3 7ET

H.M. Coroner                                                            Telephone:
Christopher P. Dorries                                      Sheffield (0742) 738721
                                                    1 October 1992



Doctor S L Popper




Dear Stefan

HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST


 I am enclosing a copy of a letter received from Barry Devonside which is self
 explanatory.

 I think Mr Devonside is quite right in suggesting that I pass this on to you,
 the answer is no doubt within the filing system "somewhere".  I am confident
 that you will have the information to the front of your mind.

 If you would like to ring Mr Devonside direct to discuss his query please be
 assured that I have absolutely no objection.  Indeed it seems to me that this
 is rather more sensible than me acting as a postbox on circumstances of which
 I have a comparative limited knowledge.

 I look forward to hearing from you.


 Yours    sincerely




 C P Dorries
 H M Coroner



 enc




                               Fax: (0742) 726247
Mr C P Dorries
Office of H M Coroner for South Yorkshire
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield  S3 7ET


28th September 1992


Dear Mr Dorries,

Reference   Hillsborough Inquests

I refer to the above inquests, in particular day 80, April 28th
1991, and Dr Popper's closing comments, in which he advises the
court, pages 11, 12, 13, of his intention to write to the
appropriate authorities, specifically t^e Fire Service, Dr Muir
and The Horns Secretary regarding various matters of concern.

I am interested to know the outcome of Dr Popper's efforts and
wonder if you would be aware of any result regarding these
matters.  If you are unable to deal with this request would you
be so kind as to pass my letter on to Dr Popper.

Thank you in anticipation,

Yours sincerely




Barry Devonside
                                              13th December 1992


Mr. C.P. Dorries,
H.M. Coroner,
Medico Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield,
S3 7ET


Dear Chris,

              Re: Hillsborough Inquest - Mr. B. Devonside.

I refer to your letter of 1st October 1992 and my subsequent
telephone conversations with Pauline.

Pauline sent on some correspondence which she found relating to my
correspondence with various people following the Hillsborough
Inquest.

When I looked through it I noticed that Schedule C of my letter to
the then Home Secretary (Kenneth Baker) dated 1st May was not
included nor was the reply from the fire service to whom I
also wrote. If Pauline could have another look for these and send
me copies so that I can have a complete set.

I have however today spoken to Mr. Devonside and briefly outlined
to whom I had written and the subject matter.

He asked me if it would be possible for him to have copies of my
letters to the various parties together with their replies.

I indicated that these copies would have to come from you as I was
no longer in post.

I explained that as far as I was concerned I had no objection to
the release of the correspondence to him but that it was also a
matter for you. I also said that you would have to consider whether
assuming that you had no objection you would be willing to release
the replies from the third parties as they might not be happy.

Mr. Devonside assured me that the copies would be for his and his
wife's use only. He said that he would write to you to give you
the necessary assurances.

I think that it would be much more appropriate that you should
release any copies if you feel that you may do so and that you
should. Obviously this is a matter entirely for you as is the
question of whether it is necessary to consult with the writers of
the replies to my letters. As I have already indicated I have no
personal objection to letting Mr. Devonside have copies of the
correspondence but of course I am no longer in the seat of
                          Page Jk:




authority.

As I am writing at Christmas time X take this opportunity of
wishing you a very happy Christmas and a prosperous and successful
New Year. I would be grateful if you could convey to those who
still remember me at the Medico Legal centre and particularly the
staff in your office and at Barnsley my wishes for a very happy
Christmas and New Year.



Yours sincerely,




S . L . Popper.
