                                      OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR        MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                        WATERY STREET
                                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                        SHEFFIELD
                                                   (West District)
                                                                        S3 7ET
          STEFAN L POPPER, LLB., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                      CORONER


                                  Tela phone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                          26th November, ig90
SLP/BW
CRN/90 82/1/1

                                                                                 oil 2-?s 2sol
Mr J H ROWLANDS
Home Office
Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT

Dear Mr ROWLANDS,

Further to my letter of 15th November, I have recollected that on 2nd August I
wrote to Miss HARRISON regarding the financing of the Hillsborough Inquest.

In order to avoid any misunderstanding, I think perhaps I ought to say that
both that letter as! well as this, is and was written entirely on my own
initiative without any prompting or consultation from or with the: Local
Authority.

However, the point which Simon HUGHES has raised and which you will probably
know has now been canvassed in the Press a few days ago, both reinforces and
indeed adds a further dimension to the need and appropriateness for some
central, financing of inquests arising out of major disasters like Hillsborough,

I do not wish to bore you with the detail but both the direct costs to the
Local Authority in connection with the Inquest and the indirect costs arising
out of their contribution to Police funds, are likely to be of. a very
substantial nature.

I entirely accept Miss HARRISON’S point that if one wanted to make a
fundamental shift of responsibility from. Local Authority financing to central
funding, eg the Lord Chancellor’s Department or the Home Office, then primary
legislation is likely to be required.

However, what I have in mind is that there must be some contigency funds
available and accessible to the Home Office or some other appropriate
Department in order to fund:, or at least make some contribution to the costs of
unusual and, hopefully, rare Inquests of this nature.

I would be grateful in. the light of the points raised for this matter to be
reconsidered again and look forward to hearing with interest whether funds
could now be found.

As Mr Simon HUGHES wrote to the Home Secretary personally, and as I think this
i®5 an important matter, I would be grateful if this point is brought to the
personal attention of the Home Secretary.

Y o urs     sin c e re ly ,




S.L.. Pop££r ^
H.M. Coroner
