29™ November 1996

Spoke to C. Domes. I told him that there was an article in the Times o f 28th
November about the Hillsborough program. It mentions what is described as new
evidence. He asked if I knew anything about this but I could not recollect anything.

I told him that there was one witness who I was concerned about namely |
I could not folly remember the details but I had wanted to call him as there was
 something in his statement about I think Bernard Murray knowing about the shutting
of the tunnel gates which I seem to remember differed from other evidence from B.
Murray. I had thought a lot about it but in the end had not called him
                                                             This seems tc) have been
borne out as I think he is one of the officers who has received compensation and in
that sense I was right. It was not possible to use the statement as documentary
evidence and in the end he was not heard. { I seem to recollect however that there
was evidence about closing the gates of the tunnel } I asked Mr. Dorries to get the
statement out and have a Ip^k at it and decide whether any action needed to be taken.
He was of the view that fright not to call h jg jio u g h perhaps it might have been
better to disseminate the statement. I said J^had thought o f that too but rejected it as
not practical in the end. He felt that I had called people where it was possible to do so
and there would have been a lot of criticism if I had proceeded against)                ~|
He felt that I was torturing myself unnecessarily and that in the context of an inquest
the error even if there was one was not significant. I asked him to get the statement out
and consider it and if any action was needed

Chris asked about the surviving Glover boy who gave evidence. He said that he
thought that he had wanted to do so and I said I was positive that he wished to do so.
I had not wished to call him as I thought he would be too upset and indeed he was so

Apparently I asked him to speak up 4 times and there may be some criticism about
this. I reminded Chris that there were the video recording which as far as I knew had
sound and it should be possible to ascertain what anyhow things were done and said.

Apparently there is also some criticism about the way I bade the families a happy
Christmas on the Christmas adjournment.

Typed at 17.25 - 17.50
