                             AIREDALE HEALTH AUTHORITY
            /:i‘                                                    Airedale General Hospital
         / ^ E T O N 52511          Your Ref:
        / ^ irie s on this                                               Skipton Road
       ' j be m ade to              O ur   Ref:   JGH/iJPS                     Steeton
                                                                                     Keighley

     'jps ..J..Stafford                                                                         W est Yorkshire
                                                                                         ,           B D 20 6 T D

.y   460


Dr S L Popper                                                                  ' 23 August 1989
HM Coroner
Medical Legal Centre                                         _■ ,
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD
S3 7ES



Dear Dr Popper

ANTHONY DAVID BLAND - DOB 21.09.70
AT PRESENT ON WARD 3, AIREDALE GENERAL HOSPITAL
                                ;

Thank you for your very full and frank conversation today.

In view of what you told me about the police attitude, we have not withdrawn
artificial feeding in the unfortunate patient we discussed.

Please find enclosed photocopies of two articles about persistent vegetative
state after brain damage. The article from the Lancet in 1972 was the first
thorough description of the syndrome and a proposal for a satisfactory name,
which is now widely used. The second article is a statement of the American
Academy of Neurology's attitude to the care and management of patients with
persistent vegetative state and it is an attitude which I, myself, would want
for me or my family or any patients with whom I am in contact.

Our patient's family were satisfied that there had been no sign of improvement
and feel very strongly that prolonging this boy's life by artificial feeding is.
no longer justifiable. They do not, however, want to see me get into trouble
over it and so they are prepared to continue seeing him being" fed but do not
wish us to treat any infections, should they arise.

 I vould be interested to hear your comments on the American Neurologists'
 statement and would also be interested to hear what the local police think
 about it as well. This is an important and distressing subject and it would be
 helpful if there were clear guidelines to help doctors and relatives deal with
 the problem.

 I look forward to hearing from you in the near future.

 Thank you once again.

 Kind regards

 Yours sincerely




 J G HOWE
 Consultant Physician
