8th May 1997

Tel call with Mr Groston.

I told him that I had looked at Mr. Bichard’s evidence but could not make out from
that on what 1 had based my question regarding the lost video . Mr. G said that he
had found from reading the transcripts that I had said more about the tapes I think he
said on 13 March I referred to these tapes and the juries requests to see evidence of
video footage of the leppings lane end. Apparently at ?C539 there is a compilation of
about 16 minut es of the tape but I had indicated that I thought it was poor quality.
 This apparently is the tape which is missing It was shown to the Jury and he could see
 I think bits of it on the videos of the proceedings.

He indicated that he had prepared a report but of course said nothing of what he had
recommended or found and I did not enquire..

We then spoke of the videos I said that we had not disclosed that these were being
made but they were there for a back up for the short hand writers and so that one
could monitor how the inquest were conducted. He asked whether the videos were
secret. 1 said we did not publicise it but there was a camera taking the pictures.

I then phoned him back and said I had thought about the question and to and it was
difficult because it depended how one viewed the matter as to whether it was secret
but I had not made it known that they were being made as they were for a specific
back up purpose. As I understood it however the coroner had allowed access to them
as it seemed tome that in the drama doc. |o m e of the footage relating to the evidence
of (Mr) Glover seemed to be based on the video recording rather than the transcripts.
I assumed therefore that the TV people had had access to them. Mr. G. wondered
whether the lawyers for the families knew about the videos of the proceedings. He
 also wondered whether there was authority to have video in court, and whether the
H.Court knew of this at the judicial re view. I said the matter was not an issue and I
 did not think the H.Court knew. He said he wondered what the present coroner made
 of it. He also wondered whether he ought to mention these to the families as it might
 make a difference if they thought the videos had been made unlawfully. (I had said I
 could not say I was aware of special provisions applying to coroner’s courts.) He was
 concerned that one should not suppress anything so as to avoid suggestions that if one
 had done it once might be doing it again. I said that I thought openness was the word
 and it was a matter entirely for him whether he disclosed these videos but that as far as
 I was concerned I had no objection. They were to monitor the proceeding and to back
 up the short hand writers and to check for errors . The existence of the videos in any
  case seemed to be in the public domain particularly if I was right that Granada had
  access. ( Note not in conversation; If I was right about this the families must surely
  know about this).

  (Note : not in conversation) Openness I think on reflection has to be qualified by
  saying that the person enquiring has a legitimate interest and the matter enquired
  about is relevant and of a nature to fall into the public domain and of course other
  parties confidences or affairs are not improperly disclosed). I can see no reason why
  the video tapes of the inquest cannot be disclosed to people with a legitimate interest
particularly bearing in mind the reason why they were prepared. Whether there^was a
breach of the act prohibiting the filming in court 1 cannot now say as I do not have the
a p p r o p r i a t e legislation and rales to hand. C o r o n e i i d o however had constderable

3             over their own procedure and the purpose of having the record,ngs seem entrre
proper Even if I was wrong in having these videos made they have it seems proved
useful and in any event would not affect the evidence as they are record or what was
said.
