V.           *
                                                                                 STATION

     NAME:            DEBRA. JANE
                      MARTIN

     ADDRESS:


     AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

     OCCUPATION:      POL SC221


     Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
     by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
     it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
     prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
     to be false or do not believe to be true.


        !D: 080589                                                   D J MARTIN (SIGNED)



                 I a.i\ Debra Jane MARTIN and I live at the above address.   I am

                 single.   My occupation is a                 I am also a Special Police

                 Constable number 221 based at VJOODSEATS (E2 Sub-division) of South

                 Yorkshire Police.

                 On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I paraded for duty at 9.00am

                 (0900) at HILLSBOROUGH Football stadium where there was abriefing for

                 all officers involved in the semi-final between LIVERPOOL and

                 NOTTINGHAM FOREST.   The briefing was at 9.45am (0945).

                 At 10.20am (1020) I returned to the gym at the football ground for a

                 separate briefing for special constables.

                 At 10.35am (1035) I left HILLSBOROUGH stadium to patrol HERRIES ROAD

                 SOUTH to stop the parking of cars by fans on the hard shoulders.         I

                 did this with S.C.206 BAKER.     We continued to patrol HERRIES ROAD

                 SOUTH, which is a very long road, until about 1.10pm (1310) that

                 afternoon.   At this time we had orders to go to PENISTGNE RD to cover

                 traffic outside the main entrance gates for the NOTTS FOREST fans.

                 At this point I saw about 6 ticket touts.     I saw them selling tickets

                 and money changing hands.      I also saw numerous fans both Liverpool




                                                                                              49
MARTIN                DEBRA JANE


fans and Notts Forest, who were obviously drunk, although at this

stage they were behaving reasonably.

At about 2 .45pm (1445) I started to make my way to the LEPPINGS LANE

entrance, as I passed what I think is the main entrance to

KOP, the turnstiles were shut down.

At about 2.50pm (1450) there was trouble at these turnstiles when the

Notts Forest fans, realising they were being locked out, were trying

any way they could to get in, this included paying money to the

turnstiles stewards and trying to buy tickets frcm the touts.     The

crowd became very abusive and angry and I had to assist in the

removal of fans frcm the ground.   I was on the road side and the

police inside were passing fans back out over the turnstiles and

there was a very large number of fans trying to get in still, so much

that mounted officers and their horses were being pushed up against

the wall.   The next thing I know is a large blue gate was opened and

a large majority of the crowd pushed their way into the ground.      I

found myself being carried along with the crowd unable to resist.        A

mounted officer grabbed my collar but had to let go, because he would

hava been pulled from his horse. I got pushed to the floor, but I

managed to get back to my feet by pulling myself up a man's back.        I

then remember opening my eyes and finding myself inside the ground,

at the bottom of the Spion Kop and the gates had been shut behind

me.   I asked the steward on the gate to let me out, but at first he

refused, it was only when a mounted officer, the same one who had

triad to help me a few moments earlier, put his horse up against the

gata, he opened it a short way and let me out.

One a outside I found myself surrounded by drunken fans, screaming

abuse, and the area covered by police. An officer used my radio to

try and call for back up but to no avail because the channel was
MARTIN                DEBRA    JANE


full of static.   My radio was handed back to me and I ran to the

lappings Lane end of the ground.      Ambulances and police cars were

rushing to that end of the ground.     When I got to the Leppings Lane

end of the ground I saw a vast crowd outside the turnstiles trying

to get in, it must have been about four times larger than the crowd

I laft at the other end, so that would mean the crowd at the Spion

Kop end numbered about 1000 plus and I would estimate about 4000

outside Leppings Lane end.

I can't really remember how, but somehow I got inside the ground,

through the large blue gate which was open, and I ended up on the
                                                                        I
pitch.   I did not go through the tunnel.

Onea on the pitch I saw a lot of people who were obviously injured

and I can remember a man caning up to me shouting, "THERE'S TWO DEAD

YOU BASTARD". I then saw people who appeared to be dead.      People

wera screaming and shouting and ambulances were driving onto the pitch.

I assisted other police officers with dead and injured people and

helped to take them on stretchers to the gym, and I can remember

seeing officers frcm E2 (WOODSEATS) everywhere.

I took about 6 dead to the gym, as well as many injured and whilst I

was trying to revive a young boy I remember something hitting me on

the back of my head, but I didn't really notice until much later when

I found a large swelling.     I could see many bodies being put on the

pitch, some of them appeared to be dying.      I lost count of the number

of bodies I helped carry into the gym.                                       t

I helped carry a young boy into the gym frcm the pitch nearby.     He

stopped breathing so I gave him the kiss of life, and heart massage

and a doctor also helped.     He started breathing and opened his eyes,

his only word was "MOM' and then he died.

At 4.06pm (1606) Dr CURPEN certified death and I stayed with him.        I




                                                                                 51
MAPTIN                DEBRA JANE


would describe him as white male, 5'6-5'7, 14-15 yrs, slim build and

brown hair, with a cut under his chin.   He had slightly crooked

teeth, there were no other marks on the body.   He was wearing a white

shirt, green sweat shirt, beige trousers, white socks, white Reeboks

and green and white boxer shorts. He had a gold metal chain with a

gold horn, a bus ticket, a train ticket and an entrance ticket.     He

had no identification or money.    I later found out the number given

to this boy was 51.

I stayed with the body and at 5.20am (0520) Sunday 16 April

(160489) an ambulance arrived and I went with the body together with

DC PONT and GRIFFITHS to the Medico Legal Centre, WATER LANE,

Sheffield.   I stayed with the body until he was stripped and details

taken frcm me.   I finally went off duty at 6.30 (0630) on Sunday

16 April 1989 (160489).

At about 6.30pm (1830) Monday 8 May 1989 (080589) I saw PC's MORGAN

and GODWIN frcm West Midlands Police at my home.   PC ? showed to me a

partially completed report of death form that I identified as being

the form I filled in whilst in charge of the body, details of name

and other personal details are missing because there had been no

identification made by the time I went hone.    All I can say is this

form relates to body 51.   I now know this is Kevin David WILLIAMS,

b. 27.5.73
    % MARTIN              DEBRA JANE


                                         D J MARTIN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   080589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
    «                                                                     STATION

NAME:          DEBRA JANE
               MARTIN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE JF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:    DENTAL NURSE


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.




•
DATED: 120789                                               D J MARTIN (SIGNED)



           Further to my previous statement dated 8th May 1989 (080589), on 12th

           July 1989 (120789) I was shown a video tape Reference Number (VRM/2)

           Exhibit (      ) buy PS/PS MDSS and KILLOCH of the West Midlands

           Police.

           At tape reference number 0249 and 0305 (Real Time) I can identify

           mysalf on the video located in the centre right of the picture.

           At this point I was engaged with the deceased Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS

           (NA51).

^          Although the camera shows a clear shot of myself you cannot see the

           deceased who is out of camera shot.   At this stage the body would be

           at my feet and to the right of the screen as you look at it.
    t MAP TIN               DEBRA JANE                          2


                                            D J MARTIN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     J KILLOCH PS 6818




                                                                    55
       I                                                                STATION

NAME            DEBRA JANE
                MARTIN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     POL SC221      DENTAL NURSE


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050989                                               D J MARTIN (SIGNED)



           Further to my statement dated 8th May 1989 (080589), I would like to

           add that today I have been shown photographs by WPC KELLY and WPC

           SNAPE of the West Midlands Police, relating to the Hillsborough

           Inquiry.

           In the photographs Ref No TT1/28, TT1/31, TT1/32, TT1/30, DM1/4,

           TT1/29, I am able to identify the person receiving first aid as the

           deceased Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS (body 51) whom I refer to in my

           original statement.



           D J MARTIN SC 221 (Sgd)

                                                              D J MARTIN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

             TIME              DATE:   050989

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:        G KELLY PC9639

OFFICERS SIGNATURE           G KELLY
        r                                                                 STATION

NAME:           DEBRA JANE
                MARTIN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: I                       ]

OCCUPATION:     DENIAL NURSE   POL SC221


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


    DATED: 170390                                             D J MARTIN (SK3®D)



            Further to my previous statements I would like to add the following,

            On Saturday 15th A]pril 1989 (150489) I worked in the capacity of

            Special Constable at the F.A. Semi-Final football match between

            Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. which was being played at

            the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.

            My recollection of the events of that day are vague and confused.

            As a result of the disaster I was prescribed medication by my Doctor

            to assist me to sleep.    I was really upset by the whole incident and

£           was on medication for about a week.    The result being that I was in a

            state of what I can only describe as semi-consciousness.    I felt like

            a 'Zanbie.'

            As a result of this I feel that my memory, my recollection of that day

            is possibly inaccurate.    I am unsure of what time I arrived at the

            Leppings Lane entrance to the ground or even how I came to be on the

            pitch but I did.

            By time I got onto the pitch it seemed to be mass confusion, there

            were police officers and supporters all over the place.    I could see

            people who appeared to be injured and possibly dead, lying on the
MARTIN                 DEBRA JANE                                         2


pitch.   I was in a state of shock.   I didn't know what to do but my

natural instinct was to help these people in the best way that I could.

I can't describe to you in any detail my exact movements over the next

half an hour or so.    I know that I approached several people lying on

the pitch and assisted if possible.    I did not give any of these

people mouth-to-mouth or heart massage.

I decided that there were enough people dealing with the situation

at the Leppings Lane end of the ground and made my way to the Spion

Kop end of the ground.

I could see that bodies were being carried from the Leppings Lane end

to the Spion Kop end of the ground and then being placed on the pitch.

I assisted to carry a number of dead and injured people from the Spion

Kop end of the pitch, into the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary

had been set up.   I was talking to seme of these people, comforting

then and trying to reassure them.     I am unable to describe any of

these people in the detail.

By this time I really was in a state of shock, I couldn't believe what

I was seeing.   I seemed to be on automatic pilot.   My memories are

very confused and distorted.

I can recall carrying a youth who I now know to be, Kevin Daniel

WILLIAMS from the pitch to the gymnasium.     He was the last person that

I assisted in carrying.    I first saw Kevin WILLIAMS lying on the pitch

near to the goal area at the Spion Kop end of the ground.     At that

stage he wasn't on a hoarding or a stretcher.

I remember that there were several people around where he was lying.

 I can't recall anyone giving him mouth to mouth.    With the help of

other people, who I can't recall, Kevin WILLIAMS was placed .onto a

 hoarding and carried into the gymnasium.    Someone instructed me to

 stay with the body.




                                                                              58
MARTIN                DEBRA JANE                                          3


I didn't know what to do.    I didn't want to believe the boy was dead.

I didn't know if he was dead or not but I decided that I had got to

attempt to revive him.    I started to give him mouth-to-mouth but

satiaone, I don't know who, touched me on the shoulder and told me he

was dead.    By this time my head had gone, I wasn't aware of what I was

doing or what was really happening.

At 16.06 hours (1606) Doctor CURPEN examined Kevin WILLIAMS and

certified him dead.

I rananber a detective officer, DC Paul MDNFREDI helping me to

complete the GEN 18 form (sudden death form).

I stayed with the body until the early hours of Sunday 16th April

(160489) when I escorted Kevin WILLIAMS, who at this stage had not

been identified, to the Medico Legal Centre.

I identified the body by the number allocated, which in the case was

Number 51.    I had no further dealings with Kevin WILLIAMS.

This statement is made to the best of ray recollection and I believe it

to be the truth.    However, under the circumstances I cannot be

positive that the details are accurate. I have been quite badly

affected by the whole incident and I am trying to erase it from ray

map Dry.

I have marked on a plan of the pitch (Reference D.J.M.l) the

approximate location where I first came into contact with the

deceased, Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS.

D J Martin
          MARTIN              DEBRA JANE


                                              D J MARTIN SIGNED

  STATEMENT TAKEN
            PLACE:

            TIME:           DATE:   170390

  WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:   WPS 7844 APPLETON

  OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     JULIE APPLETON




: •




                                                                  60
