     J

                                                                           STATION

                ROGER GRAHAM    STUART
                QUARTLEY

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 30

OCCUPATION:    ANAESTHETIST (DOCTOR)


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 121089                                              ROGER QUARTLEY (SIGNED)



           Qualification:- MBChB Sheffield 1984 (000084)

                         - Diploma of Anaesthesia London 1987 (000087)

           Present Post: - Locum Registrar in Anaesthetics, Royal Hallamshire

         Hospital, Sheffield.

         Statement of my recollection of events of 15th April 1989 (150489) in

         connection with the Hillsborough disaster.

           I initially heard of the occurrence on the radio at approximately 1505

           (1505) whilst I was on call at the Northern General Hospital after

         which I attended the accident and emergency department to see if I

         could be of any assistance.       I made my way to the resuscitation room

           at about 1515 (1515), in which I saw the consultant in accident and

         emergency attempting to resuscitate an obviously hypoxic patient,

         along with an ambulance man who was performing external cardiac

         massage.

           I took over from the consultant and artificially ventilated the

         patient with 100% oxygen.       The victim was of heavy build with short

         cropped dark hair.

         Having ascertained my identity, the casualty consultant had me
                      ROGER   GRAHAM STUART                               2


relieved and asked that I attend the ground itself, along with a

casualty officer, we departed for the ground by ambulance, which was

loaded with medical supplies, at approximately 1530 (1530).

On arrival at Hillsborough we were led to the North West Comer of the

ground, where there was a young victim lying on an advertising

hoarding, with several non medically qualified people in attendance

who were attempting resuscitation.    The victim was quite intensely

cyanosed and not making any effective respiratory efforts.    The

casualty officer cannulated a vein and administered fluid whilst I

intubated the trachea and artificially ventilated the lungs, initially

with an 'Ambu' bag using air, until an oxygen cylinder could be brought.

During all this time, external cardiac massage had been administered.

Ones venous access, and the airway had been secured, we carried the

victim on the hoarding to an awaiting ambulance where an ambulance

man took over artificial ventilation and once I was sure he was

competant, the ambulance drove off.

I then asked a policeman where the seriously injured were located and

was escorted to an adjacent gymnasium in which the fatally injured

were also located.   By the time I arrived, the injured all seemed to

have medical attendants, so I thought I might be better employed back

at the Northern General so I obtained a lift back in a departing

ambulance.

Aboard this ambulance was a youth of 12-15 yrs, a male, who was

suspected of having sustained internal injuries.   He was also

cyanosed, but conscious, although drowsy and able to maintain his

airway.   I administered high flow oxygen via a face mask and attempted

to palpate a major pulse, which is difficult on a fast moving

ambulance.   His cardiac output seemed well maintained and his colour

improved with the oxygen.
                    ROGER   GRAHAM STUART                                  3


I am not sure what time we returned to the Northern General A & E

Department but over the ambulance radio, it was declared that the

Northern General Casualty Dept was full, and further victims should

attend the Royal Hallamshire hospital.

The young victim was taken into the department and was attended by a

doctor, so I went to look where my services would be of most use.      I

spotted an operating department assistant in attendance of a male

youth, about 16 years of age, who was attempting resuscitation.     The

youth was not breathing and had no cardiac output, and was

receiving 100% oxygen by face mask and external cardiac massage.     I

took over the airway and intubated him and performed artificial

ventilation of the lungs.   Further assistance then arrived in the form

of a further operating department assistant, a junior doctor and a

consultant in orthopaedics, Mr GETTY.    I instructed one of the ODA's

to carry on with ventilating the lungs whilst I and the other two

medical attendants attempted to establish venous access.The patient

by this time had an ECG monitor attached and was seen to be in

asystole, so the junior doctor gave intra-cardiac adrenaline.

Eventually I managed to estblish venous access by way of the right

 subclavian vein and through this we admimsterd fluid, bicarbonate and

 atropine and cardiac output was re-established.   The patients colour

 improved dramatically and we arranged transfer to intensive care, on

 which, we arrived at approximately 1630 (1630).

 By this time the pulse was weakening and the heart rate was slowing so

 further resuscitation was carried out under the supervision of Dr G

 CLARK, Consultant Anaesthetist.   Despite re-establishing a cardiac

 output, his heart rate again slowed and the complexes on the ECG

 widened and after about 20 minutes he proved to be unresponsiveto any

 further resuscitative measures and he died.
                               ROGER   GRAHAM   STUART                             4


       At this stage, there were two or three patients on intensive care, all

        of whom had assistance in the form of anaesthetists, so under Dr

        CLARK'S instruction I telephoned for further anaesthetic help in the

        form of Drs APPLEYARD, SHERRY, WELCHEW and STOCK all of whom I was

        able to contact.

       When I returned to ITU there were about 8 patients all of whom needing

        artificial ventilation but there were insufficient doctors present in

        order that each patient had a doctor permanently in attendance.      I

        picked an unattended male youth of 12-14 years (Lee NICHOL) who was

        already being ventilated and I established a central venous pressure

        line and a radial artery line.    On direct measurement, his blood

       pressure was seen to be high, so some intravenous glyceryl trinitrate,

       which controlled it.     Unfortunately, despite aggressive treatment, Lee

       NICHOL showed no sign of inprovement and was clinically brain dead and

       once his family had been identified and the situation explained, and

       the necessary tests had been performed he was officially

       pronounced brain dead after a few days.



                                                         ROGER QUARTLEY SIGNED

S^TEMENT TAKEN
 ~       PLACE

         TIME:               DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:        JULIE APPLETON PS7844
