                                                          4th October 1999



Mr. Michael J.C. Burgess,
Hon Secretary,
Coroners’ Society o f England & Wales,




Dear Michael,

                   Re: Hillsborough Adlinaton v Duckenfield & Murray

Thank you very much for the time and trouble you have taken and for your letter o f 1st
October 1999.

I will send a copy o f the letter to Chris Dom es and upon his return will discuss the
matter with him.

Once more thank you for your thoughts and advice.




Yours sincerely,




S. L. Popper.
From the Hon. Secretary                                      CORONERS’ SOCIETY OF ENGLAND & WALES

Michael J. C.Burgess
 H.M. Coroner for Surrey - & - Solicitor o f the Supreme Court




1 October, 1999


Dr. S. Popper.




Dear Stefan,

Re: Hillsborough Disaster

I refer to our telephone conversation of this morning and I would thank you for sending me the various
papers the other day.

As I suggested to you on the telephone, I believe that it could be difficult, if not impossible, for you to
enter into the detailed correspondence that is being asked of you.

You retired as coroner following the judicial review proceedings and in accordance with the practice and
coroners’ rules you passed to your successor coroner all papers and documents relative to your time in
office. In effect, it is the present holder of the office at any time who has to respond to inquiries and be
responsible for the maintenance of coroner records.

 Further, the indemnity as to costs in proceedings which coroners (from the 27th September 1999) enjoy
 under the provisions of the Access to Justice Act 1999, can only extend to those holding office and would
 not, I suggest, indemnify you against any order for costs, damages or other expenses of proceedings
 should you, by your correspondence, give rise to further inquiry and/or judicial proceedings whether
 against or involving you.

 I believe that the right response for you to give would be one in which you acknowledge the various
 papers from Ms. Adlington and, whilst respecting her request for information, regret that you cannot take
 this matter any further as you are no longer in office, and the documents are within the possession and
 ownership of the present coroner and any inquiries should be directed to him.

 It may be that you should pass to Chris Dorries a copy of this letter and a copy may also need to be sent
 with the correspondence to the South Yorkshire County Council so that they are appraised of the situation.

 Finally, although it may be argued that you gave assistance to the judicial inquiry of LJ. Stewart Smith,
 that inquiry was of a different kind and standing than the form of inquiries which are now being made of
 you. Thus, I suggest, there is no further assistance that you can usefully or properly give in this instance.

 I hope that this letter is of assistance.

 With kind regards,

A Ynnrs sincerely.
                                                          27th September 1999


Mr. Michael J.C. Burgess,
H on Secretary,
Coroners’ Society o f England & Wales,




Dear Michael,

                     Re: Hillsborough Adlinaton v Duckenfield & Murray


It was nice to speak to you again today though I did not think that I would have to
trouble you again about Hillsborough.

I enclose a copy o f a letter from Ms. A. Adlington dated 8th September 1999 together
with the enclosures except for the letter from Trevor Hicks o f 13th November 1990
which was not enclosed and only pages 30 -32 o f the ruling o f the Magistrate to save
you some reading.

Enclosed then are:

Copy o f pages 30 -32 o f the stipendiary Magistrate ruling
Copy letter from Mervyn Jones dated 15th November 1990
Copy letter from Stan Beechey dated 28th March 1991
Copy oflnsp White additional points arising linked to his initial statement.
Copy Statement oflnsp. White dated 25th February 1991

I al so enclose a copy o f my proposed reply which I have marked as a draft so that you
may feel free to make any suggestions that you wish.

I had hoped to discuss the matter with Chris Dorries but he is away for some three
weeks. I would like to get this out o f the way as soon as possible.

I would value any comments or advise you may have for me.
I will be out during the day tomorrow but should be in the evening. I also expect to be
in for most o f the morning on Wednesday and Thursday. I am usually contactable in
the evenings.

I am sorry there is a little more reading then I said because I forgot the enclosures
when I was speaking with you.

I look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible.




Yours sincerely,




S. L. Popper
