                                                          23rd October. 1999

C.P. Domes,
HM Coroner,
The Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery St.,
Sheffield,
S3 7ET


Dear Chris,

                                     R.e: Hillsborough

Thank you for phoning me last night re the draft letter to Miss A. Adlington. I
appreciate your comments and have made the corrections to the last paragraph on
page one. I am sorry that there were these grammatical errors. I have also taken your
advise re the final paragraph.

We agreed that it would be better if I sent the letter and felt that there was no risk in
doing so.

I have made a number of very small textual amendments (lower case for ‘coronal’ and
added the word ‘may’ in the second caveat on page 1).

I enclose a copy of the letter I have posted to Miss A. Adlington.

Once again, thank you for your help.



 Yours sincerely,



 S. L. Popper.
                                                         20th October. 1999

C.P. Dorries,
HM Coroner,
The Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery St.,
Sheffield,
S3 7ET


Dear Chris,

                                    Re: Hillsborough


Further to our conversation last night I enclose a copy of a draft letter I have prepared
which I would value your comments on.

You were right that Pauline is away but Julie very kindly looked up the letter from Mr.
Brummell to Mervyn which is set out in LJ Stuart Smith scrutiny on page 213 and
found it amongst the correspondence. Although I cannot say for sure it may be that
copies of the letters from Mervyn and Stan Beechey enclosed by Ann Adlington are
with the papers but one would have to make a search for these. If they could be
found it would dispose of this issue too.

The draft letter is written as from me but it could be adapted so that it came from
yourself. When you have had an opportunity to consider it please ring me so that we
can decide whether it is suitable or needs amendment and how the information in the
light of Michael’s opinion should be conveyed to Ann Adlington.

A good deal of time has passed since she wrote to me and I would like to deal with
this now as quickly as possible.

Thanks for your help. I am glad you had a good holiday.


Yours sincerely,


 S. L. Popper
  draft
                                                               October. 1999

,i f                          tr,
               ^ y & 'lA ry    qj   tS^ CXlyM/* f^}'&))^-^

  Ms. Ann Adlington,
  HFSG,
  1st Floor,
  Central Buildings,
  41 North John St.,
  Liverpool,
  L2 6RR.



  Dear Ms. Adlington,

              The Hillsborough Disaster : Adlington v Duckenfield & Murray

  Thank you for your letter of 8th September 1999. I am sorry about the delay in
  replying. As I indicated in my letter to you of 21st June 19991 was extremely
  reluctant to get involved any further in matters relating to the Hillsborough Disaster
  and that remains my position.

   Please read this letter subject to the following caveats:

   1. The ravages of age and the passage of time have affected my recall and any thing
      that I say must be read subject to the proviso that I may not be recalling folly or
      correctly.
   2. I do not have the time or inclination to travel to Sheffield to search through the
      Coronal papers even if the Coroner were prepared to allow me to do so. Again this
      affects the possible accuracy of what I say.

   1. Disclosure of statem ent to witnesses.

   Turning to the two letters you have forwarded to me namely one of 15th Nov 1990 to
   Silverman Livermore signed by Mervyn Jones and the other to Mrs S Stringer of 28th
   March 1991 signed by Stan Beechey. Mr. Hick’s letter of 13.11.90 was not enclosed.

  ^ It is difficult to be certain but the shape of the letters look familiar bat I cannot say
   with any certainty that I did see them. A search of the correspondence might reveal this .
   fesaeffeis. Without documentary support I cannot now recall with any certainty when I



                                                     1
first understood that West Midland Police^had been appointed by South Yorkshire
Police.

2. Inspector White.

I do not feel inclined to take up your invitation to comment in detail on this matter but
as far as I can recall I did not hold other such private conversations with the parties
you mention.

3. Editing of statements.

A copy of the letter set out on page 213 of Lord Justice Stuart Smith Scrutiny report
Cm 3878 is with the Coronal papers.


I think that my involvement with Hillsborough should now come to an end,as£i=der
             be calied as-a-wfcnoaar I trust that you will respect this.



Yours sincerely,



S. L. Popper.




                                             2
