HILLSBOROUGH DISASTS3.


Before I start with the Inquests proper so to speak there axe

one or two remarks which I feel I would like to make, these

are general comments and the first one is of course to say that

in common with anybody else who haa been in any way associated

with indeed not associated with this incident, I very very

much regret the tragic loss of      which haa occurred and

I fully understand what a terrible, well I don't fully understand

but I try to understand what a terrible shock and loss and pain

this must be for all the families involved and it isn't of course

helped by the fact that in addition to losing loved ones, they

have to have the trauma such as it is of Inquests and other

investigations and inquiries and the inevitable delay which

occurs in a major disaster situation such as this.

I make no comment whatsoever about the incident it;jelf or what

happened before the match or around that time because of course

those questions will he not only the subject of a Judicial inquiry

which we are all familar with now, but may well also have to

be investigated within the scope of the Coroner's Inquestion, but

I do want to say this, that after the events, I have nothing but

praise for the way the temporary mortuary was organised, the allocation

of officers to help with the identification and to deal with the

very traumatic but essential work of ensuring that one knew who

one was talking about and it is really due to the extraordinary

good work which was done that it was possible to identify people

as fast as in fact it turned out to be possible, and I want it understood,

speaking for myself as Coroner, I have had the utmost help in trying

to perform my Job with bfcese deaths from all the police officers,

from the most senior ones down to the most Junior ones, and in

particular, I want to mention the Junior officers because it was

they who had to be allocated to the body, it was they who had to

accompany it, it was they who had to do the identification, it was
HILLSBOROIGH DISASTER.



Before I start with the Inquests proper so to speak there are

one or two remarks which I feel I would, like to make, these

are general comments and the first one is of course to say that

in common with anybody else who has been in any way associated

with indeed not associated with this incident, I very very

much' regret the tragic loss of like which has occurred and

I fully understand what a terrible, well I don't fully understand

but I try to understand what a terrible shock and loss and pain

this must be for all the families involved and it isn't of course

helped by the fact that in addition to losing loved ones, they

have to have the trauma such as it is of Inquests and other

investigations and inquiries and the inevitable delay which

occurs in a major disaster situation such as this.

I make no comment whatsoever about the incident itaelf or what

happened before the match or around that time because of course

those questions will be not only the subject of a judicial inquiry

which we are all familar with now, but may well also have to

be investigated within the scope of the Coroner's Inquestion, but

I do want to say this, that after the events, I have nothing but

praise for the way the temporary mortuary was organised, the allocation

of officers to help with the identification and to deal with the

very traumatic but essential work of ensuring that one knew who

one was talking about and it is really due to the extraordinary

good work which was done that it was possible to identify people

as fast as in fact it turned out to be possible, and I want it understood,

speaking for myself as Coroner, I have had the utmost help in trying

to perform my job with bfcese deaths from all the police officers,

from the most senior ones down to the most junior ones, and in

particular, I want to mention the junior officers because it was

they who had to be allocated to the body, it was they who had to

accompany it, it was they who had to do the identification, it was
that's pretty hard, not only for the relatives but also for the

officers, and I think one must acknowledge them.

I +.TrinV it is only right as well for me to say that we couldn’t

have performed the organisation method of moving the bodies

backwards from the hospitals to the temporary mortuary for

identification and then all the bodies to the Medico Legal Centre

if the ambulance service hadn't volunteered, not only crew

and vehicles but also organise themselves so that they dealt with

all the transportation, not a hitch, no problems, none at all,

and I am exceedingly grateful to them for their efforts in that

respect.
As you will of course appreciate, this building which is a purpose

built building, and which houses not only the Coroner's Court

but houses Pathological   Departments but also the Mortuary, has

a substantial capacity but we are not normally expecting to deal

with numbers of such as we had on Saturday, but it's right I

 think to say, that this building was an expensive venture for

 Sheffield when it was built, but in a situation such as this, I

 think it     been justified, because it is exceedingly unlikely

 that we would have been able to deal with the deaths in the manner

 in which we were, and with the speed as' which we were, because

 one of our prime objectives has been to minimise the delay

 to relatives, so that they can proceed with their funerals, we

 cannot undo the events, but having been faced with that situation

 I wanted, as far as possible, to minimise unnecessary trauma

 to the family and as I have just said, if we hadn't had the facilities

 and I       the people, the City Councillors who took the decision

 years ago to put this building up, they may now feel that they were

 in fact justified, $>ut of course it's very satisfactory to have

 a building, you also need the st-ff to actually carry out the

 post mortems, and I have to thank the teams of pathologists, and

  technicians, and other members of staff who spent a great deal

  of time, but who completed all the post mortem work in order to

  enable me to begin opening the:Inquests this afternoon.     I owe them
we deal with deaths all the time, as you can imagine, but when

you have an influx of-numbers such as on Saturday our capacity was

exceeded in fact, and if it hadn't been for the fact that both

the hospitals in Sheffield willingly agreed to take what I will

describe as the normal cases, not the disaster cases, and dealt with

them from a mortuary point of view, I'm not talking about the work

which they did in casualty, where they have been dealing with the living,

which we all know about, but without their co-operation, their help,

we wouldn't have been able to do what has been done, and I think

I want again that to be understood and acknowledged, and whilst

I am on that, I think it is only right to say that it's very easy to

overlook when we have a major disaster of this nature, we are looking

at such a lot of numbers, and we are, two things happen.   First of all

we forget that other people who lose loved ones, some of them in

tragic circumstances as well, they don't get reports because they

are 'one offs', they don't make an impact on the media, but they

cause exactly the same amount of pain and loss and sorrow as losing a loved

 one at Hillsberaugh, and the other, the corollary to this is that it is

 very easy to overlook the fact that because there are such a lot of

 numbers we are so bemused by the technicalities, by the enormity of

 events that we forget the individuals, and that really for each family,

 we are thinking of one or two, as the case may be losses, and it's they

 who we should have in mind as well as the overall problem, and finally

 as I am sure all of you know, there have been very very many individuals

 and asociations who have spent an enormous amount of time councelling,

 being with, sitting, helping the relatives in their distres.     Some of

 the people spent hours and it is exceeding draining to do that, and

 although in a sense they were dealing with the living, and my job as Coroner

 is to deal with the dead, I do want to acknowledge the fact that people

 have been, I am certain, a great support.   I am not mentioning any

 names, or even organisations, I am just saying it in general terms,

 and of course I would also like to thank my own officers, who have put

 in a tremendous amount of work in relation to this matter.
SIR H&BHY LIVEBMOBE.



Mr. Coroner, I am grateful for your kind expressions of sympathy and

I will see that my clients and the other bereaved families are

made fully aware of your sensitive remarks.   I would also like

to add my thanks to the officers who helped in the delicate

task of the removal of the bodies and the process of identification.

All the staff who assisted in expediting the necessary process

which resulted in us being here at this moment in point of time

and I would like to thank again on behalf of all my clients and

the bereaved families, all the people and organisations of Sheffield

who have assisted th<* bereaved families since this terrible tragedy

occurred.

Mr. Coroner Liverpool at the moment is a heartbroken city.    The people

are upset they are disturbed, they are sa.d and they are also angry.

They are angry not only that such a tragedy has occurred, but also

because of the dreadful and untotally insensitive remarks made

yesterday by the President of U&F.A. The tragedy will never be
                    by the
forgetton or forgiven/ people of Mersyside, nor will t{je remarks

of Msr.G?tcCf>£}Ctf?   however many times he may apologise.

Thank you sir.
OPENIHG OF THE INQUEST OH THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.



The position as you know, is that until the Inquest is being

completed I cannot issue a final certificate to the Registrar

and as a result it isn't possible to issue, the Registrar General

or the Registrars cannot issue a death certificate as such.     It

is my intention, in the course of the next few days, to write to

each individual family, a letter, and if you wish I can write

to you in the case of your clients, and we will be enclosing

with that letter a document which we have titled An Interim

Certificate of the Pact of Death and subject to the proviso

that the cause of death has to be formally proved at the

Inquest we will disclose on that document the cause of death

as given to us by the pathologist.    This is not entirely

satisfactory but it's the best we can do.    The Inquest

itself of course, I haven't yet determined when I will be

resuming, nor have I determined it's form, nor have I finally

determined whether the Inquest should be before or after
    j "   C&'CJ. '&J' —
the tgatetional inquiry but it is almost certain that it will

be after the judicial inquiry and that is why I said that

there will be a considerable delay because I have no

control over the judicial inquiry and to that extent I

am in Justice Taylor's hands but he does understand, he

knows the problem in concluding Inquests cause.

SIB HAIRY LIVERMORE.

Mr. Coroner, what is worrying my clients, the families is that they

are anxious to bring their children, husbands home and have them

buried, now when is that going to be possible?

In the case of your clients, now as soon as you wish.      This is the

\4iole purpose of the exercise so that the bodies can be moved and

that the burials can take place.     I have had a letter from the

Police Authority which I requested, and they have no objection to

the release of the bodies and I am going to admit that letter

as documentary evidence in every case.
                                 -   2   -



Q.   So that the bodies can be, they can take them away to-morrow?



A.   Indeed.
