FILE NOTE - HILLSBOROUGH FINANCE.       DATED 29.9.90.

TELEPHONE CALL WITH MR. FRAZER.

I asked him how many sets of the transcripts he had

actually requested.    He said that he had asked for 1 set

from Joan and had pestered her very hard for it.         He had

now also received a further set from Nechells, the sort of

difinitive version.    He did not recollect having

specifically asked for it, though he was quite pleased to

have it, particularly as it contained all the plans.         I

think he would have been willing to pay for this, but it

seems to me that it would be wrong to charge him for two

sets when one was clearly quite sufficient for his needs.

I therefore said that we would be sending him the bill for

one complete set.     He asked that the bill should be

addressed to the Hillsborough Steering Committee, but of

course sent to him
I pointed out to him that the p.m. reports were not

inclulded in the transcripts as I did not think that there

was much point   in sending these out       again.I presumed that

he had all the   copies.   He agreed.

We had a short   chat about the civil       case.It was over and

they were waiting for the judgement.       Apparently the main

hearing by the parties is to sort out the liabilities

scheduled for October in Liverpool surprisingly.

I said that I was going on holiday, and that I was

obviously waiting for the D.P.P. and thinking a little bit

about what to do if the D.P.P. were not to prosecute.            Mr.




JOAACZ
Frazer suggested early retirement!

We talked a little bit about the interim inquest.    Mr.

Frazer said "       it went very well.   We finished within a

few minutes of the scheduled time over a two and a half

week period".   He also confirmed that there were a few

families who had expected more and they were not entirely

happy with the way that he had asked any questions, but he

had deliberately tried to phrase the questions so as to get

some answer rather than to get a negative response, but he

confirmed that the vast majority of families were very

satisfied with the way the inquests had been done.




 JOAACZ
