From Mr M.J. C.Burgess           '                 Coroners’ Society of England & Wales
Hon. Secretary


26 March 1994

+ + Strictly Private + +

Dr.S.Popper,




Dear Stefan,

re: - R.v Yourself, ex p. Stringer

Thank you for your letter of 19 March, with the enclosure. I have not, as yet, had time to
go through it at length. I hope that the final form of the report to the Society will accurately
reflect the judgments as presented.

I trust that you are keeping well.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,




                                               1
                                          19th March 1994


Mr. M. J. C. Burgess,
Hon. Secretary,
Coroners' Society of England and Wales,




Dear Michael,

I have been remiss in sending you a copy of the judgement which I
have had for some time.

Please excuse this. No doubt you will want to check your write
up against the judgement.

I think that it would be better in para 1 on page two of your
letter of 29th November to make it clear that this point had
never been raised in these proceedings prior to that date quoted.

I am also not sure whether it is correct to say that the Interim
report was used extensively by me though I of course had access
to it and the transcripts of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry. I can
remember that the exact way in which Lord Justice Taylor
enquiry should be used was a matter of discussion and raised some
difficulties but without re-reading the transcripts of the
inquests I cannot fully recall the detail.

I think I would prefer to leave it to you to decide how to word
the write up of the case as I would find it rather difficult to
do.




Yours sincerely,




S . L . Popper
From Mr M.J. C.Burgess                             Coroners’ Society of England & Wales
Hon. Secretary


29 November 1993

+ + Strictly Private + +

Dr.S.Popper,




Dear Stefan,

re: - R.v Yourself, ex p. Stringer

Thank you for your letter of 26 November.

Following the judgment in the above case, I thought that you might be interested to note how
I propose to report on the case to the Council and Members of the Society.

As and when I receive a copy of the transcribed judgment, I may well augment and/or correct
it.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,
 /I


 R.v S. Yorkshire Coroner, ex parte Stringer [Hillsborough]

 1-5 November 1993 - Div.Ct., QBD McGowan LJ & Turner J

 This was the application brought by the relatives of 6 victims of the Hillsborough football
 stadium in April 1989. They had applied for the Att.Gen. ’s fia t under S. 13 of the Coroners
 Act 1988 but this had been refused. The response from the Att.Gen. was that there was no
 merit in their application. The matter came before the Div. Ct. ex parte, where leave was
 given. 3 working days before the substantive hearing commenced on 1 November, the
 applicants served revised grounds (including 2 which were new) and their skeleton arguments.


                                               1
29 November 1993                                    Coroners’ Society of England & Wales


There were 4 days (1-4 November) of argument and judgment was delivered at 2pm on the
5 November (it took about two and a half hours to give).

In the course of the presentation of the case and the argument, 2 matters had been decided -

1     It was asserted that there was Mas, that because the coroner was "employed" by
       S.Yorks Cty.C., with whom he also negotiated his salary, and they were also
       principle providers to ambulance and police services that there was a conflict. This
       matter had never (until 26 October 1993) been raised and after the unique position of
       the coroner had been explained, their lordships could find no merit or justification.

2     It was asserted that the action of the police, in opening the gates, amounted to gross
       negligence in the light of the Adamako case, which was decided in March 1993.
       U nlaw ful killing should be left with the jury (it was!) and proper directions given. No
       notice of this application had been given to the police and their lordships were not
       prepared to entertain it. It was indicated that this might be subject of appeal.

Counsel for the respondent coroner made it clear to their lordships that he objected to being
"ambushed" - in effect the late delivery and service (3 working days before the substantive
hearing) of additional grounds and fresh argument after months of quietude made it very
difficult for the respondents to give proper attewntion to the additional matters now being
raised. Whilst their lordships seemed to have a degree of sympathy for this, they made no
substantial comment.

McGowan LJ, delivering the first judgment -

Recited the circumstances in which these and 89 other deaths had occurred, the judicial
inquiry under Taylor LJ (the interim report which was made available to, and extensively
used by the coroner), the progress of the inquests and the way in which evidence was
produced to and examined by the coroner and jury. The appropriate provisions of the
Coroners Act, the Coroners Rules and case law were all examined in depth.

 He then considered each of the grounds of the application in turn.

 Callinp of witnesses- by S. 11(2) CA the coroner -"all persons having knowledge o f those
facts whom he considers it expedient to examine.n The discretion accorded to the coroner is
 based on expediency and far from concluding that the coroner’s exercise of the discretion was
 clearly wrong, we can find no fault but believe that the coroner repeatedly recalled witnesses
 to test and check the evidence being presented.

 His lordship then went through each of the allegations about insufficiency of inquiry and was
 unable to find that any was arguable. In each case, he was able to confirm that the evidence
 presented as complete a picture as it was able to produce but that, because of the scale of the
 disaster there were clear gaps in continuity which could not be filled by the evidence


                                                2
29 November 1993                                    Coroners’ Society of England & Wales


available. The pathologists’ evidence was considered and the way in which there were a
number of "recalls" to put additional points to the pathologists were noted.

It was also clear that when a victim may have been alive at 3.15 pm (the coroner’s notional
"cut-off" time) he was flexible calling additional evidence as circumstances dictated.

Where does the truth lie? I can find no fault with the coroner who made full inquiry. He
is not asked to do more. It is not right to quash the inquest and order a new one.

His lordship commented on the submission, to the Div. Ct. by the applicants of a report
prepared the week before the case (i.e. in week of 25-29 October) by a forensic pathologist
commenting upon pathological evidence though he had only the evidence, original
pathologists’ reports and photographs to guide him. This did not amount to fresh evidence
sufficient to order a new inquest (though he had doubts that the Div. Ct. had any authority
to look at fresh evidence in an application for judicial review).

Addressing the matter of production of documents, the applicants’ counsel had pleaded that
ex p . Peach had been wrongly decided that it was a breach of "natural justice" and should
be argued in a higher court.

On matter of lack of care, although originally pleaded, this had now been withdrawn, the
applicants accepting that at no time was that special relationship in which lack of care could
apply existing between the victims and either the police or emergency services. The
circumstances in which Lack of Care could apply were recited from ex .p. Hicks.

It was then argued by the applicants that as Lack of care had become so circumscribed ^and
narrowed down, that the jury should be allowed to bring in a ”narrative verdict , a
conclusion which ran to a recital of the facts. [Counselfo r the coroner had argued that the
answer to question 3 on the inquisition form already gave the coroner &lor jury the
opportunity to do this.]

The judge looked at S. 11(5) & (6) CA and R.36 & Form 22 CR; he found that the directions
to the jury were full and clear ("impeccable") enabling the jury to complete each of the
numbered questions and to incorporate at question 3 as much or as little detail as thought
necessary and to reach a conclusion therefrom. Narrative verdicts (in question 4 - "the
conclusion") were not considered necessary. The forms were correctly completed.

The applicants wanted the inquest to address the maimer in which the emergency services had
responded. The Taylor inquiry had addressed this and there was no reason bearing in mind
Rr.36(2) and 42 for the inquest to be concerned with this save and in so far as already
addressed.

 There were no grounds and no good purpose for ordering a new inquest. In any event, what
 would be the point? To get a verdict critical of the police - such criticism already appears
 in the Taylor report. To get a verdict critical of the emergency services - this is not justified

                                                3
29 November 1993                                  Coroners’ Society o f England & Wales


and irrelevant. To obtain further examinations of the last moments - I doubt that any more
could be learned and it would be harrowing and last if not for the 90 days of the original
inquest not far short of it. It would require the attendance of many witnesses who are even
now doing their best to shut out the memories of that afternoon. Irrespective of whose fault
it was, four and a half years have now gone by.

There was no merit in quashing the findings and leaving the inquisition without a conclusion.
Application and each of the grounds refused.

Turner J -

I agree. Additional points reinforcing some of the detail of the first judgment.

Costs - no application made by either respondent (for coroner and S.Yorks Municipal
Ambulance Service) but both counsel gave warnings that if the applicants took it to appeal
then this might be reconsidered.

** Copy o f judgment awaited **




                                              4
        4




,>tu.
