DRAFT OF A SPEECH prepared for the end of the Hillsborough Inquest
dinner, by RICHARD PAYNE

There is a nomadic tribe of misfits and eccentrics which sometimes sets
camp on the banks of the limpid fountain in the valley of the river Don.
This little-known people are the coronials. Recently the tribe has
received a Martian visit charged by his homus secretariar with the task
to make enquiry and report on the customs and habits of the tribe.

By good fortune I have come by a copy of the draft report.
The first finding was that in its remote habitat the tribe had evolved
new measures of time. Instead of hours and minutes they used a form of
flexitime called ’el coffeebreak, or ~Poppertime~ and instead of days
they used weeks. Late arrivals were an amusing joke, This agreeable
practice made a contribution to harmony and wellbeing. The encampment
of the tribe was found by an archeologist to have been o~cupied in past
centuries by another people under their great leader remembered as "The
Lordjustice~. These were the "QUECYS" who spoke with tones of authority
and drank milk - or rather milked the drink. The~ask Of the quecy~ had
been to create a great totem, which was made,into many copies ahd sent~
out to the furthest parts of~the valley. ....

The coronia!s as successors of the quecys we~Pe a more humble people, and
many believed that they would simply worship at the totem and send
tribute to the ~Lordjustice". Instead, much to the surprise of
neighbouring natives, the colonials rejected the materials used by the
quecys and set about making their own totem.

For months they laboured, through snow and fog, all the time
overshadowed by the awful spectre of the "summingup". This was not
their own system but was a sign of the totem, which would be taken by
all to be believed. The working practices of the coronials placed great
burdens on their leader, the CORONER. Materials were supplied to him by
a superior class of workers called WEMPS who lived with him in his tent
and sat in the best seats. When the coroner had fashioned the
materials, other inferior workers called the SOLOBARS made their ritual
movements by which they broke off and added pieces to the structure.
The name of the totem was a mystery, and would only be revealed by some
silent watchers, who, when they were on their own laughed loudly at the
coroniais in their own tent in a nearby camp.

A final series of observations in the report of the Martian visitors
related to the character of the individual coronials. They found that
in their isolated circumstances many of the workers had left their
ordinary identities and assumed strange names andprocedures.

The WEMPS were led by their exhibits offer, the MERVJONES, who wore many
suits and a broad smile. He was assisted by the imperious presence of
the STANBEECHEY. Stan, unfortunately, had been drafted to the wrong
camp and mistakenly believed that he was an attendant at a seaside
boating pond. This explained his ]ong silences, broken by suddenly
shouting out a number, ~hen he bel~ieved time was up,


The most interesting WEMP was the MISSPERKiNS who was quite different
from the others, and whose main job was to distract the solobars from
their work.
Finally among the WEMPS there was an interloper from a far-off country,
who spoke a strange dialect and had hollow legs. This was the GRIFFiTHS
WIZARD armed with a magic wand to conjure images discovered by the
archivist RUSSELL.

Among the solobars, the totem makers had   a competition to strike the
loudest clanger. Marks were awarded on a   scale of 10 and accumulated
and at the end of the winter there was a   clear winner, due to be
announced at the great feast as            . Unfortunately, the name on the
Martian report is smudged.

Particular solobars included the computer scientist the venerable
VINCHALE. This distinguished figure was frequently absent from the
camp, on hunting gathering expeditions to support his huge family.

PAUL (Kalashnikov) ISAACS used the totem as a target for his combat
training in whichno prisoners will be taken.

The solobars had their own T.V. star and raconteur appropriately called
the RICHNANNING. His amiable demeanour made many friends and influenced
people, particularly the cameramen gathered outside the camp.

A leading solobar was the TIMKING reputed to be a secret quecy and due
for expulsion. He was mainly known for his elegant wardrobe and cut a
natty figure among the lesser solobars. The Timking was accompanied by
a cheerful bohemian refugee known as the FRANCES.

A social worker infiltrated the solobars during the works, and his
helpful and sympathetic tones were a welcome relief to the other
chisellers, when they could understand what he was saying. This was the
CATCHPOLE.
ANDREA (Chuckles) ADELMAN kept everyone on the edge of their seats, with
an occasional <gasp> incredulous question about whether the totem was in
fact a <gasp> sausage.

Finally among the solobars CHRISTOPHER (Clues) RUSSELL the archivist
became more and more active as the springtime sunshine warmed up the
camp and one suspected he was falling under the influence of Chuckles.

The Martian report ends with a reference to the CORONER which is a
little difficult to decipher. Words that can be made out are Retrial,
Australia, Extradite.
Joking, of course. None of this has anything to do with the inquests.



GUESTS
Advocates would like to thank West Midlands Police for their unfailing
help over the past four months and congratulate and thank the coroner
for holding what has been much more of an enquiry than that which
preceded it and for unfailing good-humour and patience and courage to
keep going on a lonely road.
"" (~D
