     i(^                                          i~h             j   W   r




FILE NOTE DATED 11.9.90. TELEPHONE CALL TO MR. STURTT.

0304-240250       TIME   2 3 minutes, - 10.20 - 10.43 approx.

I discussed with Mr. Sturtt the Hillsborough Inquests, in

particular I wanted to get his feeling about calling the

evidence again which was included in the summary and which

dealt with what in short we refer to as the       'rescue'.

His initial re-action was that we might have to repeat that

because it might go to causation, but upon further

reflection,   he agreed with me that one could certainly

argue that it was post incident and therefore not necessary

to repeat i t .

He confirmed to me that he took the view that this inquest

had the potential of getting completely out of hand and it

was essential that I should keep very afirm control on it

and on the length of the proceedings.       He felt that the

parties had to clearly understand the necessity for

control, that fact that it was with me.        He also drew my

attention to the judgement in his case whether the judge

had pointed out that a line had to been drawn somewhere.

He also pointed out that I should not overlook the fact

that Lord Justice Taylor had had an Inquiry, and that was a

very relevant factor to the extent of the Inquisition.           He

reminded me of his illustration of drama and backdrop, and

indeed he thought that the 'rescue' so to speak could well

be treated as part of the scenery or stageing, whereas the

action was the bit that had to be looked at in greater

detail but even that, on a selective basis.




JOAAFB
I asked him what his view was with regard to meeting with

the lawyers and in particular in camera and excluding Press

e t c . He was not very keen on this.   He said he had met with

the lawyers                             j
                       nquest Review but he put no

restrictions on people there but he did make an order that

the proceedings should not be reported.      He was not keen on

talking to laywers.   He thought it was important to keep a

distance and be rather magisterial.

He confirmed that he would do anything he could to help and

that I should not hesitate to contact him but he was

anxious that I should do it at the office rather than at

his home, and that we should correspond with him at the

office rather than at his home.




JOAAFB
