 /
  /
                H I L L S B O R O U G H          S T E E R I N G         C O M M I T T E E


                              c/o CastCc CfamScrs, Coo(^Street, LivcrpooC L 2 SS9{
                                TcC: 051 2 5 5 0628 T ^\: 051 236 0047 (DX14100




                                                                       Our Reference : FRK/LH


        Dr S L .Popper
        H M Coroner for South Yorkshire
        Medico Legal Centre
        Watery Street
        Sheffield
        S3 7ET




        3rd January 1991



        Dear Si r,

        RE: RESUMED INQUESTS - INDIVIDUAL QUERIES

        We write, further to our letter of the 19th December 1990 to provide you
                ®-nunary of outstanding queries which have been raised by families
        in^cortaectiodfwith deceased individuals.                             -r

        In a number of instances, family members are seeking amendments or additions
        to the West Midlands Police1 Summaries.      We are enclosing copies of the
        relevant documentation but for your ease of reference will summarise
        the amendments/additions and queries below:—                                 I


        Amendments/Additions to West Midlands Police Summaries
• •l*




        1.. - Christopher Edwards

            The Summary indicates that a number of named officers attempted to revive
        ■   Christopher.    The Edwards family would like more information as to what
            Christophers condition was when the various Officers attended him and
            also what time these attendences took place. The family would like the.
            Summary" amending to reflect these details and we enclose a copy of the
            specific question of the Edwards' for your consideration.    It may be
            t ha t■the various Officer's statments may provide the information the
            Edwards' desire.

            James Gary Aspinall

             The.Aspinall family are concerned about what happened in :the time between-
                  ’
                  •5?elng ldentified on ^ e pitch, ie. 15.27, and bein© certified dead
            .at ib.45. Is there- any other visual evidence which may account for the
             missing 18 minutes and can the summary be amended to reflfect to this. A
             copy of Mrs Aspinall's letter of the 15/11/90 is enclose^' for your
             information.    •■                                       7




                                                                                                    /
                                                                                                /
               3.        Jonathan Owens
                         The Owens family would like the Summary amending to reflect that Jonathan
                         together with his friends, Peter Birckett and Michael Robertson, were in
                         a snooker hall between 11.15 and 13.15 on the day of the tragedy.  This
                         information was contained in a statement given to the West Midlands Police
                         by Mr Robertson.

         P               The Owens family also dispute P.C. Parkes1 account when Jonathan joined the
                         crowd outside Leppings Lane at 2.40pm.  Video evidence timed somewhere
                         between 14.45 and 14.50 showed Jonathan and his friends standing in
                         Leppings Lane and making no attempt to join the crowd.  Can this
                         discrepancy be clarified ? You will note that in our letter of the
                         19th December 1990 we requested that P.C. Parkes be called to give evidence
                         and it was with this issue in mind that we made this request.  A copy
                         of Mr and Mrs Owens'letter dated the 15/10/90 enclosed for your information.

                         Adam Edward Spearritt
               Adam's father, Edward has been attempting for some time to discover what
               happened to Adam before he was sighted in front of the Spion Kop at 15.25.
       I      The Summary (paragraph 5) gives the impression that P.C. Harratt saw Adam
  s H f . p a s s between Pens 4 and 3 at around 15.05 and therefore leaving some 20
   I J J ^ m i n u t e s unaccounted for. However, the release of P.C. Harratt's statement
        i     statement show that in fact the sighting took place between 15.22 and 15.30.

                         Mr Spearritt,. wouild like the Summary amending to reflect these timings.
                        --HS"would also"^Li'Ke to know if other sightings were made of Adam prior to
                         P.C.v.Harratt-Jx other than the unconfirmed ones at 15.08 and 15.09.
                                                                              *                :   : i:’’;
                        ...Bhiflip John Steele
                      The Summary indicates that Mr John Liam Boyle gave assistance to Phillip.
                      The Steele family would like if possible to know what time this assistance
                    _ was given and the Summary added to accordingly.  It maybe that the answer,
                      to their question is contained in Mr Boyle\s statement and we would
                      respectfully ask that you consider releasing a copy to ourselves. '“W e enclose
St             ^      a copy    ^rs Steele’s letter of 12/11/90 in this regard for your

  •
W                     information.

                   6.    Paul Brian Murray
                         The Summary is unclear as to when^Sergeant David Fox drae into contact
                         with Paul, merely placing the time after.some time after 15.05.  Photograph
                         Reference 5/32 timed at 15.32 shows Paul being carried on a temporary
                         stretcher by, among others, Sergeant Fox.  The Murray's are anxious to
                         fill in the missing 25 minutes or so and perhaps you would kindly consider
                         releasing Sergeant Fox's statement.

                         We enclose a copy of Mr and Mrs Murray's undated letter which outlines
                         their concerns and should be obliged if it would be possible for you to
                         kindly consider the further questions contained therein.

                         Sarah Louise Hicks

                         The Hicks family are anxious to establish whether Sarah received attention
                         between 14.50, when she was seen by Paul McCaffrey and 15.21 when she
                         was helped through the perimeter fence by P.C. Marshall. We should be
J-y2^ /y r \             obliged if you would kindly consider releasing a copy of P.C. Marshall's
’          J             statement which may deal with this aspect.    A copy of Mr Hicks'letter of
                         13/11/90 is, enclosed for your 'information.•
                      Victoria Jane Hicks
                      You may recall that in our letter of the 19th December 1990 we requested
                      that you kindly consider calling P.C. McGuinnessr and Mr Paul Taylor,
                      We enclose for your consideration a copy of a letter dated ^13/1 /
                      which provides further details of Mr Taylor’s account of his contacts
                                                                                               P.C
                      with Victoria.  Mr Taylor-' s account of cuddling Victoria conflicts wi
                      McGuinness' account of removing her from a pile of bodies on the
                      terracing and the Hicks family would like this clarifying if possible.




               Further outstanding Queries

               1.     John Alfred Anderson
{Jt Ihw*   fX '
                      The Anderson family are anxious to have clarified at the Inquest
                      their s o n 's consumption of a quantity of alcohol prior to the game
                      did not contribute in any way to his de a t h . We enclose a copy of
                      Mr Anderson's undated letter to ourselves in this regard for your
                      consideration.

               2.     Colin Mark Ashcroft
                      The Ashcroft family are not content with the position of C o l m on the
                      terraces as identified and would like if possible to view the video
                      footage again.  A copy of their letter dated 12/11/90 is enclosed.

       ,   / 3.      Nicholas Peter Joynes                                                      . . .

                  t-’.The. Summary.'indicated that Nicholas was attended upon.by a young doctor,^ .. .
                ’' • from Liverpool.     This doctor has not been identified up to the^completion.
               '     of the Summary.     Mrs Joynes would very much like to meet this individual
                     and wishes to know if he/she has been identified.     A copy of Mrs Joynes
                      letter of 12/11/90 is enclosed.

               We are obliged to you for     your assistance   in regard to the above   mentioned        ^(
               queries and ask that you kindly contact our Miss Frances Kennah if you-.jrequire
               any further,information.

           .   .Yours,; faithfully




                HILLSB010U6H;,STEERING COMMITTEE
