From:   J M HILLIER FIPM DMA                                    WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
        DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATION                              HEADQUARTERS
                                                                PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                Colmore Circus Queensway
                                            UNITY               Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                Telephone      021-626 5000
  J M Jones QPM MSc
  Deputy Chief Constable
  Cheshire Constabulary                             Our Ref:   ADM/DSH/MR
  Castle Esplanade
  Chester                                           Date:      2 July 1992
  CHI 2PP



  Dear      f V U W V ^ |T^   J
  HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

  I forward herewith correspondence received from Malcolm J Gregg & Co Solicitors
  acting on behalf of the next of kin of 6 people who died at the Hillsborough
  Stadium on the 15 April 1989.

  I understand that Mrs Harper has already contacted you regarding receipt of
  these documents and has faxed through the covering letter. I am now in a
  position to advise you as to the current position.

  The correspondence was forwarded to John Kilbey who has suggested that you
  should be advised of the present position.

  At the suggestion of Mr Kilbey, Mrs Harper has contacted the new Coroner at
  South Yorkshire.   He was very helpful indicating that he too was in receipt of
  documentation which had been forwarded to the city Solicitors. I have asked
  Mr Kilbey to liaise with the Solicitors and advise them of our possible
  interest. The Coroner has undertaken to keep us advised of any developments
  although at this stage it is his belief that it is unlikely that the Inquests
  would be re-opened.

  It is interesting to note however, that should a decision be taken that the
  Inquests should be re-opened, the present Coroner would be unable to officiate
  as s-

  1.He was in attendance at Hillsborough Football Ground on          15 April 1989.

  2.       Before being appointed to Coroner he acted as Solicitor to the Football
          Club Doctor at Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry.

  3.      He attended the Inquests representing Doctor Forrester.

  The documentation is being forwarded purely for information at this stage, the
  Coroner has agreed to keep us informed and Mr Kilbey has responded to the
  Solicitors asking them to keep us advised as to developments.

  I trust you are keeping well and offer you my congratulations on the award of
  the Queen’s Police Medal in the recent Birthday Honours.

  Yours sincerely
                                        1
1
CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY   Headquarters

                        Chester CHI 2PP

                        CHESTER (0244) 350000




                                  7 JUL t f K
