SLP/JT/HO/INQ.
802350/42/MM.




Mr. P.J. Tomlinson,
H.M.Coroner for North Leicestershire District,
80 & 81 Wood Gate,
Loughborough,
Leicestershire. LE11 2XE.

Dear Mr. Tomlinson,


Re: INTER-RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INQUESTS & PUBLIC INQUIRIES.


Thank you very much indeed for your letter of the 30th of April.  I was aware
that in your particular case, there had been no public inquiry as there had
been say at Bradford or Hillsborough.

Nevertheless you were involved in what turned out to be a major tragedy and
as you very rightly point out, apart from your own investigations, very
extensive work was also done by the A.A.I.B.

I had overheard a snippet on a radio programme where the Attorney General
commented that high level discussions were taking place regarding the
inter-relationship of inquests and public inquiries and I felt that if that
were the case, it might have been helpful if someone or more coroners who had
had something to do with a major disaster had been invited to input into
these discussions.      As far as I have been able to ascertain, none of the
coroners who have been involved in the recent major disasters, (Bradford,
Zebrugge, K i n g ’s Cross, Clapham, Marchioness, Kegworth and Hillsborough) have
in fact been invited to do so.

I note what you say regarding making comments to the Home Office, and
obviously if you feel that you would like to make a direct contribution,     I
can see no reason why you should not do so.

Finally, may I thank you very much for your kind words in the final paragraph
of your letter.

Yours sincerely,




S . L .Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
           . CORONER FOR                             80 & 81 WOOD GATE
      LEICESTERSHIRE DISTRICT                         LOUGHBOROUGH.
                                                      LEICESTERSHIRE,
                                                          LE11 2XE
               TEL. 0509 217770


                                                      OUR REF.:.802350/42/MM
      CORONERS OFFICER TEL. 0509 31111                YOUR REF.:

                                                     30th April      1991



Dear Dr. Popper,

You have spoken to my secretary about the inter-relationship
between inquests and public inquiries.  I didn't know that the
Home Office were looking into this matter.  If you have any informa­
tion on this point I shall be very interested to read it.

In the case of the Kegworth matter, there was no public inquiry
as such but the A.A.I.B. under their own rules carried out an
inquiry and as you are probably aware, reached certain conclusions.
T h i s ,inquiry, however, was certainly not a public inquiry; it
didn't sit in public? it received submissions and its report
was then produced to the relevant parties for comment.      My
situation, therefore, was rather different.

At my  pre-inquiry meeting I was urged by a number of parties
to delay the inquest until the A.A.I.B. report was to hand.   Other
parties vigorously sought that the inquest should go ahead as
soon as possible.  I took the view that as the A.A.I.B. report
was not a public matter and could be delayed for a very long
time then I would not therefore hold the inquest in abeyance
and this was not challenged.

I think that the inter-relationship between the inquest and the
public inquiry is a very difficult ohe in that:

(a)         facts are given at the public inquiry which usually precedes
            the inquest which are then given a second time at the
            inquest itself;

(b)         the public inquiry makes recommendations and it is certainly
            open to the coroner to make recommendations;

(c)         the coroner's function almost inevitably with a jury goes
            far beyond mere recommendation and is based on evidence
            which has already been given in public and a jury is likely
            to have read about the matter in question, recommendations
            and criticisms at a public inquiry.
 r                                            i
            Dr. S.L. Popper,
            H.M. Coroner,
            Medico-Legal Centre,
            Watery STreet,
            SHEFFIELD, S3 7ET
 L                                            J


                                                      contd             /2
                                               30th April   1991



Furthermore there does not seem to be any uniformity in the calling
of public inquiries.  It was never suggested, as far as I am
aware, that there should be a public inquiry into the Kegworth
case.  I would be very happy to give my comments to the Home
Office either through yourself or directly.  It is certainly
a topic that is going to come up again in the future whenever
there is a disaster and it certainly should be tackled.

I was sorry to read of your retirement and can well understand
the impact which the Hillsborough inquest had.  I hope that you
will be very happy in whatever you choose to do though I imagine
you will turn to medical circles.

Yours sincerely,




P.J. TOMLINSON,    H.M. Coroner
