                                               29/ 9/92


Mr. Patrick Hargreaves,
Close Up North,
BBC TV.,
Woodhouse Lane,
Leeds
LS2 9PX


Dear Mr. Hargreave,

Further to my telephone conversation with you and your assistant whom
I only know as Lesley I now enclose a photocopy of the letter which I
wrote to Dr. Howe on 24th August 1989 regarding his management of his
patient Anthony Bland.

This copy letter is being sent to you on condition that it will not be
used unless you have obtained Dr. Howe's consent to its use andalso
the consent of of the Bland's to its use. It is also my view that as
this letter was addressed to Dr. Howe and I understand that the Area
Health Authority are starting proceedings that it would be sensible to
obtain their confirmation that they have no objection to the use of
this letter in your programme.

I appreciate that the letter is quite long but I have been assured
that if it is used it will be used fairly.

If for some reason the letter is not used in this program could you
please return it to me.

Finally I asked if it were possible to have a video copy of the
program as I live out of your area so that I can view it and see what
in fact you have said.




Yours sincerely,



S.L.Popper.
                                                   2 9 / 9/92

                                                   13:01


Tel call with Dr. Howe about an hour ago. He confirmed that he had
objection to me releasing my letter to him of 24th August 1989.
Apparently he had been toldnot to give TV interviews at the present
time. He also told me that the BMA ethical committee gad prepared a
position paper on the issues and that he had just seen the latest
draft. He suggested that if I contacted them they would likely let me
have a copy.

I also spoke to Leslie of the BBC. I repeated that I would not object
to letting them have a copy of the letter subject to them obtaining
Dr. Howe's and the Bland's consent. I also repeated that I thought
that they should check with the Health Authority as I did not want to
do anything which might breach the subjudie rules or which might
interfere with the proceedings.
                                                                               • ■ 24th August          89

 SLP/JT.
                                                                               COmjTDSHTTAT..
 Dr, J. Hove,'.                ^     .     -    .    v    r   V  A        -gat . ’: " " * ? - l
 Airdale Hospital, •. ...'...•;               ; ; " : a . . o                                   ii;'a
"Skipton Hoad, i-r;. ' 1 - l a ^ ' s t v : . c x - J L x f i 7 sr.'jlisa       ■£?*£
 Steeton BD20 6PD. vc '!:!„>, s?-** sa                                  .-IrCx-t, sld'tesiss
  ....                 ' ;/~iV ^"■o, v- ;                               r:cdl.v.\
tDear Dr. Bowe, '‘                  '                                ’‘

 I refer to my conversations with you about Mr* Bland who I
 imderstand froa you is In a vegetative state but not brain
 dead.

 You indicated to me that in your Tiaw and that of consultant
 colleagues, there was no hope of recovery for this youn£ nan
 and it was felt in the circumstances efforts to prolong life
 should he abandoned and that he should be allowed to pass
 away peacefully, I understood frost you that his family
 are aware of your proposed management* .7.

 In this connection, you mentioned that it was proposed to   ‘“
 discontinue medical treatment and also to withdraw food and
 water which X presume is in fact being supplied by nasogastric
 tube or possibly intravenously.

 You contacted me in order to obtain my views on your proposed
 aciion. You had already spoken to Hr* Turnbull, who had
 suggested you speak tome*'               ■T-T~'   ..~ V T *  •••

 I explained to you that I as coroner had no jurisdiction over
 any living person, and that my Jurisdiction would (assuming
 that the case were transferred to me) arise only when the young
 man was dead*

 I did however say that in my view your proposed course of conduct
 was one which I could not approve and indeed I felt that you were
 exposing yourself to a very serious risk of criminal liability.
 I suggested that before you undertook any steps, you should obtain
 clear legal advice, and that in any case 1 neither could condone
 or approve your suggested course of conduct.

 in a later conversation with you yesterday, you confirmed that you
 would not take any of the steps mentioned except that it was
 your intention not to administer antibiotic therapy.

 I have since had an opportunity to consider the mattef further
 and discuss it with senior members of the Vest Midlands Police
 who are engaged in the Hillsborough, disaster enquiry.

 2n the light of these discussions I am now writing to you to ’
 confirm that strictly, I as coroner am not involved in this matter
 until the death has been reposted to me* However, as it haw been
 raised with bis and I consider that it has serious implications
 both ethically and legally, I must again mak* it clear that
 I cannot countenance, condone, approve or give consent to any

                                                                                            cont'd
                                                24th A iig u s t

 is. J. Hove fcont*d). .
action or inaction which, could "be or could be construed as
Leins designed or in&ended to shorten or terminate the life
of this young nan. This particularly applies to the witholding
of the necessities of life* such as food and drink* elothing
and warmth and* on reflection* this includes medical care*
including antibiotic cover where' necessary.

I would he grataful if you could please reply "by return and
confirm that this is understood, and that no such activity or
inactivity will be undertaken in relation to this patient.

I am aware that there are occasions -when epople are terminally
ill, say frorj cancer, that a clinical decision may be taken not
to seek to prolong life by heroic medical intervention, and
this may include the withholding of aay antibiotic drugs.

 Tha problem in this case is that although this young man may
 be severely brain damaged, it is clear from what you said that
 he is not brain dead in accordance with the published criteria.
 In fact, I am very concerned whether it is possible, in the
 light of toe information you have given me, to even consider®
 this patient as terminally ill.

 I am in come difficulty, as I have never seen this patient and
 am not responsible for his clinical management, and in any case
 have no jurisdiction, as he is not dead. However, it must be                 -
 apparent that there moat be a difference if he dies as a result             ..
 of say hypoxic brain damage or if he dies as a result of some
 ••new act or ommission1* implemented because it ia thought that
 his prognosis and quality of life are such he mi^it be better
 dead than alive.

 You will also appreoiate that any clinical decisions which you
 may take axe of course your sold i-espcnsibility, and you have
 always to be in a position to defend them and to show that they
 comply with the law of this land. I have no doubt that your
 legal advisors will be able to guide you further in this matter.

 I * M t>Tc that I might juat mention that if you feel that you need
 clarification of the legal position with regard to any or all of your
 proposed actions, thenitt might be worth asking your legal advisors
 vmethar it would be possible to make an application to the High
 Court for directions and guidance.

 Please  note that a copy of this letter is being sent to I^r. Turnbull,
  Her Majesty'a Coroner for Vest Yorkshire, the Solicitor to the
  Hogional Health Authority, the Secretary of the Hedical Protection
x SAoiaty (who I understand are your Defence Union) and the West
  Midlands Police.


                                                                   cont*d<
  \
         ' ■•    v                                                   24th August .                  89.
                                                                                                i
jg. J. Howe fcont«dk


Finally, I wo-uld lilce to say two things

                     If this yorag aan were at some point to dif the
                     death rust be reported to Mr* Turnbull who is
                     the coroner for yottr district. He will then
                 - l i a s e with me if he thinks that is appropriate.

                b.      I votild’H k e to say that I feel for the lad,
                        the family and the medical and nursing
                        teams in this terrible tragedy *bich has
                     .. befallen this young man.


T o u t b sincerely,               :                      V-c                      •.j
                                               '.:>-y -     vv*HT'     ■ y.::!.':-3
ta Wl




        ,L . Popper,                     ;’w                 V                 ..   :/ .;vr-.
        .11.Coroner.

c.c. Mr. T.A. Turnbull, H.M.C. Bradford.    '> ■>*-
     H.H.A. Solicitor, Mr. Chapman, Yorkshire Hegional H.A. Windsor Hse, Cornwall Sc
     Medical Protection Society, 50 Hallam St, London.WiN 6DB      HarrogateHGl 2FW.
     Mr. M. Jones, W/Midlands Police.
