                                                iIM
                                                  IS
                                                   m#gjI'
                                              is*©!§!
                                              §§




                                                            INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
                                               ilGTIMS OF ..THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
                              mfflm
                             MBM                                .. STADIUM DISASTER

                 §MwM0
                  W§i0@M
                      S0$§                                      ON THE 1STH APSIL, 1989




                                                                        Before
                                      DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP
                                                                (Her Majesty*s Coroner)




;
.                .                                                        At
'


:                                                                   The Town Hall,
;                                                                     Sheffield.
?r               :                                                        On
a.          ..       :                                             22nd March, 1991




                                                            m the Notes of J-L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       mm
                                                              Official Shorthand Writers,
                                                              .Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                        MMMI
     Im M                             WM$K0
    mm
                 §st®8?t
    0 # Y

    C o f / f O J/S££TJ     '•




    l~ *   C. t s j y




    fy*           t-? * j ~7.



?
            thejr#ason that I have spent a few minutes on this,

although .Dr. Nicholson wasn’t very happy with his figure on

pens 3 and 4» at 14.52 of 880 and 821, which were the two

figures in round terms, that is 1,500.       If you were to

subtract that figure from your 3,800 approximately, which

would be the maximum you would have in that pen at that

time, it leaves you 2,300,     which is remarkably close tothe

total number of people who cane in through Gate C#

       If you were to accept the view that the majority of the

people who entered when Gate C was opened, and do not

forget, of course, people were coming in through the

turnstiles as well and the turnstiles were working at that

stage at about 1,000 an hour, again Dr. Nicholson showed us

that on the graph, between 800 and 1,000 an hour and there

were seven of them®      You   can work it out for yourselves#

If you accept the proposition that the majority      of people

went down the tunnel then you may feel that Dr.       Nicholson s

figures for 14.52 are not that far out.      If, of course, you

take the view that the majority did not go through, then you

are back with Dr. Nicholson's original estimate.

       It   is very important to think about this.    You may not

be able     to resolve it but at least you ought to ask

yourselves the question, because it becomes terribly

   (keyant when you come to the issue as to what the pens

   3ked like when people were observing them, particularly

   5   track Officers.    It is obvious that, isn't it?       If you
                                                           3?




cannot itself be held to have been reckless in respect to

this particular event.

     How what about the rest of them, Mr. Bowses, Mr.

Butler, the people 1b the Officers Working Group, the

people who acted?     In a nutshell it seems to me quite

clear that all of them, and I have already mentioned Dr.

Eastwood yesterday, but all of them including the Police

who were associated with this Group, did not prior to this

event see the Stadium or the way it was constructed, or

the signing or indeed anything else as constituting a

serious and obvious risk of injury to anybody.       They did

not as far as one can tell and from the evidence, ever

contemplate the possibility that people might enter

 through exit gates.     That was not within their

 contemplation, and you may feel that was not only not

 within their contemplation, it was not really foreseeable

 realistically.     If that is so, and despite whatever

 criticisms one might want to make about slowness and

 falling between two stools and people perhaps interfering

 to a greater or lesser extent more than they should have

 done, taking decisions as to moving barriers and so on, it

 might have been wiser to have dealt with it in other ways,

 it seems to me that all these people who were not on site

 on 15th April are, apart from anything else, too remote in

  a causative sense to be considered, when you come to

: ie»asider the issue of whether or not any of the deceased
fOoJt SJV
  Jg.       /iePp



  yprT/9 <£■/+&?

        ? P^x
