                                                                          J. Mervyn Jones, Q.P.M., M.Sc.
                                                                              Deputy Chief Constable
       Cheshire                                                              Constabulary Headquarters
                                                                                Chester CH1 2PP
                                                                         Telephone Chester (0244) 350000
     Constabulary                                                                  Telex 61261
                                                                                Fax (0244) 351050


r.



                                                    COPY
 Our reference             Extension              Your reference            Date
                                                                                   8th February, 1993,


         Dear David,
                                        HILLSBOROUGH INVESTIGATION


                 Following our telephone call of the other day I thought 1would put down some thoughts
         on the subject which may be of interest and help to you.
                  As you know I wrote to John Kiibey in December last year detailing my reaction to the
         Application to the Attorney General to grant leave under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for
         a Judicial Review, In sum, my view was that it was not for the Coroner's Officer to address
         issues in the province of H.M. Coroner, At the same time i advised John Kiibey that if an
         investigation was to be mounted then it would be appropriate to contact you in case there were
         any complaints and discipline issues to be considered. Let me say at this point I do not believe
         there are sufficient grounds in the letter by Malcolm J, Gregg, Solicitors or the accompanying
         papers to formally record the matter under Section 85 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.
         No doubt Mr Gregg, a practising solicitor, would have advised the Williams family to make a
         formal complaint if that was the course of action which they intended. Reading again Mr Gregg's
         letter there is no suggestion of a complaint or even criticism.   If 1 was in your position 1 would
         await the decision of the Attorney General, If leave is granted for a Judicial Review then 1would
         send a senior officer to Court to observe, if what was then said in Court in respect of the
         Martin/Bruder business amounted to an allegation 1would take appropriate action, if leave is not
         granted then i would await action, if any, by the Williams family or their solicitors. 1do not think
         it would be wise to contact special Constable Martin or Police Constable Bruder, If they had
         thought at the time or, since, that they were subjected to undue pressure, then they could report
         the matter formally through South Yorkshire Police channels. 1 am not aware of any such
         reports being made,
                 1 have to say the suggestion of Inspector Sawers putting undue pressure on any of the
         witnesses very difficult to accept. Mr Sawers stayed with me throughout the long two years of
         the investigation. 1 always found him to be thoroughly professional in his endeavours to reach
         our goal, the truth. Many families told me personally how they appreciated his compassionate
         approach to what was obviously an extremely difficult task. Furthermore, 1believe the Coroner,
         Dr stefan Popper, had a similar view of him. Throughout the investigation Were were numerous
         occasions when i had to deploy officers to re-visit witnesses to dear up ambiguities; the contacts
         with Special Constable Martin and Police Constable Bruder were obviously two of those. Often it
was the Coroner himself who briefed my officers, On many occasions I heard him say to Mr
Sawers and others, that they should be thorough in their enquiries but not to put people under
improper pressure in the search for truth The circumstances of the disaster were for many
confusing which, when charged with the emotion, led in some instances to people saying things
that could not possibly have been true, Unravelling those varying accounts required
thoroughness set in the context of sensitivity.
        When i now read the Humble Memorial, it is dear to me that there is still confusion over
the facts and indeed failings in memory of some aspects of what went on in the Coroner's Court.
These would obviously emerge if the Attorney General grants leave for a Judicial Review.

        I hope these few words are of assistance to you. if there is any further way in which you
feel 1may be able to assist, please do not hesitate to make contact, I have taken the liberty of
copying this letter to the retired coroner, Dr Popper.
Yours sincerely,
