21st November 1993    Sunday

13:55

At about 13.25 or so Mrs. Sefton telephoned. She identified herself
as a mother of one of the Hillsborough deceased, I remembered that
I had spoken to her before.

I asked how she was and she said not that well.

She asked whether the judges in London had had all the facts before
them. I explained that they had everything that counsel had put
before them and I really could not comment any further on that.
She said she had not been there nor had she been one of the
appellants. I said that I had been there for the proceedings.

She had never felt that she had got the facts or had her questions
answered and whether even in retrospect perhaps I might think that
the inquests should have been different. I explained that I had
retired and that I did not think that I should make anycomment    and
that as far as I was concerned the proceedings were over. Shesaid
that might be so for me but not for her.

She reminded me that she was a lady who liked to say what thought
and did not believe in anonymous letters or so.

She said that although she had not appealed, as she had
previously told me she had not been satisfied with the conduct of
the inquest. She felt that she an ordinary mother had been caught
up in a hugh intrigue and that none of the questions that she had
wanted answered had been answered.

When she mentioned that it was all a hugh intrigue I said to Mrs.
Sefton that whilst she had the right to speak her mind I had the
right not to listen. That I had now retired as Coroner and that
there was nothing more that I wished to discuss on this.

Mrs Sefton accepted that I had the right not to listen and said
that she had no intentions of taking the matter further legally and
indeed had not been one of the appellants but that she felt that she
could not rest without telling me that she was not satisfied. She
said that she felt at the least the law on inquests should be
changed particularly when big organisations were involved.

She then added that she could not accept that the inquest had been
impecable. I asked her where she had got that from and she said her
local paper and it had also been on TV.

I suggested that it might be helpful if she got a copy of the
transcript of the judgement as I thought that it might be that some
of the papers may have overstated what the Judges said. My
recollection was that they were commenting on a particular part of
the summing up when using the word immpecable. I said that I had
not seen the transcript myself yet and would have to see what was
recorded. She asked how she could get acopy and whether she would
have to go to London for it. She is not in touch with the
appellants. I suggested in that case she should write to the Crown
Office at the Royal Courts of Judgement in London and ask them. They
would tell her and also tell her if there was a cost involved.
                           Page 1
In the alternative she could get in touch with the City of Liverpool
who I though were still involved and ask them if they could get her
a copy of the judgement.

She thanked me for this information.

After reminding me that she lived in Skermesdale and telling me that
this was in Lancashire, and not Yorkshire where I had initially
placed it, the conversation ended with Mrs.Sefton saying that this
was the end of the matter as far as she was concerned as she did not
think any useful purpose would be served by continuing. I tended to
agree with that.




I felt rather upset when she said that it was all a bad intrigue as
I knew that I had done my best and I did not think that I had to
listen to some one telling me otherwise.
