                                                           58

                                                B.'D. MURRAY


     Notts. Forest supporters coming over their end, and
     having a melee in the middle, that was the problem.

Q. 1988 is quite a few years ago now, but in the course of
   your duties you would have been looking round the
   Ground, I take it? - A. Yes.

Q. Have you any recollection of anything unusual in any
   way about the terracing at Leppings Lane, in 1988? - A.
   No.  I didn't see anything peculiar about it at all.
   There was some climbing from the terracing at half
   time, into the West Stand, from both the terraces in
   front of the stand and the terraces at the side of the
   stand, but I noticed nothing unusual about it.  It was
   the first time I had seen a capacity match for some
   years and it seemed to go very well indeed.

Q. You were not either aware at the time or later that
   there were some people who felt uncomfortable within
   the centre pens at Leppings Lane - 1988 I am talking
   about? - A. I received no information on that from
   either people who had attended the matches or any of
   the Officers who were there for that particular event.

Q. We have heard evidence from quite a lot of people - it
   differs in slight detail but the substance of it is -
   that in 1988 the tunnel was for shorter or longer
   periods closed off pre-match, with the presumed
   intention of diverting the fans.  First of all, did you
   know anything at all about that? - A. No, sir.

Q.    The    second question, of course, follows:     you therefore
     did not give the order for that to be done? -   A. No,
     sir.

Q.    Was   it reported back to you by anybody? - A.No,I only
     learnt about it after the 1989 semi-final.

Q. So that is the first you knew about that? - A. That is
   the first I knew that the tunnel had ever been closed.
   I obviously made enquiries after that event.

Q. That brings me to the second aspect of the matter.
   Leaving aside the semi-final, thinking just of league
   matches, were you aware or had you ever seen anybody
   close the tunnel off? - A. I had no knowledge of the
   tunnel ever being closed.  No one had ever told me it
   had been closed; no one had ever told me it had been
   used as any sort of measure to prevent people going
   down.

Q. So what you are saying - I am not talking about semi­
   finals, I am just talking about ordinary matches .... -
   A. I am talking about every match I attended, sir, yes.
                                                         59

                                              B.'D. MURRAY


Q. May I ask you this, when you took the job on I assume
   Mr. Mole or somebody must have had some conversation
   with you as to what would be expected? - A. I took over
   from Superintendent Freeman who had left the Police
   Force sometime before I was appointed to Hammerton
   Road.  I had no opportunity to speak to him.  I spoke
   to Mr. Mole about football and he told me that the
   matches would be commanded by the Divisional Commander,
   which was himself, or in his absence his Deputy, and
   that I would operate as the Superintendent from FI Sub-
   Division, operating from the vicinity of the Control
   Room, which was normal.  I accepted that.  I had a
   Chief Inspector there who had been there for some
   considerable time and obviously asked his advice on
   different topics about football.

Q. From what you have said I take it that the occasion
   never arose where you were faced with the question, "We
   have got too many fans in this area, we have got to
   send them somewhere else", or did that happen? - A. I
   never had that occasion personally and I did not know
   whether anybody had ever taken any independent action.
   If that was the case it had never come back to me and
   the people I had spoken to had never told me, "We do
   close the tunnel, we do deflect fans from the tunnel".

Q. So what you are telling me then is that was news to you
   after the 1989 event? - A. Absolutely.

Q. It became news? - A. Absolutely, yes.  It came   to my
   attention that someone had said the tunnel was   closed
   in 1988.  I disputed that but if people say it   was
   closed then it was closed.  It was never drawn   to my
   attention in any way.

Q. I would be right in thinking then from what you say
   that apart from the hiccups of pitch invasion and a few
   other matters which may have arisen in 1988, you were
   satisfied that everything had gone satisfactorily? - A.
   Yes, I was.  The Order was prepared by my Chief
   Inspector and another Inspector.  It was based very
   much on what had happened the year before, which I had
   not had the privilege of attending, and it seemed to go
   very well.

Q. Then of course after that semi-final you continued to
   do Control Room duties, I take it, for other matches? -
   A. Yes, I did.

Q. Throughout the season until some point when you were
   told that the next semi-final was going to be played at
   Hillsborough again? - A. At the beginning of January
   Mr. Mole came and discussed football with me again, and
   said that he was satisfied now that certain matches he
