                                          OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR             MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE.
                                           ' ■
                                                                                 WATERY STREETvK.
                                                   SO U TH Y O R K SH IR E
                                                                                 SHEFFIELD
                                                          (West District)
                                                                                 S3 7ETr:
          STEFA N L. P O P P ER, U .8 .. B.MED.Sci.. a.M., S.S., M.RC.G.P.
                                                              C O R O N ER


                                                 SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721




      Your Ref:       DRF/JD'.


      Hillsborough Steering Committee,
      c/o Castle Chambers,
      Cook Street,
      Liverpool. L2 9SH.




     Our Ref: H i l l s /S ol/4/S L P /JT/2                                      19th September 1990



      Dear Sirs,

      Re: RESUMED INQUESTS 19th NOVEMBER 1990,


      If you are not already aware, I intend to resume the Inquests into the deaths
      of the 95 people who died at Hillsborough, one or more of whom you represent,
      on the 19th of November 1990 at 10.a.m.   Details of venue will be notified in
      due course.

      I do not have to remind you of the fact that a considerable amount of
      evidence has already been taken, nor of the nature and limitations of a
      coronal investigation which you will recollect is not adversarial but
      inquisitorial in nature, and which of course has only limited objectives.

      Subject to the C o r o n e r s ’ Act 1988 and the Coroners’ Rules, the Inquest is
      under my control, and in particular, it is my responsibility to select the
      witnesses who wish to give evidence.          1 am at present engaged in considering
      this and in determining who I wish to invite to attend.

      Without prejudice in any way to my rights in the matter, I am writing to you
      to give you an opportunity to draw to my attention the names and other
      appropriate details of any witness or witnesses whom you would like me to
      consider calling to give evidence at the resumed Inquests.

      May I please ask you in considering whether you wish to draw any names to my
      attention, to bear in mind the scope and limitations of an Inquest.
                                                                             O

      I also want to make it absolutely clear that the submission of a name or
      names for consideration is nothing more than that, and that the decision as
      to who to call to give evidence is and remains a matter for me.

      I would be grateful if you could respond as soon as possible. If I have not
      heard from you by the end of September I will assume you have no names to
      submit.

      Yours faithfully,
               A____

HILAi¥I^L.Ee4pr5er,
LESAAG H.M.Coroner.
