                                                 15th November     90

four Ref: CRN 90 28/37/1


Mr. J„ H. Rowlands,
Horae Office.
Queens Anne’s Gate,
London,
SW1H 9AT



Dear Mr, Rowlands,

Thank you for your letter of 13th November enclosing a letter from
SiB*on Hughes MP for Southwark Bermondsey.

1. I have to say that I am soinewhat surprised ;

a. by the fact that I was first sade aware that there was & letter
from Mr. Hughes to the H0 n3.es Secretary when a reporter from a National
Ifewsoaper visited sc at hems shortly after 2 p,s» on Sunday 9th Nov.
1990.

b. that the KP for Bermondsey is concerning himself with the running
of inquests in Sheffield as 1 assume that neither Sheffield City
Council nor ~ys;?l£ nor cn vnnaraed Liberal wereocratic councillor nor
for thet natter Liverpool or Nottingham. fall within his constituency,

c„ that a concert? re&ardln^ a possible conflict of interest should be
raised with no tSuree working days before the recommencement of the
Billshorotigh Xsquests particularly when I had already spent several
days in April 1989 opening the inquests and had resumed with a jury
.between iwfch April - 4th May 1990. The transcripts of the evidence
of these hearings run to over 1000 pages. In addition there was
extensive national publicity regarding those proceedings, The
conclusion of the interiB hearings on 4th Kay are themselves 5 wontfe®
prior to the date of i$r, Hughes letter#

2. Everything that is referred to in Mr. Hughes letter (apart frera any
references to CkwrAttee meeting matters of Sheffield City Council of
which. I have no knowledge) was known in April 1989. That was the time
when anything regarding possible conflict of interest should have
been raised and not 18 months or so later,

3. I would reaitti you that a Coroner is an independent judicial
officer and is an appointee and. not an employee of the local
authority. The latter have inter alia a duty to remunerate his and
pay his costs and expenses but they do not control what he does or how
he does it. They are not able to remove hi® from office which is a
right reserved for the Lord Chancellor, and in presumably very rare
instances, the Crown Court.
I have sought to maintain good relationships with the officers of
Sheffield City Council, to behave responsibly with regard to the
incurring of costs and expenses and to keep them informed possibly to
a greater extent than was strictly necessary,

4. As I understand it I was the only eligible coroner unci.u- the
legislation unless the provisions of Section 14(1) Coroners Act 1988
had been implemented and some other coroner had agreed to take the
transfer, or the provisions of section 14(3) or 13(l)(a) and 13(2)
Coroners Act 1988 had applied which I do not think was or is the case.

Although a large number of the deceased cares from Merseyside by no
means all did, and it would not in m y opinion have been right to ask
the coroner in Merseyside or Liverpool to take over the irque^tn.

If I could have divested ipyself in April 1969 of the responrd.tili 1 7
for ti>e inquests into the deaths caused by the disaster I have pc
doubt I v/ould have gladly assented and it certainly would have nr.de en
enormc-us difference to ray life.

h. It is inherent in the coronal system   which is territorial ir nature
that the coroner may cose into conflict   with the local authority.
This is no doubt one cf the reasons why   the coroner's; position ir.; as
in described in paragraph three of this   letter.

xhe Corojsers Act 1988 specifically mentions various disqualifications
from appointment to coronal office. 1 draw your attention       Metier,;?
2 (2) and 2 (3). It seems therefore to me that had parliament wished
to include provisions to cover the sort of situation described by Hr.
Hughes, it would have been childs play to legislate for it,
particularly as sections 2 (2) and 2 (3)    CiCtuaily deal with thn
appointment of a coroner who is or was a councillor or alderoan.

b. Whether it is a &ocd thing that a coroner’s jurisdiction is
territorial and that he is locally appointed as opposed to centrally
by say the Lord Chancellor is another question. 1 do not think
that this letter is the appropriate place to deal with these .issues
though 1 may write to you again on this after the inquests are over.

The separation of. powers is very fine in principle but not so easy to
achieve in practice, for instance even the head ox the judiciaryis
hi!5self a political appointee.

7. It goes without saying of course that should someone feel that
proceedings are defective then judicial review or the provisions of
Section 13 Coroners Act 19d8 are open.

6. You will no doubt be aware that in the normal course of things
should I require sosse expert legal help 1 ( and I believe coroner’s in
general ) would in the first instance look to their local authority’s
legal Departments for help.

I was .however conscious from very early on that there was the
possibility of criticism of the Council's involvement in connection
with the disaster. I felt that it would be inappropriate to .
consult with the® as this could give rise to a conflict of
interest if I were to discuss matters with then when the officer’s
or the Council’s conduct might be called in question. 1 therefore
arranged for a meeting with the then Chief Executive and inter alia
agreed with him that it would be right that in the Hillsborough
disaster I would seek independent legal advice if I felt that I Deeded
it and instruct independent solicitors which I have done. 1 had
thought about the problem and in so far as it was necessary I had and
have continued to take steps to avoid difficulties arising.
In fact I seem to recollect that I approached some one in the Hoe©
Office to see if legal help was available from you or treasury
solicitors but I was told that that was not possible.

8. I mast say that X am not entirely happy with the suggestion that
has been raised and even less so with the tining and nanner of its
making. I have had to devote considerable tisie to this reply which
could have been better spent in getting prepared for these inquests.

I hope the foregoing will be of assistance to jou* Please let nje have
a copy of Mr. Haddington's reply.




Yours sincerely,




S. L. Popper,
H.M. Coroner.
I
