                    /
                        A AIREDALE HEALTH AUTHORITY
                 ^/TON 52511   Your Ret:                     Airedale General Hospital
                ,ies on this                                      Skipton Road
                made to        Our Ref.    JGH/JPS/                         sty
                                                                        Steeton
                                                                              Keighley
           J J Stafford                                                                  West Yorkshire

          /                                                                                   BD20 6TD
          i60
 .!
      /
 ,Dv S L Popper                                                           31 August 198.9
/ HM Coroner
  Medico-Legal Centre
  Watery Street
  SHEFFIELD
  S3 7ES



 Dear Dr Popper

kANTHONY DAVID BLAND - DOB 21.09-70
 AT PRESENT ON WARD 3, AIREDALE GENERAL HOSPITAL

 Thank you for your letter of 24 August 1989 about    Mr Bland, which arrived this
 morning.

 This is just a short note to let you know that this young man’s medical and
 nursing care continues unchanged from the course it has followed over the last
 four months. He remains unconscious and is being fed by nasogastric tube. He
 has recently had a course of antibiotic for a chest infection.

 I would be interested to hear your personal comments on the American
 Neurologists’ statement on persistent vegetative state which I sent to you. It
 seems to me that there is an important principle to be tested in this and
 similar cases, but I do not think I am the man to test it. I will ask the
 Editor of the Journal of Medical Ethics if he would like to commission some
 articles on this subject in the hope of stimulating some discussion in the
 profession. The BMA Ethics Committee might also like to look into this matter
 or perhaps a committee of one of the royal colleges. Patients like this have
      kept alive in a vegetative state for periods in excess of ten years, at
 great personal cost to their families   and the care staff. They also consume
 resources which could be used for people who have a chance of recovery, or at
 least relief of their suffering, for there can be no doubt that someone who is
 unconscious can not suffer. It may be that, in time, the way to deal with this
 distressing condition will become clear but, for the moment, Mr Bland’s family
 and the nursing staff at Airedale General Hospital will continue to suffer and
 are likely to do so for many years since the rest of his body systems are
 undamaged.

 Finally, can I say how much I appreciate your clear, sympathetic and helpful
 advice.

 Kind regards
 Yours sincerely




 J G HOWE
 Consultant Physician
                            ,                                                                                   —   w '
                        /


                                                                           ••- 24th August                89.
SLP/JT.             /                                                     _______
   '          .'• A                                                       COIEPIjMfTTAT..
 Dr, J. Bove,--                   ■■. ~ •• : • .*•               .y i •'! ■•:• • y.• •••••.■ v*
 Airdale Hospital,                               ~             ••. c.i*             ,>....• ..i..;2
'"Skipton Road, -                    - r.r t . i - x l j x f i x vr*ySJjtA iv           •./S.iLsHi.-a-;                   \   \
 Steeton HD20 6PD.               'L w - ..         xu ^jK*i sisS .h:1-:.-.:.7
                                                                                                                                  \
       ■.••     :               .■;"                ’■ *                  V          r. •;

Dear Dr. How©;"'

I refer to my conversations with you about Mr. “RTnn^ vfao I .
tmaemtand from you ia In a vegetative state but not brain
dead.

You indidated to me that in your viav and that of consultant
colleagues, there was no hope of recovery for. this youn£ rnnn
and it was felt in the circumsianoaa efforts to prolong life
ahould be abandoned and that he should be allowed to pass'
away peacefully, I understood from you that Tvts family .
are aware of your proposed management*    ^‘            ‘ "V,


In this connection, you mentioned that it vas proposed to     ”
discontinue medical treatment and also to withdraw food
water which I presume is in fact being supplied by nasogastric
tube or possibly intravenously.

You contacted me in order to' obtain my vievs on your .proposed
action. Tou had already spohen to Hr. Turnbull, who had
suggested you speak to'mei'                  : '*.          .7".

 I explained to you that I as coroner had no jurisdiction over
 any living person, and that my jurisdiction would (assuming
 that the ease were transferred to me) arise only when the young
 man vas dead.

 I did however say that in my view your proposed course of conduct
 was one which I could not approve and indeed I felt that you were
^exposing yourself to a very serious risk of criminal liability.
 I suggested that before you undertook any steps, you should obtain
 clear legal advice, and that in any case I neither could condone
 or approve your suggested course of conduct.

 In a later conversation with you yesterday, you confirmed that you
 would not take any of the steps mentioned except that it vas
 your intention not to administer antibiotic therapy.

 I have since had an opportunity to consider the mattaf further
 and discuss it with senior members of the Vest Midlands Police
 who are engaged in the Hillsborough disaster enquiry.

 In the light 01 these discussions I am now writing to you to
 confirm that strictly, I as coroner am not involved in this matter
 until the death has been repoatod to me. However, as it has been
 raised with me and I consider that it fam serious implications
 both ethically and legally, I must again make it clear that
 I cannot countenance, condone, approve or give consent to any
jr. J. Hove (confd).                                            !

action or inaction which could "be or could "be construed aa
being designed or intended to shorten or terminate the life
of thin young nan. This particularly applies to the witholding
of the necessities of. lifo, such aa food and drink, clothing
and varmth and, on reflection, this includes medical care,
including antibiotic cover where’necessary. •     - ; T

I would be grateful if you could please reply by return and
confirm that this is understood, and that no such activity or
inactivity will bo undertaken in relation to this patient.

I am aware that there ere occasions vhen epople are terminally
ill, say frora cancer, that a clinical decision may bo taken not
to seek to prolong life by heroic medical intervention, and
this aay include the withholding of aay antibiotic drugs.

Tha problem in this case is that although this young man may
be severely brain damaged, it is clear from what you said that
he is not brain dead in accordance with the published criteria.
In fact, I am very concerned whether it is possible, in the
light of the information you have given me, to even considers
thin patient aa terminally ill.

I am in. some difficulty, as I have never seen this patient and
am not responsible for his clinical management, and in any case
have no jurisdiction, as he is not dead.;.However, it must be            •
apparent that there must be a difference if he dies as a result
of say hypoxic brain damage or if he dies as a result of some
"new act or oramisalon" implemented because it ’is thought that
his prognosis and quality of life are such he might be better
dead than alive.

You will also appreciate that any clinical decisions which you
may take are of course yciir sole -responsibility, and you have
always to be in a position to defend them and to show that they
coaply with the lav of this land. I have no doubt that your
legal advisors vill be able to guide you further in this matter.

I think that I might just mention that if you feel that you need
clarification of the legal position with regard to any or all of your
proposed actions, thenitt might be worth asking your legal advisors
whether it would be possible to make an application to the High
Court for directions and guidance.

Please note that a copy of this letter is being sent to I'fr. Turnbull,
Hor Majesty's Coroner for Vest Yorkshire, the Solicitor to the
Eogicnal Health Authority, the Secretary of the Medical Protection
S&ciaty (who I understand are your Defence Union) and the Vest
Midlands Police.


                                                               cont*d,
        \
    ■                                                       24 th August .       83 .
                                                                             I
;i% J, Hova fcont*d).


Finally, I v/ouLd like to nay two things                                                \



        a. If this young nan wore at soma point to dip the
          . death must be reported to Mr, Turnbull vho is
          - the coroner for your district* ■He will then
        ' liase with me if he thinks that is appropriate.

        b. X voulcL'like to say that I feel for the lad,‘‘
           the family and tho medical and nursing '      -
           teaxas in this terrible tragedy which has
           "befallen this yotci£ man.'
                                   . v\ >.a Vr-jra. 'Jp:


Tours sincerely.                       ... a ;    ,.i;     ;;         y j




S.L.Popper,
T
T




c.c. Mr. T.A. Turnbull, H.M.C. Bradford.          ?•'.  •••y.v
     R.H.A. Solicitor, Mr. Chapman, Yorkshire Begional H.A. Windsor Hse, Cornwall :
     Medical Protection Society, 50 Hallam St, Iondon.WiN 6EE      HarrogateHGl 2P
     Mr. M. Jones, W/Midlands Police.       ■■«...
                              AIREDALE HEALTH AUTHORITY
TELEPHONE; STEETON 52511            Your Ref:                      Airedale General Hospital
Telephone enquiries on this                                              Skipton Road
matter shoultf be made to           Our Ref:    JGH/JPS                        Steeton
                                                                                    Keighley
       .Mrs.,J..Stafford                                                                       West Yorkshire
                                                                                                    BD20 6TD
Ext     460



      Dr S L Popper                                                              23 August 1989
      HM Coroner
      Medical Legal Centre
      Watery Street
      SHEFFIELD
      S3 7ES



      Dear Dr Popper

      ANTHONY DAVID BLAND - DOB 21.09.70
      AT PRESENT ON WARD 3, AIREDALE GENERAL HOSPITAL
                                /
      Thank you for your very full and frank conversation today.                                      -

      In view of what you told me about the police attitude, we have not withdrawn
      artificial feeding in the unfortunate patient we discussed.

      Please find enclosed photocopies of two articles about persistent vegetative
      state after brain damage. The article from the Lancet in 1972 was the first
      thorough description of the syndrome and a proposal for a satisfactory name,
      which is now widely used. The second article is a statement of the American
      Academy of Neurology's attitude to the care and management of patients with
      persistent vegetative state and it is an attitude which I, myself, would want
      for me or my family or any patients with whom I am in contact.

      Our patient's family were satisfied that there had been no sign of improvement
      and feel very strongly that prolonging this boy's life by artificial feeding is
      no longer justifiable. They do not, however, want to see me get into trouble
      over it and so they are prepared to continue seeing him being fed but do not :
      wish us to treat any infections, should they arise.

      I would be interested to hear your comments on the American Neurologists'
      statement and would also be interested to hear what the local police think
      about it as well. This is an important and distressing subject and it would be
      helpful if there were clear guidelines to help doctors and relatives deal with
      the problem.

      I look forward to hearing from you in the near future.

      Thank you once again.

      Kind regards

      Yours sincerely




                                                                   /
      J G HOWE
      Consultant Physician
                                                                                  rnoRSTY
                                                                                  Airedale General Hospital
                s CORONER                              C IT Y COURTS                   Skipton Road
               /                                       THETYRLS                              Steeton
              J f West Yorkshire
                                                       B R A D F O R D BD1 1 LA                    Keighley
           ,/n District)                               Tel: (0274) 391362                                     West Yorkshire
           /                                                                                                       BO20 6TD




      .o u r ref: SLP/JT
    .■cur ref: JAT/AG                                                                          31 August 1989

/   D r . S . L . Popper.
    H.M.Coroner.
    Coroner's Office,
    Medico-Legal Centre,
    Watery Street
    SHEFFIELD S3 7ET


                                       30th August 1989

    Dear

         Thank you for your courtesy in letting me have
                                                                                   which arrived this
    a cop7 of your letter to Dr. Howe of the 24th August.
    Of course I agree entirely with your assessment of
    the legal position.  I do not know whether you told
                                                                                  in's medical and
    Dr. Howe that you were sending copies of the letter
                                                                                  Lowed over the last
    elsewhere before you did so. If I may say so I think
                                                                                  sogastric tube. He
    that I would have refrained from doing this at this
                                                                                  bn.
    stage.
                                       VnnTe      einrorolv                  American
                                                                              I sent to you. It
                                                                            id in this and
                                                                            11 will ask the
                                                                            jcommission some
                                                     nbull.
                                                                            [cussion in the
    fc                                                                 fk lnt0 this matter
                                                                             ts like this have
                                                                           jof ten years, at
                                                                           j They also consume
                                                                           |f recovery, or at
                                                                           'hat someone who is
               ....                .   Xl/ UJay       uwi,, in nine, tne wav to deal uit-h t-Me
     aid fhSSln® ?onditlon u l n become clear but, for the moment, Mr Bland's family
     “ e             St3^ 3t Alredale General                 c°ntinue to suffer and
     undamaged!       S°      ^          SlnCe the rest of his body         are

     IdvlJe!’ Can 1 Say h°W "UCh 1 appI'eclate l°'Jr clea>-. sympathetic and helpful

    Kind regards
    Yours sincerely




    J G HOWE
    Consultant Physician
