                                                            23rd October. 1999




Ms. Ann Adlington,
HFSG,
1st Floor,
Central Buildings,
41 North John St.,
Liverpool,
L2 6KR.



Dear Ms. Adlington,

           The Hillsborough Disaster : Adlington v Duckenfield & Murray

Thank you for your letter of 8th September 1999. I am sorry about the delay in
replying. As I indicated in my letter to you of 21st June 19991 was extremely
reluctant to get involved any further in matters relating to the Hillsborough Disaster
and that remains my position.

Please read this letter subject to the following caveats:

1. The ravages of age and the passage of time have affected my recall and any thing
   that I say must be read subject to the proviso that I may not be recalling fully or
   correctly.
2. I do not have the time or inclination to travel to Sheffield to search through the
   coronal papers even if the Coroner were prepared to allow me to do so. Again this
   may affect the possible accuracy of what I say.

1. Disclosure of statement to witnesses.

Turning to the two letters you have forwarded to me namely one of 15th Nov 1990 to
Silverman Livermore signed by Mervyn Jones and the other to Mrs S Stringer o f 28th
March 1991 signed by Stan Beechey. Mr. Hick’s letter of 13.11.90 was not enclosed.

It is difficult to be certain but the shape of the letters look familiar though I cannot say
with any certainty that I did see them. A search of the correspondence might reveal




                                             1
this. Without documentary support I cannot now recall with any certainty when I first
understood that West Midland Police had been appointed by South Yorkshire Police.

2. Inspector White.

I do not feel inclined to take up your invitation to comment in detail on this matter but
as far as I can recall I did not hold other such private conversations with the parties
you mention.

3. Editing of statements.

A copy of the letter set out on page 213 of Lord Justice Stuart Smith Scrutiny report
Cm 3878 is with the coronal papers.


I think that my involvement with Hillsborough should now come to an end. I trust that
you will respect this.



Yours sincerely,



S. L. Popper.




cc. Mr. C. Dorries, H.M. Coroner




                                            2
