                             OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR                f       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                               MEDICO-LE
                                                                               WATERY STREET,
                                                                                       ST
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                  (West District)
                                                                               SHEFFIELD
                                                                           M   S3 7ET
STEFAN L. POPPER. LL.B., B.MED. S ci.,                  M R.C G P
                                                       CORONER


                      T e l e p h o n e : SHEFFIELD   (07421 738721              —   6-fch■Apr ii •    —


                                                                                     Ref: h/list/12.



To all Pathologist who
undertook post mortem examinations
in connection with the deceased
at Hillsborough Stadium on 15.4.89.


 Dear
                   Resumed limited inquests ~ Hillsborough

 I enclose a copy of a schedule showing the times and dates when the
 individual inquests into each of the 95 persons who died at
 Hillsborough will be held.

 Also shown on the schedule are the names of the pathologist who
 performed the respective postmortems and I would be grateful if you
 could verify that the names shown as applicable to you are as you
 understand it. If you spot an error please let me know.

 The list has been prepared to take account of the dates and times when
 you have indicated that you would be available. I understand from
 my listing officers that it has been possible to so arrange the list^
 as not to   encroach on any ofthe dates which did not individually suit
 you. I am   very pleased aboutthis.

 Would you  please reserve the dates and times shewn on the schedule
 and assume for the time being that you will be required to attend
 each individual inquest.

 It may be that once we have got through the first few days it may be
 possible to deal with some of the cases by way of documentary evidence
 and consequently be able to avoid having to ask you to attend for each
 and every case. If that were to happen I. will let you know ao soon as
 possible in.order to avoid inconvenience for you. However at this
 stage please assume that you will be required at the times and dates
 shown on the schedule.


  Youys ^inceraly,


,«/«. Mbpjper.
 jH.M. Cf'foner


  Circulation list.
  Dr. J. Clark                                                        Dr. L. Denmark
  Prof. L. Henry                                                      Dr. S. Holt
  Prof. S. Jones                                                      Dr. S. Sivaloganathan
  Dr. D. Slater                                                       Dr. J Shortland
  Prof. J. Underwood                                                  Prof. A. Usher
