                    /C»„ fh/jJ^ycr.                       ]„


FILE NOTE DATED 3.10.90. MEETING AT MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE
WITH MERVYN JONES, CAROLINE PERKINS, STAN BEECHEY AND FOR

PART OF THE TIME, SUE HARPER.___________________________.

Had a very long meeting starting at about 10-o-clock and

finishing after 5.
1.   We spent a considerable amount of time looking through
     the 3(\J-CrM^£or the Inquest which I had prepared and the
     schedules of witnesses.    Mr. Jones wasn't very happy
     with the revised version in which I suggested that we

     would take the evidence of supporters first followed by

     others.     He thought that this would give an unbalanced

     impression.    We spent a considerable amount of time
     debating this. When we went through the various
     schedules it became clear that in respect of some of
     them at least it would be practical to deal with

     supporters and others at one and the same time but I

     thought that it might be difficult with regard to some

     of the other aspects, particularly as in principle I
     preferred to take the evidence of people whose conduct
     was likely to be called in question towards the end.

     We in the end agreed that we would think'about the set

     up again.

2.   We spent some time discussing the witnesses.     I

     explained that the names which I had put down would
     have to be pruned and thinned. This was the first cul
     so to speak.    We agreed that the officers would a.

     merge the schedule of names from the body files with




LESABB
     the other names, taking out duplicates.     We would then
     try and group witnesses and access them, so that we

     would have first rank witnesses with back-ups in case

     they were unable to come for example.     The object of

     the exercise was to try and give a rounded and balanced
     view of what people had seen or perceived both from
     supporters as well as others.   This will involve a
     considerable amount of work.    I suggested that it was

     important that we dealt with supporters and lay people

     first so that we could try and give as much notice as
     possible to them.   I explained that I had not yet

     looked at police witnesses because I had not had time.
     We then went and spent a considerable amount of time

     viewing the Don Valley Stadium complex and the Rutland
    Hotel.   Neither of them are ideal, but of the two,

    probably the Don Valley is for our purposes better,

    provided that we can use the suite downstairs and not

    the long room upstairs.   At the Rutland Hotel we were
    entertained to sandwiches and then had a look at the
    accommodation.   Whilst the syndicate bedrooms were

    satisfactory, the whole thing gave a rather run-down

    appearance with a very poor entry.    In addition the

    room suitable to be used as a court room was only

    marginally bigger than the Medico-Legal Centre and had
    no satisfactory lobby or entrance room.    One would have
    had to go into the open air to cross from one section

    to another.   Although it had attractions in the sense




LESABB
         that it was central and that there was food and
         accommodation etc., close by, I think it's

         disadvantages outweighed it's addvantages.

         Upon return to the office, we spent another hour or two

         talking about what needed to be done.   We discussed the
         background statement.   it was agreed that it would

         probably be better if this was given by several people

         rather than by one person and arrangements were put in

     hand for the appropriate officers to start preparing a

     statement.     The intention would be that they would let
     me have a version by the 15th so that we could send it
     out to solicitors as soon as possible for their

     comments, with the view to having an agreed back-ground
     statement,     we discussed whether this would be the

     opportune time to invite them to Pre-Inquest Review or

     discussion.     The problem was raised by me plus the fact
     that it would be difficult to exclude non-lawyers as
     this could be open to criticism at a later time.      We

     felt that perhaps on balance it might be better not to
    arrange a meeting.

    I pointed out that one or two of the sub-sections were

    more difficult than others, for example pub survey.

    Also I pointed out that the requirement for sorting out
    when people came through into the Stadium had to be

    done very carefully and that whoever presented it had

    to be ready to justify his opinions. We agreed some

    re-shuffling and re-numbering of the schedule and we




LESABB
                   also agreed at Mr. Jones's suggestion that we should

                   start with a video of 1989.     I asked whether there were
                  any other witnesses who were close to the barrier.

                  Apparently there are quite a lot.      Maybe up to 4 0 but

                  the evidence is even less specific and clear as that we
                  have already got.   I   asked whether we had a statement
                  from Nigel Clough      S U f f have a look to see what

                  there was available.     We discussed whether Mr. sharp^f
    if            should be called as a witness.     I^p^inted out that this
                  could create problems for him in view of his position
                  as Chief Constable in Liverpool.     We would have to
              review what he actually said to see whether a. it was
              necessary to have the evidence, and b.         whether it

              could be obtained from another                 I said I would

              re-consider the matter.        We discussed one or two other
              aspects relating to turnstiles and the               ln „hlch
-             people oould go through.        It was felt that this would

              be better dealt with by Dr. Nicholson.        We discussed
              the timing for warning of witnesses and we felt we

              ought to aim to do this as early as we reasonably could

              and that perhaps a suitable pro-fonna letter should be
             prepared and go out just as soon as we knew who we
             were certainly going to call,        we could then schedule

             them later.     We agreed that this work would have to be .
             done through the West Midlands Police officers.

             It was agreed that we would have a look to see who

             amongst the relatives was thought to be either unable




         LESABB
     or unwilling to give evidence or who might be

     particularlarly interested in doing so. We also noted

     that some people, particularly a P.C. Smith apparently
     were very unwell, and probably would not be fit to give

     evidence.   I said that we ought to have a doctor's
     letter to that effect.

     During the day we discussed the giving of evidence.                      I

     suggested it might be an idea if we dealt in fairly

    great detail with the evidence of some of the people
    who were perhaps at the forefront of the issue and who
           .         r.       . . . .        . . .     <P\    u   U           it,
    had made some of the ciriticisins.      Whilst           —one— &@rrs^r"^

    this was unfair as it gave undue prominence to them aes P*'1

         I— as other people who perhaps had been more quiet

                                        , Jjz- another it was not
    only fair but very fair because it ensured that the
    points which people felt strongly about and which they
    were prepared to be vocal over had been put to the
    inquest jury.

    I explained that I was unable to summons people outside

    mY jurisdiction and that if we had to issue summonses
    it would have to be done through the Crown Office.                    I

    would try and find out the procedure.            Letters notify

    ing people of the dates when they were likely to be
    called had to go out this month.

    We discussed the possibility of adjournment.                      I

    explained the problems i.e., Judicial Reviews,

    application by several parties, civil trial, overunning
    etc.


LESABB
