SLUG                                     FROM     ARRIVED               STATUS TIME

POPPER                          *        MSSbmn-r Fri Dec     6 14:04          3 :59


MERCURY PRESS AGENCY

SEE MEMO

The coroner who conducted the Hillsborough Disaster Inquests

yesterday (FRI)

said he might extend the disputed 3.15pm cut-off time if the inquiry

was re­

run .

And Dr Stefan Popper said the accidental death verdict returned on

all 96 did
O
rtot close the door to criminal prosecutions.

But he claimed a new inquest would be futile because of the

limitations

imposed on coroners' courts.

Speaking on BBC Radio Merseyside after Jimmy McGovern's controversial

Hillsborough docu-drama, Dr Popper said: "I did the best I could

under the

circumstances."

Dr Popper at first defended the 3.15pm cut off time which allowed



evidence about alleged police and ambulance blunders to go

unrecorded.

He said: "I was flexible in my approach because if you think back to

the
evidence that was heard wherever it was necessary we went well past

3.15 when

discussing individual cases."

But then he added: "It may be if I was doing this whole thing all

over again,

with the benefit of hindsight, I might take a different view bearing
in mind

the considerable anxiety which it seems to have caused.

"But you look at the evidence that was put before me, and I can only

go on the

evidence not on what I think, and the evidence was that people had

suffered an

injury which was irrecoverable.

"The fact that they well have breathed or lived if you like bit

longer doesn't

actually alter the fact that the injury which led to their death was

caused by

      crushing."

Dr Popper said he could understand the families' grief because he has

lost his

own son since the inquest.

But he said the accidental death verdict was misunderstood by many

people.

He said: "I made it perfectly plain that the word accidental did not

mean that

no-one was responsible.

"I made it quite clear it covers the spectrum from no blame to full

Blame.

"This is a verdict which is brought in hundreds of times throughout

the

country when say a motor accident occurs.

"And very often people recover damages or people are even prosecuted

from time

to time and even convicted."

Dr Popper said he had been unjustly blamed for the accidental death

verdict

which was returned by a jury.

He said: "I don't manufacture the evidence which is presented to me.
I did

the best I could with it.

"It isn't right to say that I reached a verdict.   It was a jury,

ordinary

people, not me, who came to that conclusion after very long

deliberation.

"I think these are just ordinary people from Sheffield who heard all

the

evidence and who took two or three days and eventually came back with

a

verdict."

P~\ Popper said a "reasonable round" picture of the tragedy was

painted at the

inquest.

He said: "You have to remember that a coroner's inquest has got very

limited

parameters.

"There were thousands of witnesses and I selected several hundred.

"There may have been some witnesses whom I could have called but I

think on

the whole a reasonable, round picture was given particularly when you

Wompared

it with Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry.

"I don't mean his was less rounded I mean that we covered, as far as

coroners

are able to, similar ground.

"It is obviously a matter of opinion whether I did a good job or a

bad jo b .

"All I can tell you is that I did the best within the circumstances

that I

could.     That's all I can say."

Dr Popper said another inquest would not serve any purpose.
He said: "I don't think having another inquest is likely to achieve

anything

because people have the wrong expectations of inquests.

"Inquests are so very limited on what   they can do.   It may bethat

the powers

that be take a different view on that so be it.

"Some of the issues which concern the   families would still not be

dealt with

because of the way inquests are constructed by statute.

"I don't think it would achieve very much."

MEMO: THIS COPY IS SUPPLIED ON THE PROVISO THAT BBC RADIO MERSEYSIDE



CREDITED IN THE PUBLISHED TEXT,

ends

Mercury Press Agency, 7th Floor, Cotton Exchange, Old Hall St,

LIVERPOOL L3 9LQ



MCRY8723 BMN7417 14:05 06 DEC 96
