                           WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY


J.M .K ILBEY, L L.B                                      Legal & Valuation
Deputy Solicitor to the Authority                        Services Department

My Reference       G 178/JK /S JP                        Civic House
                                                         Great Charles Street
                                                         Birmingham B3 3HN
Your Reference                                          Telephone 021-626-8301



           14th October 1992




          J M Jones Esq M.Sc.
          Deputy Chief Constable of Cheshire Constabulary
          Castle Esplanade
          Chester
          CH1 2PP




          Dear Mr Jones

          HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY AND CORONERS INQUEST

          I believe you may have spoken to Sue Harper about proceedings for
          judicial review of the Coroners verdict in the above case.  These
          proceedings are being taken by certain members of the victims families
          and I enclose a copy of the statements of their case.

          Out of the blue the Chief Constable of the West Midlands has been
          invited to participate in the application for leave to apply for judicial
          review by the families solicitors.

          Frankly we are not sure whether and if so how to respond to this invitation.
          You will appreciate there are very few officers currently serving who
          were with you at the time and in a sufficiently senior position to
          comment.

         I would be most grateful for your comments on the nature of the application
         being made.  Whilst on the one hand we are reluctant to become embroiled
         in the merits of the application we are naturally reluctant to face
         the reopening of the inquest for the want of having the opportunity to
         speak at the application for judicial review.

         I can tell you however, that I am liaising with Sheffield City Council
         who are making arrangements for the coroner himself to be represented.
         You may however appreciate that the coroner who conducted the inquest
         has also since retired and Sheffield now has a new coroner.

         You may find it helpful to discuss matters over the    phone in which
         case I would be pleased to do so.

         Yours sincerely




         J Kilbey      v
         Deputy Solicit^
