                                                         20th October 1997




Mr. Michael J. C. Burgess,
Coroners Society for England & Wales,




Dear Michael,


I did not think that I would have to contact you again about Hillsborough.

I enclose a copy o f a letter which Mr. Bone has sent to me. I would like to discuss it
and my proposed reply. I tried to ring you today but you were out. Unfortunately I
am rather elusive during the day but you can usually contact me sometime in the
evening on the above telephone number.

I hope that you are keeping well.



Yours sincerely,



S. L. Popper
              THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
              Room 1106
              50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
              Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Dr S L Popper                                                Your reference:
8 Colwick Park Close
Colwick                                                      Our reference:
NOTTINGHAM
NG4 2DZ                                                      Date:         L*    October 1997



    r ib C U T                             (J0j*ip*s
Thank you for your letter o f 23 September.

I apologise for this slightly delayed reply. Since you wrote, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
received a major submission on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support and had the
opportunity to discuss it with them and their legal representatives. He has been to Liverpool
and met many of the families involved.

We have also had a letter from the Coroners’ Society of England and Wales - 1 attach a copy
of that and of our reply to it.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith takes the view that it is a matter for you whether you have any
contacts with the Family Support Group. It is not clear to him why the group should wish to
contact you. In view of the fact that they seek the quashing of the verdicts on the
Hillsborough deaths by Judicial Review or under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, you
may think it wiser not to have any direct contact with them.

I anticipate that it will be helpful if Lord Justice Stuart-Smith could see you at some point to
discuss various questions which the Support Group and others have raised about the Inquests.
If so, we would notify you by letter with full details of the topics the Judge will wish to
discuss. It would be helpful if any such meeting could take place at our offices here (we
would meet your travel expenses). If you wished to have somebody with you, such as a
legal representative or a representative of the Coroners’ Society (or both), there would of
course be no difficulty about that. We would arrange for a full shorthand note to be taken,
and would send you a copy.

Can I take it that you would be willing to meet the Judge on that basis?

I am copying this letter to Mr Dorries.
     r " > '■ • A . - )       j,       t
             -            ^                ()
         f                         T
C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny

G:\HlllSBOR\HAIN\DRPOPPER. 104
