                                                                           STATION

NAME:          MILES J.
               DAVIDSON                          '      n
                                                        f      / <f
ADDRESS:

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:__
                                                      V<V7')
OCCUPATION: M.B., Ch.B

Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.

DATED: 070789                                   .           M J DAVIDSON (SIQJED)



           STATEMENT FOR THE HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY
           On the 15th of April, 1989 (150489) I was on duty with Dr. John
           GLENDENING in the Casualty Department at the Northern General
           Hospital, Sheffield.   At approximately 3.27 p.m. (1527) that day, the

           emergency telephone from Rotherham Ambulance Headquarters rang and we
           were informed that there was a Paediatric cardiac arrest coining into

           the Department.   About 3 minutes later the ambulance arrived, bringing

           a young boy, who looked to be about 10 or 12 years of age.      It was at
           that point that we were told by the ambulance drivers who brought him

           in that a major incident had occurred at Hillsborough.     The boy was

           taken into the resuscitation rocun and attempts to resuscitate him were

           made by myself, Dr. GLENDENING, Dr. WALKER, Anaesthetist, and one of

           the Paediatric Doctors.
           No more than 2 minutes later a second ambulancearrived, bringing a man

           looking to be in his late 2O's. He too was brought into the

           resuscitation rocm.    Some 2 minutes after the receipt of the second

           patient, we had another 2 ambulances outside bringing patients in.        I

           believe that the time now was approximately 3.35 p.m. (1535).     I find
the events of the next 5 minutes very difficult toromanber exactly.

I ramember the arrival of several other cyanosedyoung patients and

the early arrival of a number of our colleagues whowere on-call in

the hospital.

At around 3.45 p.m. (1545) I was told by Mr. WARDR0PE, the Casualty
Consultant, to go to the ground because there had been a Police

request for a medical team on site.   I helped to load some of the

emergency supply boxes into the back of an ambulance and waited for

the Anaesthetist Dr. QUARTLEY,who had also been directed to come to

the ground.   There was a slight delay of a couple of minutes before he
was able to join us and I would estimatethat this ambulance left the
Department to go to the ground some 7 or 8 minutes after the directive
had been given.   There were two Ambulancemen in the vehicle and two
Policemen as well as myself and the Anaesthetist.

The ambulance went into one of the entrances off to the bottom of

Berries Road by the Sports Hall at Hillsborough where there was a

large Police prescence and a great deal of ccmmotion.   On getting out
of the ambulance, myself and the Anaesthetist automatically headed for
the pitch where we presumed the majority of casualties would be.     I
now know that this area of the pitch was the area between the Spion

Kop and the North stand. About 20 yards into the field of play from

that comer of the pitch, we attempted to resuscitate a male patient

who was laid on a board with an advertising slogan on it.   I have

already submitted a report to the Enquiry regarding this patient.

Neither myself or the Anaesthetist were wearing any identifying

clothing, which in the rush to load the ambulance with airways and

lines, we had omitted to pack.   Because of this, there was an element

of delay in trying to ask where any further seriously ill patients

were.   I think if we had been identifiable, we could have been
DAVIDSON               MILES   J.                                         3


directed by the Police to the casualties needing attention most.     At
this point, I got separated frcm the Anaesthetist who I did not see

for the rest of my stay down at Hillsborough.

I went around a number of patients who were lying on the pitch.      It was

difficult to tell at a glance, the nature of the majority of injuries
whether people were seriously hurt or not. After attending perhaps

another 15 or 20 individuals,I found no one who was in need of urgent

medical attention.I was not able to tell where the crush had been and

at this point, I went to one of the Senior Police Officers on the

pitch, and explaining who I was, asked if he could tell me where any

of the serious casualties were and he directed me through to the
Sports Hall.

The Sports Hall was being used as both the mortuary and a resuscitation
room, half and half, and as I went along the line of some 15

casualties requiring attention, it was obvious that almost everyone of

then was being attended to by a Doctor who had been in the ground,
either General Practitioners or Hospital Doctors.    Two of them I
recognised.    The ambulance crew that we had come down to the ground

with, had already taken the majority of medical supplies into the
Sports Hall and by the time I had got intothe gymnasium, a number of

intravenous lines had been sited and a central pool of drugs and

equipment had been established in the middle of the floor.   I examined
about 6 casualties who were not being attended to.   One male patient

was unresponsive to verbal questioning.   His eyeswere staring straight
in front of him. His pupils were equally responsive to light.      His

pulse was weak and I checked his blood pressure which was satisfactory.

He had air entry to both bases of his lungs but on inspection of the
back of the rib cage, he appeared to have a small flail segment.     I

borrowed a biro off one of the Policeman and wrote flail on his flank,
‘DAVIDSON              MILES   J.                                             4


inserted an I.V. line and asked one of the Ambulancemen if he could be

nerved as a priority from the Sports Hall, if possible maintaining a

recovery position he was in.        I now know that this patient came to the

Northern General Hospital.
There were a lot of people down at the ground who, whilst not requiring

immediate resuscitation, appeared quite dazed and confused.       Seeing as

there was now a plentiful supply of Doctors having a good supply of

equipment, I decided that I would be better off back in the Casualty

Department.   Ambulances now appeared to be going to the Hallamshire

and I approached one of the Senior Police Officers who arranged a lift
back to the Department for me.
I would estimate that I arrived back at the Casualty Department
at the Northern General Hospital at approximately 4.30 p.m. (1630).

The resuscitation rooms were, at this time, filled to capacity.       I saw

that each patient had at least two Doctors attending them and I

reported back to Mr. WARDROPE who directed me to go back to the main
Department and the cubicles there, where a number of casualties not

requiring immediate resuscitation had been sent.       I understood my role

here to be to assess and re-direct patients as quickly as possible to

either ward admission, or if I considered their injuries to be minor,

to direct them to the Physiotherapy Department at the Hospital where I

understood there to be a number of General Practitioners who were
dealing with the less seriously injured patients, who, it was intended,

would be discharged.    The majority of patients I saw were ones who had

been in the ground and who had been crushed and had suffered a degree

of asphyxiation.   It is difficult to remember individual cases.      The

majority of them were in a degree of discomfort on inspiration. A
significant number of them appeared to be under the influence of

alcohol, though I could only say that one or two of them were
        .J
       J&Idson             MILES   J.                                           5


       intoxicated.
       I remained in the main part of the Casualty Department for perhaps 90

       minutes after returning frcm Hillsborough.   By this time, we had no
       more minor injuries left in the Department. Although not
       participating in any further emergency resuscitation of patients after

       returning frcm Hillsborough, I felt happy that the more senior staff

       who had arrived in the Department were dealing with this aspect of

       patient care and that my time could best be served by trying to keep
       the rest of the Department clear, in anticipation of any further
       casualties and of those walking wounded, who we all felt sure would be

9      coming in to fill the Department.    As it happened, we did not see

       mucmnor trauma at all.




                                                          M J DAVIDSON SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:
          TIME:           DATE:    070789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

®TICERS SIGNATURE:
