                                                                            STATION

NAME:           PETER JAMES
                MARSH

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:     CASUALTY DOCTOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110789                                                P.J. MARSH (SIGNED)



           I ana the above person and I reside at the above address.

           I was b o m in Merseyside and in August 1988 (000888) I moved to London

           as a career move, I am at present a Casualty Doctor at I

                                                        [ am a Liverpool Football

           Club supporter and I have attended many games with other members of

           ray family from the age of (15) fifteen.   However, since living in the

           London area I have not attended so many games.

           On Saturday the 15th of April 1989 (150489)1 attended the Liverpool v

           Nottingham Forest F.A. Cup semi final game at the Hillsborough

           Football Ground in Sheffield.

           I travelled from ray heme in London, together with ray sister,

                                                                            We left

           London at about 10.00 am (1000) on that morning and travelled together

           in itty car,                                        |we stopped at

           Scratchwood Services to fill up with fuel then drove direct to

           Sheffield.

           The roads were quite busy with Nottingham Forest fans but traffic

           flowed very well, as it was well signposted, we arrived in Sheffield
MARSH                PETER JAMES                                         2


at about 1.30 pm (1330), we went to a pub in Sheffield for lunch and a

drink, the pub was very quiet.

We left the pub after lunch and drove towards Hillsborough, we parked

the car on a housing estate at the top of a hill at the Spion Kop end

of the ground, we then walked together towards the ground, I wanted

to go to the toilet and I saw a public house, I went in and used the

toilet, the pub that was on the main road and modem, was packed

full of Nottingham Forest fans, the fans were singing and drinking,

but there was no trouble.

We niade our way to the ground, other fans were in the street drinking

frcm cans of beer, we asked Police Officers on the side of the road

for directions to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, this was given.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstiles between 2.30 pm (1430) and

2. 40 pm (1440), we had both got tickets for seats in the North

Stand, our father had obtained the   14 tickets for us from a contact

in Liverpool.

Upon our arrival at the turnstiles I saw a mass of people, not orderly

queues, I could however quite clearly see the turnstiles I required a

the left hand end of the row of stiles, we joined the crowd.    It was

difficult to direct yourself through the crowd, the pressure in the

crowd was more than normal, I would say that we stood together in the

crowd up until just before 3.00 pm (1500).   I saw a Policeman on a

horse attempting to control the crowd, I didn't see any stewards

though.

Just before 3.00 pm (1500) a large blue concertina type gate at the

far left hand end of all the turnstiles, at the left hand end of

the North Stand entrances, suddenly opened, I don't know who opened

it, people had been banging on the gate for seme time though.

As the gate opened I only took two steps, I was pushed the rest of
MARSH                 PETER JAMES


the way though, just beyond the gate there was a line of Police

funnelling fans towards the rear of the North Stand.     At the end of

the Police line the crush eased and I rejoined ray sister, we walked

together into the North Stand and took up our seats easily.

In the seats, I met ray parents, M   r    .     a    n    d    L ^

        together with ray sister                         who live at



          who had travelled to the game from Liverpool.

As we took up our seats the game had just started, both me and ray

sister still had complete and unchecked tickets,     I had not seen

any trouble inside the ground and I hadn't seen anyone drinking

alcohol inside the ground.

Aftar three to four (3-4) minutes of play I saw fans climbing over

the front fence of the centre pens in the Leppings Lane stand     and

from what I can recall it seemed like the 'overspill'    of fans were

allowed to sit on the track area behind the photographers, then more

and more fans climbed over and the quantity of fans on the pitch

meant that they had to spill onto the pitch, even then I didn't

realise the enormity of what was going on.     I had seen people being

carried off that were obviously alive, I still thought that the game,

even though it had been stopped by now, would continue.

Only when I saw people apparently dead did I start to    come to terras

with what was going on at that end of the ground.

I decided to go down onto the pitch to help.    I approached a Police

Officer at the back of the North Stand who took me to the

gymnasium, I arrived there at about 3.25 pn (1525).

In the gym there were a number of people that were dead, I would

say that there were no more than 20 people dead in the gym.    There

were others there with minor injuries.   I decided that it would be
MARSH                  PETER JAMES                                          4


better to go onto the pitch to help those in a serious condition.

I walked onto the pitch at the comer of the Spion Kop and the

North Stand, people on advertising boards were being carried

towards me, I saw one man who looked to be very ill.     I stopped the

men carrying him and introduced myself as a doctor, a female nurse

cams up to me and assisted.     I checked the man on the board and

couldn't find any pulse, he wasn't breathing, he had fixed, dilated

pupils that didn't react to light, he had no major broken bones,

the man had gone blue.

The man was white, in his early 20's, thin build, and about 5'10 tall,

he had short mid brown hair, I think he was clean shaven, he was

wearing jeans and a red Liverpool 'Candy' top.

I was with this man when he was transferred to an ambulance stretcher,

we got the man into an awaiting ambulance and went on to the Northern

General Hospital.

The nurse, whose name I do not know, stayed at the ground whilst a

man, who again I do not know, assisted with heart massage.      I

maintained an open airway and gave oxygen to the man on the way to the

hospital.

When we arrived at the hospital the man had not started breathing and

had no pulse whatsoever. I informed, who I believe to be the member

of staff whose responsibility it was to check over the people being

bought into the hospital, I advised him of the man's condition.      He

then decided to stop heart massage, the man was taken away to a side

roan, the man was dead.     I did not certify death and I do not know who

did, I would suggest that the doctor posted to the door would have

certified death.

I introduced myself to the staff in the Casualty Department and

offered my services.     I spoke to the Casualty consultant.   The
MARSH                  PETER JAMES                                             5


Casualty Consultant directed me to assist with a man that was being

resuscitated, the man who had had an airway fitted and having heart

massage died.   An ambulanceman was maintaining airflow whilst a

medical student administered the heart massage. I simply checked that

everything was being done correctly.    This man had ginger hair, he was

short, clean shaven and average build, his top clothing had been

removed, he had jeans on, he would be in his mid to late 20's.

By this stage the Casualty Department had quietened down considerably.

With reference to the second man who died, he had a wrist tag with a

number on, he also had an accompanying file, I wrote in this file what

drugs and treatment had been given and that we had stopped heart

massage.    I wrote down the time of this occurrance and signed that the

man was dead.

After this point I went to the physiotherapy part of the Hospital

where I saw about 30 casualties with minor injuries.       I sent all but

one of these heme.   The one man who appeared to be well, but had been

knocked unconscious was admitted for overnight observations.

By 6.00 pn (1800) the area was clear so I left the hospital.       I walked

back to ray car and found ray mother and sister waiting.     I still had ray

car keys.    I travelled back to Liverpool.

As a general observation I feel that there was a lack of co-ordination

to get the injured to hospital in priority order and an apparent lack

of any major disaster contingency plans at the ground.
       MARSH              PETER JAMES


                                         P.J. MARSH SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   110789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
