 draft
                                                           Sept. 1999




Ms. Ann Adlington,
HFSG,
1st Floor,
Central Buildings,
41 North John St.,
Liverpool,
L2 6RR.



Dear Ms. Adlington,

           The Hillsborough Disaster ; Adlington v Duckenfield & M urray

Thank you for your letter of 8th September 1999. As I indicated in my letter to you of
21st June 1999 I was extremely reluctant to get involved any further in matters relating
to the Hillsborough Disaster and that remains my position.

I am a little confused by your letter as you have headed it R v Duckenfield and Murray.
This would indicate that the prosecution has been taken over by the Crown but the
rest of your letter seems to imply that the position remains that this is a private
prosecution. I assume that your heading is a typographical error.

Despite the first paragraph I do not wish to be unhelpful and will endeavour to address
the issues you raise subject to the following caveats ( or whatever the modern word for
this is).

1 The ravages of age and the passage of time have affected my recall and any thing
   that I say must be read subject to the proviso that I may not be recalling fully or
   correctly.
2. I do not have the time or inclination to travel to Sheffield to search through the
   Coronal papers even if the Coroner were prepared to allow me to do so. Again this
   affects the possible accuracy of what I say.

For convenience I do not intend to repeat this each time I comment but the whole of
this letter must be read subject to the above.
   Whether what I say is of help to you will be a matter for you to judge I do however
   want to make it clear that merely because ] have replied must not be construed as
   agreement or support for the action which you are taking.

  Ialso want to say that I find it difficult to see how anything I may or may not have said
  or done m mquests months if no, years after the event can a ffe jh e evide"2 wMch
  the prosecution will have to establish in a criminal court.

  It.‘S     “"heard of for inquest verdicts and criminal trial verdicts to differ On the

  fa respect
  m  reLe“ ofo fthe
                 f tetwo
                      T ^defendants
                          f f “J " t™and   f
                                      ""?the jury evidently did not “bring
                                                                         * °the
                                                                            it in.     W

  Turning now to your questions.


  1. Disclosure of statement to witnesses.


  A. Shortly after the disaster occurred Lord Justice Taylor as he then was (LJT) was
  appointed to head an mquuy and the West Midland Police were appointed to
                wvestigation into the Hillsborough Disaster. The initial responsibility of
  West Midland Pohce(WMP) was to LJT and then to the Director of PubHc               ^
 Prosecution and m due course to myself. I was not consulted about these
 appointments (and I make no complaint in this regard) and obviously was not involved
    th the making of them. Nor did I know the legal niceties of the appointments and I
 forces 1' Uf kdythat at that tlme 1 was aware of the legal relationship between the
 tn h t f S 38 WaS C° nCemed 1 dealt with the WMP who as far as 1 knew (subject
 to what I am gomg to say below ) had control of the documentation.

 I seem to recall that LJT did allow a degree of disclosure to the parties but I cannot
 recall the details of this. You undoubtedly will be able to establish this better than I
cL T T                      bvolved h thoseproceedi^ -               a— g£
m   T tL T J         f ^ T u Sr 8 that they          there     other explanations (e g
retention of copies of proofs by the makers or their solicitors) which suggest

dated?June11! ^ 1                              °              ^ ^       t0         Jones
fw hth TI T          not only says that the statements were circulated to a11the parties
(w ch I assume would include your Clients’ then representatives) but in the final
sentence of the third paragraph he speaks o f releasing the final version of the statement
to the press. (U>rd Justice Stuart Smith (U SS) Scrutiny page 213). Obviously this
would only apply to statements which were before LJT.

               leamed !!“ *, WMP Were witMra™ S t o ” * e case and that they
would be handing over the documentation to South Yorkshire Police (SYP) I would
^ n     r     T l, thlSK
                       by e"d ° f MarCh 1991 and Probab|y earlier but cannot recall
when that would have been. 1 seem to vaguely remember that by March 19911 also
knew that the reason for this was that the appointment of another force to investigate

t t ,X     2 eony SYP bU‘ Wh3t'                reCa" " ^



                                               2
In connection with this 1 have to say that:

i. Even if I had known about the legal relationship between the forces there is nothing
    I could have done about it.
ii. If LJT and the DPP accepted the position it would not have been a practical
    proposition for me to ask for some other arrangement to apply.

I recall one item of evidence in which the witness Mr. T. Birchard indicated that he
had access to a video which he had reviewed over the weekend. (I have a copy of the
transcript of this evidence at home and can give you a reference Day 72 page 14). I
seem to recall that I was a bit startled by this but in the end it turned out to be the
compilation tape which he had reviewed (p i7). Unfortunately I cannot help you as to
whose copy he viewed. Again I think at one point the video and perhaps others were
made available so that interested people could view them. Mr. Birchard made his
comment in open court and I think no legal representative took exception to his
remark.

I think you are right when you say that it was my policy not to allow the distribution of
statements to the parties I seem to recall that witnesses were allowed to refresh their
memory when they came to give evidence. As far as I was concerned the rule applied
to all as I was anxious that the inquests should be conducted fairly to all. You will of
course again note what I have mentioned above about LJTT enquiry over which
naturally I had no control.

Turning to the two letters you have forwarded to me namely one of 15thNov 1990 to
Silverman Livermore signed by Mervyn Jones and the other to Mrs S Stringer of 28th
March 1991 signed by StanBeechey. Mr. Hick’s letter of 13.11.90 was not enclosed.

There was a great deal of activity regarding the release of statements and I was aware
that people were requesting statements and that these requests were being turned
down during the course of the inquests. It is difficult to be certain but the letters do
look familiar and it would not surprise me if a search of the documentation might not
reveal copies of them or something similar.

What 1 can say is that having read the letters they do not in my view in any way
support the suggestion that SYP had access to material which was not being made
available to other parties during the course of the inquests. As you know WMP were
appointed very shortly after the disaster occurred and it would have been a little bit late
if I had complained about the legal position in late 1990 or early 1991. Furthermore I
do not think bearing in mind my limited role (i.e. to determine the who, when, where,
and how) that it had any particular relevance to my enquiries.

  I do not now know the precise date of hand over of the documentation to SYP but
as far as I am aware documents were in the custody of WMP and were handed over
during the WMP withdrawal.




                                              3
   t o t a J ? ‘f T * W M P ^                    aCCOumable to       than one party
   As far as the inquests documentation were concerned I would have expected mv

                                            inS,Wti0nS bU‘ ' “        ^            “      °*»

   “          r T ' ;i°" ?i ‘‘ “ d ' *hereforePresumetta‘ SilvermanLivennore did not
   object to the content ofthe letter from Mr. Jones of 15* November 1990 Iftheyhad

   c o n S g ^ ™ S S C0U'd              * * * “ UP direC*0    1   me but 1 d° “ * " » »




  K is unfortunate that when I first drew Mr. Croston’s attention to the statement of
  initially found                   ^     °f               * * n°* have a « W ) il ™ "<*


  in'!*! a T ™ 1y° U,hat ™ tnquest is quite diffei™t from say a criminal prosecution
    that the former is inquisitorial whilst the latter is adversarial. Not only this but the
  coroner , the inquisitor and also conducts the inquest. I, is the coro“            £ £ £

 presented06         Pl“         “ *“ “ *          d“ deS “ the                   £ ta

 Although I have now no specific rem1W.tion i™™ a conv           .. . ,,
 believe
 r    Vf that1 the initial request
                ", II,uiai request!             1;o bePY
                                                       calledm° Whch
                                                              came    1 have
                                                                   from      Seen 1
                                                                         Mr. King
 One of my officers in WMP got in touch with SYP to contact




 Again although I cannot now recall it I presume that it must have been in my mind
  at it might be possible to introduce the statement under the provisions of Rule 37
provided of course that it was not controversial.




You will appreciate that having taken the view that the statement contained matters o f
comroveisy1 could have decided without any further reference to any one that it could
not be introduced and that would have been the end of the matter.


                                               4
 However presumably I felt that I wanted to put the evidence before the jury if at all
 possible and I even considered whether it would be possible to read the statement
 leaving out the controversial parts. I must have abandoned this idea.

Although again I cannot recall specifically I assume that I must have felt that the only
person who could legitimately object to the use of this statement as documentary
evidence would be Superintendent Murray as he was mentioned by name. In other
words I would now say that this was a last attempt to see if it would be possible to
put the document in under Rule 37. When Mr. Manning indicated that the contents
were not agreed that merely confirmed my own opinion.

I want to stress that the initiative for this meeting came from me. If I had not made a
file note it may well be that I would not now remember it. I was given to writing file
notes and dictated quite a few!

I can see no reason why Mr. Manning should not exercise his right to object to a
document being put in under Rule 37 if he thought it contained matters which were
controversial and which because the maker was not being called was not open to cross
examination. As it happens in view of what I will say below it is possible that he too
may have misread the document.

From a practical point of view the outcome would have been the same if I had taken
the decision without exploring Mr. Manning’s view and similarly had I introduced the
issue to the lawyers in the absence of the juiy the document could not have been used
if objection had been taken.

I have read with interest pages 30 -32 of Mr. Cadbuiy’s ruling as to the meaning of
what                    I have also reread the wording in               statement and it
seems to me that Mr. Cadbury is right in what he says.

 I now wonder whether I overlooked or did not attribute sufficient weight:
i to the word “league”
ii. nor to the fact that              Snakes it plain that he had not been in the concourse
    area during the previous semi final.
“i- ^ a t    ,         Is not referring to the blue tunnel gates at all but to the small gates
    at the rear of the terraces.

Had I read the statement in that way I think I might well have taken a different view on
the question of controversy but as I do not have Supt. Murray’s transcripts to hand I
cannot remember what if anything he said about the discussion with                  or the
perimeter gates. Obviously if that is in dispute then the position regarding introducing
the statement under Rule 37 remains.

As far as I can recall I did not hold other such private conversations with the parties
you mention.


3. Editing of statements.


                                              5
     For the reason which I have given above particularly that I                      ,       nnt




   jsss:rsxis
  T is s ° +       I      ^ so,lcItors were fully aware of the practice (see page 213 of
        Scrutiny and paragraphs 19-24 of chapter 7 of the report).

  I have noticed in an index which I have consulted that among the pacers at
    ere is a reference to a letter between Mr. Jones/Mr. Brummell dated 7th Tune 1989 T
  have not reviewed this letter as it is in Sheffield but I notice that
  parties and carries the same date as the letter set out on page 213 of the LTSS S*
  report. If Weed there is a copy o f this letter m J E g Z £ £ m i s Z T
  the statements.6"        °r“               ^       0P'K>m“'ity ° f ^ ”8 “ware o f the editing of


 T         reCaU that 1 had conceras about this matter nor it seems did the enquiry team
           aw your particular attention to LJSS comments at paragraph 24 of chapter 7.

 You will aiso appreciate that whatever might have been the position with regard to
     S qu,ry the inquests were concerned with a much more limited brief and
 ^pressions of opinion however interesting (except from Experts of course ) were
        e evan o etermimng the 4 questions that a coroner concerns himself with.

 I would also wish to remind you that in many cases the recollections were
 supplemented by Criminal Justice Statements.

You are correct that a copy of the DPP submission was made availab le tn ™ B
pent and t t a this was one o f * , principal sources for s S o “        £ ™ oS T
enquiry. If these were the edited versions then these were the ones 1 used It was not

S ee                                13180hadt ioamms                         » wha*«
                                         "               & r each            d™           -


I must also remind you that with a veiy few exceptions the evidence before the iurv
m he^t              W°Uld n0t ^     ^    aCC6SS 10 dements/recollections edited 7


owr *H                ° ? ° n lookmg through the transcripts that there were well
over a dozen witnesses including some police officers who gave evidence resardine
what they felt happened with regard to the tunnel gates in the 1988 match



                                                 6
Please acknowledge receipt of tMs letter.


Yours sincerely,



S. L. Popper.




                                       7
