                                                                                        /   9{ L / ^

                    Office of H.M. Coroner
                     The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET

HM Coroner:                                                          South Yorkshire (West)
Christopher P. Dorries                                                    (0114) 273-8721



                                                                                 17 June 1999
Your ref:
Our ref:

Dr Stefan Popper




Dear Stefan
Hillsborough etc.
I hope that you are keeping well. Unfortunately Hillsborough does not show too much
signs of going away. Although I clearly remember your earlier comments about not
wishing to become involved further (perfectly understandable), I have been asked to post
the attached documents on to you by the Hillsborough Family Support Group solicitor.
However I would be grateful for your comments on one item. The statement of Mr Daines
(presently Assistant Chief Constable) at the rear of the blue folder says in the second
paragraph that he holds some documents on behalf of the coroner. I do not think that this
is correct. Our own archives surely contain our own copies of everything that was used by
you at the inquest. These are the original documents of the coroner’s court although they
may in themselves be copies of documents that the West Midlands Police obtained during
their investigation for the public enquiry, inquest and DPP’s report.
I am writing to Ian Daines today to seek clarification of this.
Whether you choose to reply to HFSG is entirely a matter for you. I do not see that it is
got very much to do with us beyond Mr Daine’s comment.
It would be helpful, but not essential, to have a copy of any reply that you send.
Best wishes.




C P parries
    Coroner




                                        Fax: (0114)272-6247
                                                                                     CMJ7816A.DOC
                                                          21st June 1999

C.P. Domes,
HM Coroner,
The Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery St.,
Sheffield,
S3 7ET


Dear Chris,

                                     Re: Hillsborough

Thank you for your letter of 17th June received on the 19th.

You are quite right that I do not wish to get involved further but it is in fact very
difficult not to reply when something comes through the post.

I have therefore written to Mr. Croston dealing with a couple of points. I have also
reminded him of my earlier correspondence when the CPS were conducting their own
inquiry.

With regard to Mr. Dames’ comments about holding documents for the Coroner I am
puzzled like you obviously are. I cannot recall that I handed any documents to South
Yorkshire Police (SYP) for safe keeping as the Coroner is quite capable of looking
after his own documents.

 I am not sure about this but I think although West Midland Police (WMP) were an
independent force investigating the matter when they finished they handed everything
they held over to the SYP. I seem to recall that some one told me that this was the
normal procedure. You may however wish to check on this.

  The vast bulk of the material was not of course specific to the Coroner though certain
items such as the Body files would have been specifically prepared or compiled. I
think in addition to our copies of these files and our copy statements etc. used in the
inquests WMP also had a set or sets and handed these over together with presumably
the original signed documents. You will no doubt recall that the documentation we
used was only a fraction of what had been amassed. It may be this is what he is
referring to.
  I also presume that they handed over videos etc. which they might have had. In fact
I seem to recollect that when I wanted a particular video for LJ Stuart Smith scrutiny
you got SYP to prepare the videos for me. I presume this was because they had
copying facilities which you did not have but you would know the reason. Again he
may have these in mind.

Whether you think it necessary to retrieve documents etc. which were specifically
prepared for the Coroner is a matter for you. However I think that the vast bulk of the
material is so to speak ‘share ware’ and the Coroner probably would not have an
exclusive right to it.

As requested I enclose a copy of the letter I have written to Mr. Croston and to Ms.
Adlington.

I hope that you are keeping well.



Yours sincerely,




S. L. Popper.
