                                                    fn-nfr
                                      o f-   < -U k l ( l *(<?')
TELEPHONE CALL TO MR. FRAZEF             <-.3   U


I had found a note on my desk which said "please ring

‘ffhim" .   It turned out to be an old note.           He confirmed that

he was coming on the 30th with M r . King of Counsel and

probably an articled clerk.      He mentioned that Mr. Jackson

from the Supporters Association might be in touch.                    I said

that he had already been so.      We discussed Mrs. McBrien.

He confirmed that she had told him that she didn't want

him to represent her at the Inquest though she still wanted

him to act in other matters.      She seemed to be under the

impression that she would be able to ask most questions.

Mr. Frazer said that he felt Mrs. McBrien thought that the

              should not have been opened under any

circumstances and felt very strongly about that.

He said that he thought there cannot be many coroners in

this country who weren't feeling sorry for me.                     I said it

was a very difficult problem and a lot of hard work.                     It

was regrettable that it would not be possible to please

 everybody., indeed f aj3£l tj^eft I had had another letter from

 somebody who wasn't very happy with the Interim Inquests

 despite the fact that he Mr. Frazer had made a special

 submission on his behalf.     I said in the end I could only

 do my best and that the verdict was a matter of

 indifference to me in the sense that I had no axe to grind

 and that it was a matter for the Jury to bring in whatever

 verdict they thought.     Mr. Frazer was very sympathetic.




 BACAAV
                                  2




We spoke about the location.    I told him that the Inquest

Review was at the Medico Legal Centre but the Inquests were

at the Town Hall.   Mr. Frazer thought that we might well be

moving back here if interest fell off as sharply as it had

done in the Interim Inquests.    He said that he would have

to be very quiet at the Pre-Inquest Review as he had

counsel with him.




 BACAAV
