19th September 2003


Spoke to Chris Domes today about his letter of 11th September relating to a letter
addressed to him by David Conn of 21st August 2003.

I confirmed that I did not want to do an interview.

I told him that Supt Stan Beechey was a West Midland police officer who was part of
the team that dealt with the coroners inquests.

I pointed out that the vast majority of the statements had not been taken for my inquiry
but for Lord Justice Taylor and the DPP.

I had a Coroner’s office who was Mervyn Jones who was Assistant Chief Constable in
West Midlands at the time.

He had a team and I contacted several people in it but my Comer’s Officer was
Mervyn.

Stan initially was not the most senior officer after Mervyn as there was at least on
Chief Superintendent but by the time we came to do the main inquests he was assigned
to Sheffield and at that time was the most senior ranking officer after Mervyn. Bearing
in mind the structure of the police he may well have been second in command but it did
not affect me. He was a contact for me but I also contacted other members of the
team I think Sgt Threadgold the listing officer springs to mind. I think Mervyn liked to
be kept inform

I reminded Chris about the interim inquests and the summaries and told him that I had
gone through all these as I had said I would to Mr. Frazer for the families. I then
wrote asking for corrections or amendments etc and I wrote to Stan and also to an
Chief Inspector Tobe. I must have met him as there is a meeting at which he was
present but I think I only got to know him when he was posted to Sheffield.

The structure of the police team was something for the West Midlands Police and the
officers were serving police officers no doubt to police discipline. My officer was
Mervyn.

I said I thought the reason for the enquiry was that Stan had been part of the West
Midland Crime squad which had been disbanded . I did find out about this at some
time I think during the main inquests (I think Mervyn told me perhaps when Stan was
allocated to Sheffield) but he also told me that there were no spots on him.

Chris Dorries confirmed that there was no need to write to him.. He would send me a
copy of his letter.
