FILE NOTE DATED 19.7.89.
LONG MEETING WITH MERVYU JONES HE
-n nr . ii   iy
              ^iirt--    i
                         i ........   -
                                           HTLLSBOKOTTGH.
                                               ,    .................




We agreed that he would let me have a copy of his notes which
would be really a list of the points which we had discussed.
This is so that I don’t have to duplicate the recording
of the meeting.
Perhaps the most important thing we discussed was the involvement
of the D.P.P.           He will be getting in touch with him and
I said that it might be a good idea if we both met him so
that we can try and sort out the D.P.Pfs involvement
and the effect if any on the Inquest.
I also spoke to him about the ACC’s report and discussed the
fact that it might be abvisable to get a bit more work done
to try and sort out the figures before and after the opening
of the gates and also to have a look at the loading, if
that's the right word, of Pfen 2 which appears to have been around
the Green Guide figure, but which was being described by virtually
everyone as pretty empty.
lvTe discussed Fiance for a little while.               I explained that if
we were to hand out any statements of people whose evidence
was admitted for documentary purposes, then we would normally
expect to make a charge, and that I agreed in the present
circumstances, and for the time being to waive my charge in
favour of Sheffield City Council.
Mervyn wanted to know whether I refunded any costs to the
South Yorkshire Police Authority in connection with either the
officers who are permanently employed, or other investigations.
I explained to him that we never made any payment whatsoever,
but that this was provided for us by the Police Authority a^ required,
on a ib?ee of Charge basis.
He mentioned that he had had a letter from their solicitors to the
effect that he should not be acting for the Coroner and making some
illusion that the Coroner might hsve to pay the bill.                   This was not
Mervyn's understanding of the situation, and he wanted me to confirm
that in the past and indeed currently that police involvement in Coronal
work was not debited to the Coroner’s Service.
