                                                         30th November 1996


Ms. Katy Jones,
Granada Television Ltd.,
Quay Street,
Manchester
M60 9EA




Dear Ms. Jones,

Thank you for your letter of 21st November 1996 which I received today in reply to my letter of
24thNovember 1996!.

I am disappointed with the contents of this letter so this now makes two of us .

Whatever you had intended the fact of the matter is that it was implicit that a reply was not
necessary if I was not willing to set up a meeting.

I would ask you to carefully reconsider the second page of your letter as the whole question of
replying is governed by the introductory words “If you are agreeable to setting up a
meeting”. Please therefore ensure that the position is correctly portrayed.




Yours sincerely,



S. L. Popper.
          G       R   A       N   A     D      A               T       E    L       E     V     I    S       I   O       N




Dr Stefan Popper




21st November 1996

Dear Dr Popper,

Thank you for your letter.

I am afraid I cannot give you any further assurances on this matter.
Implicit in my original letter was the need for a reply, and I was most
disappointed not to hear from you.

Yours sincprely,


Katy Johjefs
Factual Producer




  G   R       A   N   A   D   A          T   E     L   E   V   I   S   I   O    N           L   I    M   I   T   E   D
  REGISTERED              OFFICE : QUAY STREET.                MANCHESTER               M 6 0 9 EA
  T E L E P H O N E : 0 1 6 1 8 3 2 7 2 1 1 G E N E R A L F A X : 0 1 6 1 8 2 7 2 0 2 9 T E L E X : 66 8 8 5 9
  REGISTERED              NUMBER: 840590           ENGLAND
                                                         24th November 1996


Ms. Katy Jones,
Granada Television Ltd.,
Quay Street,
Manchester
M60 9EA




Dear Ms. Jones,


Thank your prompt reply.

I am pleased to note what you tell me and in particular your reassurance as to the future.
However it is also essential that you make it absolutely clear that you had only requested a
reply if I was prepared to set up a meeting with you.




Yours sincerely,




S. L. Popper
              G         R      A       N         A     D       A               T       E   L       E   V   I   S       I   O       N




Dr Stefan Popper




21st November 1996

Dear Dr Popper,

I am sorry if you feel there has been a misunderstanding over
communications between you and Granada Television about the making of
the drama-documentary on Hillsborough.

It seems that the reference in the Times is strictly accurate, but it had been
made clear by us that our team had spoken to you on the phone before
putting our request for a meeting in writing. However, if you feel that any
correction is necessary then you should take it up with them.

For our part, we are happy to reassure you that in future we will make it
absolutely clear that you decided not to meet after having considered the
contents of a letter outlining the subjects we wished to discuss.

Yours sincerely,
1   .________________   _ J __________________




Katy Jofief?'
Factual Producer




     G    R     A       N    A     D    A              T   E       L   E   V   I   S   I   O   N       L   I   M   I   T   E   D
     REGISTERED                  OFFICE:             Q U A Y S T R E E T , M A N C H E S T E R M 6 0 9 EA
     T E L E P H O N E : 0 1 6 1 8 3 2 7 2 1 1 G E N E R A L F A X : 0 1 6 1 8 2 7 2 0 2 9 T E L E X : 6 68 8 5 9
     REGISTERED                  NUMBER: 840590                    ENGLAND
                                                         24th November 1996

The Editor,
The Times Magazine,
The Times Newspapers Ltd.,
1, Pennington St.,
London,
E l 9XN



Dear Sir,

My attention has been drawn to an article in the Times Magazine of 16th November in
which it is stated among other things that I did not reply to Ms. K. Jones when she
wrote to me.

Whilst this is superficially true it gives a misleading impression. Ms. Jones has
confirmed to me that her team had made it clear that I had spoken with one of them
on the phone prior to her writing to me. In her letter Ms. Jones asked me to contact
her if I was willing to set up a meeting. On reflection I was not willing to do so, so I
did not reply as I came to the conclusion that this was unnecessary and not expected
by Ms. Jones.

You will no doubt wish to note the position so that this erroneous impression is not
repeated.



Yours faithfully,



S. L. Popper
                                                         19th November 1996


Ms. Katy Jones,
Granada Television Ltd.,
Quay Street,
Manchester
M60 9EA

Dear Ms Jones,

My attention has been drawn to an article in the Times Magazine dated 16thNovember 1996 in
which it is stated that you did not receive a reply from me when you wrote to me.

This letter is confined to this one issue only.

You did write to me on 13th May 1996 referring to a conversation I had with a member of your
team . You go on to say in the first paragraph on the second page of your letter:

        “If you are agreeable to setting up a meeting , I would be grateful if you could
        contact me on                           | so that we can discuss this further.
        Alternatively, you can drop me a line at Granada Television, Quay St,
        Manchester M60 9EA.............”

From your own letter it is clear that not only had I not ignored your (or your teams’)
approaches but you only expected a further communication from me if I was willing to set up a
meeting with you..

Having considered the contents of your letter I had came to the conclusion that I did not wish to
meet, and in the light of my understanding of your letter no further contact was either
expected or necessary.

Please make arrangements straightway to correct the erroneous impression that has been
produced by this representation in The Times Magazine and contact any other persons or
bodies who may have been given this information. Please also ensure that it is not repeated
either on TV, Radio, in writing or in any other way.

I would be grateful if you would implement the above steps immediately and acknowledge
receipt of this letter by return of post.



Yours sincerely,


S. L. Popper
                                                         29th October 1996

Mr. Christopher P. Domes,
HM Coroner,
The Medico Legal Centre,
Watery St.,
Sheffield,
S3 7ET

Dear Chris,

Thank you for your letter of 22nd October.

Granada did get in touch but I did not in the end feel that it would be appropriate to
participate in the proposed programme.

I have no wish to get immersed in renewed discussions regarding the Hillsborough
Inquests particularly if it involves going over well traversed ground . As far as I am
concerned I am content to leave it to you to decide whether and what response is
required to the programme when it has been shown.

I was not aware o f the proposed date of broadcast and appreciate that you let me
know.

I hope that you are keeping well. Please remember me to those at the centre who still
recollect me.


Yours sincerely,



S. L. Popper.
                   Office of H.M. Coroner
                   The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET

HM Coroner:                                                             South Yorkshire (West)
Christopher P. Dorries                                                       (0114) 2 7 3-8 7 2 1



                                                                             22 October 1996
Your ref:
Our ref:



Dr Stefan Popper




Dear Stefan
I hope you are keeping well, it has been some time since we last spoke.             Things are
carrying on in much the same fashion as ever.
I do not know if Granada Television have ever managed to get in touch with you about the
drama/documentary they are doing about Hillsborough. I am know told it is to be shown
on the evening of Thursday, 5th December. The limited conversations that I have had
with the researchers at Granada make it quite clear that this will be slanted completely
from the relatives point of view.
I anticipate that the conduct of the inquest, particularly the 3.15pm cut off and the way
that relatives were dealt with generally is likely to form the subject of much adverse
comment. I very much doubt that the complimentary remarks made by the High Court
about your handling of the matter will get much of a mention. I am rather concerned
about this because I think that the picture likely to be left in the minds of the average local
viewer will be of a Coroners Office that is uncaring and (possibly) incompetent. This was
very far from the truth and I think that someone is going to have to stand up and say so
loudly and publicly at the appropriate time.
Obviously the first right of reply will fall to you but in all the circumstances you may not
care to exercise it. If that is the case I would certainly wish to get stuck into this myself
and stand up both for you and for the office. Obviously, as human beings mistakes were
made and there will be a number of things that you could identify worthy of improvement
for “next time”. Certainly this should be admitted but equally I see no future in letting wild
criticism become accepted as factual simply by default.
Perhaps you could let me have your views so that I can start to prepare matters
accordingly.
Best Wishes.




                                       Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                      CMJ4881A.DOC
                    G   R       A   N   A        D A                T       E   L        E       V   I       S       I       O       N




    Dr Stefan Popper




    May 13th 1996

    Dear Dr Popper,

^   I am writing to follow up a conversation you had with my colleague, David Price,
    about the Hillsborough drama documentary being made by Granada television.

    As you know, the programme is being made with the co operation and backing of
    the Hillsborough Family Support Group. We have also talked to a whole range of
    individuals and organisations involved in all aspects of the disaster, in order to get
    a full and accurate picture of what actually happened. In addition, we have also
    consulted with a range of professionals, including experts in Post Traumatic
    Stress, about the broader issues raised by the disaster.

    We would be very grateful if you could spare the time for an informal meeting to
    discuss various aspects of the inquest. We are particularly interested in finding
    out more about the following:

    a) how and why the 3.15‘cut off was introduced

w    b) the pathological evidence given to the inquests

     c) the selection of witnesses for the inquest

     d) the direction of the jury

     As I am sure you are aware, these are all issues which have been raised by the
     families. We would be very interested in hearing your views on the subject, and
     finding out more about the reasoning behind the decisions that were made.




                G   R   A   N   A   D   A         T E L       E    V    I   S    I   0       N       L   I       M       I   T   E       D
                REGISTERED          OFFICE:    QUAY     STREET,         MANCHESTER               M 60 9 EA
                T E L E P H O N E : 0161 832 721 1 G E N E R A L   F A X : 0 16 1 8 2 7 2 0 2 9 T E L E X : 6 6 8 8 59

                REGISTERED          NUMBER: 840590        ENGLAND
               G R A N A D A                                         T       E   L       E    V    I    S       I   O       N




If you are agreeable to setting up a meeting, I would be grateful if you could
contact me on 0161 832 7211 x3849 so that we can discuss this further.
Alternatively, you can drop me a line at Granada Television, Quay St, Manchester
M60 9EA. May I stress that any conversation we had would be on an informal,
one to one basis, and would not involve doing an interview to camera.

I do hope to hear from you.


Yours sincerely.



Katy Jon^sl




          °        A               iytL         «/                                       ^
                  *> ■*        e (j                          oL.'<g



         &        A ^              j       fe n L Z j& r W

          G   R    A   N   A   D       A       T     E   L   E   V   I   S   I   O   N         L   I   M    I   T   E   D
          REGISTERED           OFFICE : QUAY STREET,                 MANCHESTER              M60 9EA
          T E L E P H O N E : 0 1 6 1 83 2 72 1 1 G E N E R A L F A X : 0 1 6 1 827 2 0 2 9 T E L E X : 66 8 85 9
          REGISTERED           NUMBER: 840590            ENGLAND
