                                                       ckh*
FILE NOTE.


After we had a brief meeting in the office to discuss the Inquest
review which on the whole had gone quite well, it was pointed out
to me that I had referred to the solicitor for Hammond Suddard
as Mr. Kennedy and it should have been Mr. Metcalf.     It was also
pointed out to me that Inspector Leighton would deal with the videos
rather than explaining                 though he no doubt could do that
as well.     Mr. Jones told me that the solicitors for the Club had
indicated that they would like a copy of the summary.     I thought
on balance that whilst I didn’t mind letting Hammond Suddard have
it, I wasn’t too keen on handing them out to all.     Initially Mr.
Jones was of the opinion that it would be a good idea to let
everybody have it who wanted it but Inspector Tobe pointed out
that one could argue that these summaries were really related to the
relatives but there was a danger of breach of confidence and that in a
sense it would perhaps be better if we only allowed solicitors for the
relatives to have the summaries and let everybody else hear them at
the Inquests.     I think on balance that that is the sensible thing
and will have to just be fairly firm on this point.
We discussed sending out summaries.    It was agreed that a copy
would go to the Hillsborough Steering Committee (Mr. Frazer)
as well as to the respective solicitors.    They thought that it would
perhaps be sensible that once I had approved the summaries they eoald
be s-eat out by West Midlands as opposed to my office, as this would
save time.    We agreed that the documentation would come to me Via
Inspector Tobe.    I would return it dither approved or amended to Supt.
Beechey who will then make the necessary corrections and when that had
been done would arrange to send them out direct from Nechells with
a standard covering letter from me which obviously needs preparing.
We felt that it might be a good idea if circulation of notification
of datgs^w^rg..tjlone by telex we would have confirmation of receipt
by the solicitors,/ We would expect solicitors to notify their clients
we would write to them direct as well, probably recorded delivery, and
also no doubt the Social Workers would let them know.    We thought that
that should be sufficient.
We discussed the extent to which the evidence would go (this is aaother
point raised by Mr. Devonside and his eolleagues).    They wanted to-
know   at what point the evidence would stop.   Would it be merely up
to the mortuary or beyond.   I said that probably up to the temporary
mortuary but obviously if there were any particular difficulties we
would do our best to try and answer the questions as far as we could.
Inspector Tobe said that on the whole the evidence went beyond thatr
and would take a body right up to identification and the Medico Legal Centre.
It obviously depends upon the evidence in any particular case.    We
agreed that they would let me have summaries, the first batch to-morrow.
We spent some time discussing a Jury, and problems in relation to this
as obviously people who were related should be excluded but it is
                                  -    2   -




            to know, where th draw the line           other matters and in ,
^particular we wanted to avoid any possible suggestion that we were
 handpicking a Jury which of course was not the intention.         I
 decided that I would have a word with Mr. Sturt to see how they
 tackled this particular problem.
 Mr. Jones had brought a Press        Officer with him who prepared a press
 release.   A meeting was being       convened at Furnival House for 5p*®*
 It was agreed that I would not be present at that.        Mr. Jones was
 concerned about the length of the Inquests and was worried about starting
 at 9 .3O as he could seethat the Inquests might go on to very late in the
 evening.   I said that it might well bethat some        of them would take
 rather less time than we had estimated         and in particular it seemed that
 there would be anumber of families who would not be attending.         Presumably
 these would be rather quicker.        We thought it would be a good idea
 if we tried to ascertain from the Social Workers whether they were
 aware of the familes who had indicated         that theydid not   wish to attend,
 and providing that we had sufficient numbers, they could try and schedule
 2 a day say of non-attenders. We initially thought that it might be
 a good idea to put these on in the morning.        This would give extra
 time for people to arrive in Sheffield but on reflection we felt that
 it might be better to have them in the evening;’ partly because people
 would be getting tired at that point and partly because it would enable us
 to slot the non-attenders in whenever it was convenient to do so.
 Mr. Jones is going to try and have a word with the Social Workers on the
 7th of March.   Inspector Tobe thought that he should be able to let me have
 a final report round about the 21st or 22nd of March.         Obviously the rate
 would depend upon the number of alterations that I would want to make
 to the documentation.
 We spent some time discussing the listing as it is very important
 to find out who is not going to attend, as this will affect the
 way in which we would call people.
 We also agreed that we would send out summaries on a piecemeal basis
 and not send them out in large batches.        In other words as soon as
 we approve them they could go po the solicitors to give them a little
 bit of extra time.
