            THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
            Room 1106
            50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
            Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007


Michael J C Burgess                                            Your reference:
Coroners Society for England & Wales
                                                               Our reference:

                                                               Date:      (S’     October 1997




  r OCXS'       X \s
 Thank you for your letter of 4 October.

2.     As you know, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been appointed by the Home Secretary to
conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. I
am acting as Secretary to the scrutiny.

3.     It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of LordJustice Stuart-Smith’s
scrutiny is to establish whether there is any significant new evidence which was not
previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police
disciplinary authorities. If there is significant new evidence, he will aim to see if it might
have affected the outcome of the Inquests or any of the other proceedings which took place.
I attach a copy of his terms of reference.

4.      I have shown your letter to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.He has       asked me to thank you
for it and to say that he expects that it will be helpful for him to see Dr Popper, who
conducted the inquests on the (then) 95 victims of the disaster, to discuss various questions
which have arisen in the course of the scrutiny. Dr Popper has I understand retired, but he
has already written to us and I am sending him a copy of this letter.

5.      We will of course offer Dr Popper the opportunity to respond to any criticisms made
of him in the course o f the Scrutiny. If he wishes, we will also ask for your Society’s views
on the questions which are involved.

     ^(;>          sj*Ace/eJU^.



C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny


G:\HILLSBOmMAtN\CORONERS. 112
