 *      ~.
                                                  rf) I- ■


      FILE MOTE. DATED ^th &efct 1989.
                                            /
      MEETING WITH MR. STURT OH FRIDAY/OF JUNE 1989.

      ALSO PRESENT FOE PIET OP THE TIME WAS BILL MADDOX HIS CORONER'S OFFICER
      AND JOHNNY 'THE LADY WHO APPAEENTLY HAD A LOT TO DO WITH THE ADMIN
      AND OEGANISATION OF THE TRANSACTIONS'.


      Mr. Sturt was exceedingly helpful, and with guidance and help in
      connection with the work and help in connection with the work
      which he did on Zebrugge, which might be relevant to me.

1.     We discussed the ambit of how.    He let me have a copy of the judicial
      review in which he was supported and also photocopied and extracted
      out of his direction to Jury which he explained the general proposition
      on which he had proceeded.   In principal he distinguished between
       the background circumstances               was more in the nature of
      setting the scene and explaining the situation so that the actions themselves
      i.e., the how could be understood.

 2.    He felt that it was exceedingly important to try and establish the
      when and where of the deceased, and entirely agreed with the amount
      of work which was being put in.     Although we didn't discuss it
      in absolute detail, my impression was that he felt it was necessary
      to deal with the surrounding circumstances, for example arrests for
      drunkenness and so on, and what had happened outside the ground
      immediately prior to the event.     He had in general dealt in great
      detail with the 24 hour period over which the disaster had occurred.

 3.   We discussed the question of Jury.     He pointed out that we had to be
      careful about the conflict of interests, not only for myself, but
      also for them.   In particular they might be related or associated
      in some way with some of the deceased.     This was a point which had
      to be watched.   Basically he had been advised by Counsel that his
      job was to minimise the disruptions rather than to maximise them.

 4.    We discussed the question of D.P.P. and Manslaughter. He poiMed
      out that under Eule 28 the D.P.P. could authorise an Inquest to
      proceed, even if evidence were being produced which might give rise
      to charge of Unlawful Killing.

 5.    He pointed out that the D.P.P. in his expersrsacappreciative of Idle
      problem of aborting the Inquest or even holding it up for any length
      of time.
thought the Juries and he himself could sustain it.

.Families on the whole were represented jointly but there were a few
.who individually represented, one of which whom was Mr. fiLp,pley who
represented an individual.




   He said the length of the Inquest was to a large extend by^ the legal
    submissions.    There was one which had lasted at least 2-J- hours.

   He tended to retire, even if it was only for coffee before giving a
   ruling on anything or any complexity.     He felt that it was exceedingly
    important not to make mistakes.

   He consulted with Counsel with regard to his advice where necessary
    and received some guidance and help from Counsel with regard
    to his summing up, though on the whole he felt that this was his
    own unaided work.

    He discussed transcription.   They had used recordings.    I wasn't
    quite clear whether they used two or three tape recorders, but
    certainly there was one reel to reel machine which was used as a
    overall back-up copy.    They had 1 policewoman whose sole job was to
   make sure that the tape recorders were working properly.      They
    had used 4 word processors.    Initially they were able to keep •sip
    but eventually fell behind because two of the secretaries had left.
    Altogether they had about 6 secretarial staff and I think Mr. Sturt
    felt that it might have been a little bit on the low side but
    Johnny thought that they would have coped if everybody had stayed.
    In addition they had a Marshall who performed certain functions,
    Solonel McEwan, but he had to leave before the end because of the
    length of the Inquest.    Mrs. McEwan would come along as well and
    specially made the tea and coffee and generally by the end was
    an exceedingly helpful person.    The fact that somebody was there
    to 'mother them' so to speak was very useful.

    Ordinary Soronal work was handled by his Deputy.     He had to give up
    all his normal legal work (he is a part-time Coroner) for several
    months at very severe financial loss.

    Johnny had gone through all the transcripts and had flagged and
    marked relevant bits of the evidence of each individiial ,and death,
    and this helped him with his summing up.    He did not hand to the Jury
    anything other than 3 exhibits, a life jacket aad a plan of the ship. ^
    He did not l®t them take in the Jury Room any documents of their
    own but he did give them a pro-forma on which they were able to
    record various aspects.
         ( T l h ^ k we~ will have tothink about this. We have pre-psepared
         the Inquisitions, which to a certain, extent covers the pro-forma
         which they used, hut it is       obviously   going to he a bit of a complicated
         matter, to enable them to remember all the details and facts.          He as
         far as I could make out prepared his summing up over the week-end).

         He felt that the transcripts had to be read through and corrected
14.
         by him before they were released.          They were listened to by members
          of his family and also by himself and then the necessary amendments and
          corrections were made.


                                      -    3   -


 15.   Discussed shorthand writing.       It seemed from what he said that
       transcription by recorder would be cheaper (but I amusMlik dJempted
       with the shorthand, as the standards of the Inquiry seems to be
       very high).

 16.    Arrangements were made for the witnesses to be warnest in batches.
       This was done well ahead of time.        Witnesses notices were sent out
       but not summonses and by and large things went quite smoothly.
       Expenses were re-funded usually by cheque, but in one case they
       had to pa*F out in cash.    If need be, overnight accommodation was
       paid for.
       All witnesses were supplied with a plan of Dover showing locations
       of site, names and addresses of boarding houses and hotels with
       costs and other general information, to make life easier for them.

17.    Provision was made in the building          for tea and coffee, but this was
       not provided on a free of charge basis either to families or witnesses.

18.    Arrangements were made for the Jury to be able to take their coffee
       breaks on their own.   There was a room which had to be provided, so
       that they didn't mingle with the general crowd.          Apart from that,
       they were free to go out in the evening, having been warned of course
       not to discuss the matter, and similarly at lunch.          Coffee breaks
       were arranged in the morning and in the afternoon, and there was
       usually an hour for lunch.     The Inquest started, I wasn't sure whether
       it was 10 or 10.30.

19.    They had provided a room in the building as         a   museum for the Inquest
       in which they had retained all the various copies of all papers, documents
       and newspaper cuttings etc.        This would be open to people who wanted
       to do serious research.
       Transcripts were in three forms in this room.           The first raw draft, and
       then the various afflBnd/^^rsions as they were listened to.          All these
       had been kept and usefully so, because with the present prosecutions,
       some of the details on the original drafts, such as who had typed them etc.
       was needed.   Tapes had also been kept.
    :t , • ' .. 2 0 . ^          Mr, Stur-b had retained all draft notes that he had made and these had
            •   V
                                 carefully been bound for historical purposes.

                                 Documentation was neatly bound and presented in good quality binders.


                     22      .             bejng-that they took              under some pressure as some
                                 of the paper work wasn't completed when they began and they were catching
        ]
                                 up as they were going along.    Hopefully that is a problem which we
                                 won't be faced with.

                23»              Mr. Sturt made it clear that it was absolutely essential to try to
                                 an‘tic^ip|te^the legal problems which might arise, and be able to give
                                 well esBdgpSd guidance and rulings.      It is hispoint of view that the
                                 most difficult question of course is the issue, Unlawful Killing,      He
    i
                                 pointed out that the situation would now be more difficult in view of




                                 the prosecution initiated against P & 0 and various people,
                                 as not surprisingly others would want to seek to follow the
                                 same principle in cases.   This might of course apply at Hillsborough

                                 as well.
                                 I asked how the Jury were sworn in and he pointed out that this was
                24.
                                 actually set out in the transcript of the opening which of course
                                 I have already got.    They did it by a very short oath and on the
                                 basis that he would then read out all the names, which is m     fact
                                 what he did.
                                 He confirmed that the signing of the verdicts after the Jury had given
                25.
                                 •their decision took a good two hours.

                    26   .       The Jury once they had been put in charge were kept in a hotel overnight
                                 until they had reached a verdict.     This took over 24 hours to conclude
                                 their deliberations.

j
!
        ;
