HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKShIRE
             Twist d i s t r i c t !-----------—

     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

              STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                   Before

S. L. POPPER, LLB. B.MED.Sci. BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty's Coroner^




                     At

              The Town Hall,
                Sheffield.

                    on

            25th March, 1991




       TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDING




From the Notes of J. L. Harpham Ltd.,
     Official Shorthand Writers,
 55 Queen Street, Sheffield, SI 2DX.
Ow >7
< £ ^ P /0 0
               jh c b        a rt J


                      ‘^ /
      £e>,     •)! 7-«;

      ^         / ^      //* /^°
            The exiting from the tunnel is also interesting.

        tre was Mr. M u 11in for instance.    I think he said he
        .died out".

           Mr. Richardson I have already mentioned.      He said
     that he did some pushing.

           Mr. Bullis gave a very graphic description.      He

     said it was like a "stream of lava" that he seemed to
     see coming out of the tunnel mouth.

r.         Mr. Hughes, that is Mr. Grier's friend, Stuart

^■'Thompson's friend, he was sitting on that little wall

     and he said he was knocked off it, off M s     perch by the

     crowds of people coming in, not "crowds"      numbers I think

     would be a better word, so 1 find as 1■say the evidence

     regarding the tunnel, I am not going to say unsatisfactory

 because it is not a question of being satisfactory or

 unsatisfactory, I just find it w r y difficult to reconcile
 all the accounts which we have had.

          l now want to turn to the terraces themselves.

 You will have noticed that I have managed to speak for

      don't know how long and l have not referred to a single

 *C * nUmber yet 1 think or hav* I?       Anyway, I certainly
have not referred to very many but I will refer to a

couple now.      That is because x have not got particularly
Mr. Russell's skills with r e g a r $ , ^ ^                  but

be that as it may 1 dc want to refer to a cuupis which

1 found helpful and /hat is 536 and 537.         They are the

plans which Miss Goofc^ii prepared wherethe' witnesses
   * gates.    -1 think he. said, "My lovely boy is dying."               He

said the Officer Jt,9j0^--iitl^otTce'’of         er      least appeared

    fro t p k e a n y notice of him.    He thinks Adam..-by.jfc^ien had

tofjr consciousness and certainly he did.             He was very, ^ e r y

ill himself.     He did not see the gate open so we do not ^

actually know exactly when he lost consciousness, but if/the

pathologists are to be believed, it does not take very'''long

to lose consciousness,

     Wi.thiB_that s.horJ; period'-of'Time there was a completely

dramatic change in that front area.

     We also know that in fact that gate was opened around

14.59,   We can say that with reasonable confidence because

we have photographs of Sergeant Swift at the gate and in

fact on one of those where he has seen somebody has

identified himself as well.        If you remember one of the

witnesses said, "My friend is outside and I am just coming

out, or possibly I am out."

     Yet despite the fact that he was so close to that gate,

whatever evidence there is, and there isn’t very much, it

does not look as if Adam actually got out straight away.

You remember we did call PC Harratt.           He was the chap who

said he thought he saw him being passed from pen 4 across

into pen 3 and then out.       I must admit I hadn't realised

that he had not handled him.           I thought he had actually

held him, but he hadn’t, he merely saw him.             Although he

felt reasonably confident it was Adam, bearing in mind the
                                                                  53



 contributed   to the death of anybody, although it may not

have been a    very wise thing to do or say.

      In Pen   4, as I say, my impression is if you look at

 the plans that   first of all there were far fewer people

who died, secondly some of them 1 think were further back,

and that is why 1 think there was a slight difference ~~~

and that may be for the reason which I have said to you,

it nay be that people were actually heading towards Pen 4

because of the --- X d o n ’t know that is sheer guesswork

and hardly worth mentioning, but whatever the situation it

was clearly very, very full in that pen.

      There was another chap - I am   picking out all the

ones who tended to say things were worse early because          it

is important that we don't overlook those - and that was

Mr, Langley,    He said that distress was at 2.40 but he

linked it to when people were climbing up into the stands.

Now, we c a n ’t be absolutely sure what time-p,epple began to

climb into the stands because of course, as you kndw, the

cameras did not- follow that scene the whole time - ]>wish
                                                            6%.
they had -- there is a gap so we don't know, but he    did ^
                                                                     \
look at at least one exhibit, C344,    which is timed at
                                                                     \

around that time, and he agreed that that was not what he

was describing as the condition in which he was in.        in

fact, it was Mr. Langley who referred to the Officer,

Sergeant. Swift, swearing at somebody and I have-'already
dealt with that....
                                                                          59
                        (Short Adjournment)

     Again, as I say, 1 have told you of a good number and 1

am not going to refer to them all by name because you have

heard the evidence.     1 will just pick two o     r   j   u   s    t

as samples and as reminders.      .©he is Gary Oyltch.     He w«is the

friend of Marie McCabe and Inger Shah and he was right at the

front if you recollect.     He remember the players being

announced-   That is   n o t the same as-the..,..players coming out.
He remembered discussing it with Inger.        Prom then onwards

there was a tight crush.

     The other interesting thing he said was the surges.                 He

described three surges.     Do you remember that?      That is why I

remind you about him.     He said the first surge he got up on

to the little wall and a fan behind him told him to get off.

At that point things nay not have been quite asr:dramatic as

they obviously became.     The second !|urcje he got off on ’h.is

own but...,there was a third surgeN^nd it never relaxed.           Be\

then lost consciousness and was rescued fortunately.           He

remembered, he said, a Policeman patting his face 'through the

wiring but poor Inger and M a r i e o f ”course, not only did they

lose their"’lives but they had the misfortune of being

photographed at great length because they were right at the

front.

     Mr. Watson had been to a League match in January and on

that occasion he remembered that there was a diversion at the

tunnel and he felt at 2.20/2.25 the crowd was large and he

commented to his friends that the Police would probably be

taking action quite soon to divert fans.         He did go on to say
.




                                                                      60

    that things did not really become tense until the players

    came out.    Be also said it had not entered his head to leave

    the pen.    He described people being lifted up between 14.50

    and 3 o 'clock but he said it had not occurred to him to leave

    the pen at that time.     Be very cautious with timing.   This is

    a time.     I am not saying it is wrong but I am just advising

    you to be cautious.

         Mr. Duckworth was near the front^as'^well.    He was next      \

    to Mr. Baron.     He was the gentleman who received the oxygen,    f
    Mr. Gillam came along and gave/it to him.     It is an event

    which we can easily remember. \He recollects a beach ball
                                   \
    being knocked about and there wa^'-some surging then,,b»t"'he

    was not particularly worried.     Interestingly he said he saw

    two girls who were crying and they were taken out by the

    Police and after that two or three other people were not

    allowed out.    He went on to say in his view the Police could

    not realise quite what the situation was that was going on

    within the pen.

         He remembers the gate, because he was quite near the

    gate, opening between the players coming out and kick-off.

    We will come back to the gates in a moment.     He also

    remembers that people were coming out of the gate initially

    under their own steam and he made the interesting comment

    that opening that gate actually created more problems so far

    as he was concerned because people were coming towards him

    though he did agree, in his position, the only way out would

    have been forward.
        We have heard from Hr. Wells and Mr. Gillam and

 Mr. Eason.         They were at the Spion Kop, at the two corners,

 and they were looking across.               We also heard from another

 gentleman who was an ambulanceman who was In the catering

 department, earning some extra money I suppose.                 He looked

 down at about kick-off time.               He went In and said, "Don't

  bother to hurry.         They will have to postpone the match,"

  because he could see the people coming over.               It was only

  subsequently that he realised there were injuries.                He

  said, "I saw them carrying injuries."               He used an unusual

  turn of.....phr.as.e_.

         Mr. Eason».jwfio was the ambulance man, and agai^t who had

Nr©.particular duties - 1 am not suggesting that               tp * a moment
  - but he                                                  and he walked
  down to have a look to see what was going on.                He went down

  to the gate 4 area.         When he got down there some time after

  he still - and now I think the situation changes because he

   is now going down as a roan to look whether help is needed.

   After all, he is ambulance chap.              He can assess injuries.

   He made a very interesting observation that even when he got

   down there, there were       people...   on ...the pitch and they were

   walking about, lie did not see any serious pirol?lems.                When

   he wai challenged with one of the photographs he 'smid, "1

 --'don't see anybody particularly seriously injure? wal-k^gj^

   around out there.”         Of course it all changed wittittra.-ye^,

■N-^very short time.        1 think it is significant, and one
       Hy personal feeling was that that barrier, although it

„v    have made the inflow of people that much easier into the

terracing, indirectly may perhaps have led to the barrxer

124 . A breaking.     I am not entirely couvinced - 1 would have

thought it was pretty tenuous because the most direct

barrier which should have broken was the one immediately

below it - if you remember there was a very long stretch

down - and that one did not break, fortunately.        I t seems

to me that the breaking of the barrier almost certainly must ^

have - even from the point of view of "how" - played a very          \

important part in the disparity in the number of deatas

between pens 3 and 4.       Also if you consider the
 distribution of the people who died you will recollect that

 a very substantial number were in the vicinity of that

 barrier that broke and in the vicinity of the gates, so

 there is a double a s p e c t there.   Also, if you think back to

 what Mr. Greenwood said, he said it looked to him

 there was a longitudinal cut across the pen;        people in

  front of that barrier in a terrible state, people further

  back, in his judgment, not so bad.

          The problem, of course, is trying to decide when the

     barrier broke.    I t has proved to be a very difficult

     problem to sort out.    I think at one point one might have

     felt it must have been when Beardsley hit the crossbar which

     would have put it at about five minutes past.      However, I
Sergeant Swift because they said at about l-*minute-to~3

the gates were not o p e n a n d indeed he was not able to

reconcjM-'e it either, I mean P.C. I U i n g w o r t E r ~.

              will also remember that Sergeant Green

refers to him as hurrying in fact towards Pen 4 but from             '

the opposite direction and on the last video which we

looked at, I think you can actually see him moving backward

and forward between the pens but at a rather later time          -

than he has indicated in his statement.

               if... timing is probably just as bad as everybody

else's.     The one thing that can be said with any certainty

is that he was at Pen 6 when the players came out and that

fits in with his account that he was told there were

problems up in the Stands and indeed he looks as if

he is looking up.

          If that is so then it is quite possible that the

escorting and so on which he talks about occurred at some

time somewhat later than what he describes.

          He also said that he could not remember any other

Officers there but he is not the only witness whom we

heard who could not remember what on video and photographic

evidence would seem to be self-evident and I just instance

one name and it is Mr. Doyle who also could not see any

Officers and he could not see the gate open and yet there

is clear photographic evidence of him standing on the

fence next to Officers next to an open gate, Gate 3.

          1 don't blame him for that.      Don*t get me wrong,
                                                                                    97



             t          to      thereforej       that whatever involvement,

                             MaCkreU -       -      ^     -   -   < a y , i t „as
   h          '     t0 PUt U *DOth« " * • it was after the events
       a   occurred, whatever those events „ere, Khich had

           r contributed to the disaster.               j am sure hfi



 ~ n°!"ai..’iUnnlng * M S f o o t b a U match in seeing to the
  people who were there maHnr. *.          ,
                         making sure that everything
  administratively worked right, but he did not
                                »    «e aid not seem to fulfil
  or perform any function in relation *
                             relation to crowd control,
  opening of gates, supervision of terraces or anything like




 d oubt
   o u b tthere
           W h ais
                -8 plenty
                   already oflndiC3ted
                               room for "crlticl„
                                           y °U> alth°U8h
                                                    „ f ^ 1e —               »«

 respect of signing, or lac, of it, and various other

 -tters,         they did see. to be i„ the situation where they nad

  a) instructed a professional engineer of competence to
 ■ vise and help them, (b) they had arrangen]ents ^                     ^


    " “ °rder t0 try 3nd P0ll“ «*• matches and (c) thev
were caught by the Officers' Working Party, which had

inspections and gave advice and directions as to what they

           do.     There was no evidence that I could see that

they substantially faiied in these regards to such an extent


defi -telr f3llUre C °Uld te deSCrlbed as fallinS “^ M n the
    nation Which we have already considered several times.

n other words, their earlier conduct, as ! have said there
  You know that in fact he was identified on video at just

  before kick-off when Mr. Clough cooes out, and he is seen

  looking in towards —      well, you did not see the video so,.

 you d o n ’t know this but he is at that position at oae-
 m inu te-to-3.   .. ... ..... „   ...   '‘
                                          ...'..


      He then told us that shortly thereafter his attention

 was attracted to Leppings Lane Terraces.      He went over and

 as you will remember there was a whole series of

 photographs in which he is traced, from about 2-minutes-

 paSt to about 6-minutes-past, doing various things in and
 around the terracing, and in particular Gate 3.     He was

 quite clear in his evidence that when he first got there

he still thought the position was retrievable if he could

have only Sot the people in, shall we say, the three
quarters of the pen - if you divide the pen into four

segments like HSE did, Dr. Nicholson - then his evidence

is that the first quarter was the area - in fact, I think

he said six or seven steps, in fact it is a bit more was

where the real problem was, that if he could have got

people to move back he thought it was retrievable.

Whether he is right in that, of course, is another

question, bearing in mind that the barrier might well have

broken by then, though of course that was something which

he could not have known because it would have not been
something which was visible to him.
  feel it was right to countermand it.     He c o u l c T W see

 arotind the corner anyway on their videos, so it was also

/'clear there was some conversation regarding the number

 of people outside at around 2,30 and he of course had no          j
 experience of the number of people who could come in a n / he

 turned to Mr. Murray and asked him;      "what do you t&Tnk?"

 and Mr, Murray said:      "We can get them in".   M r r Goddard

 when giving his evidence said that he did not disagree
 With-that i - -   ..... .. .

           They didn t in fact use the data which was available

 from the Club to work out how many people had come in and

how many people had not come in, they did it shall we say
by e ye.

        Mr. Lock did have the data.     Certainly he had it

at 14.48 because he was in the Club loom and when

P.C. Guest according to Mr. Lock said:     “The gate has

burst open" or something like that     "People have cone in",

one of the things that Mr. Lock did was to see how many

people still had to come in and l think he thought there

were about 4,500 spaces at that point in time.

        It is quite clear from the evidence of Mr. Lock

that that at that time did not cause him any particular

concern so if the data had been utilised in the Control

Room , certainly it made no difference to Mr. Lock's
immediate appreciation.

        In fact if you look at Mr. Lock's timings, if

he found out at 14.48 that something had happened, which
 not cause hint at that point in tine any apparent anxiety.

          Apart from saying;   "Can they get in?" they also

 talked about postponing the kick-off and 1 have already

 dealt with that so 1 am not going to repeat it.       You will

 remember what I said about this.

          There are some discrepancies in the evidence between

 Mr. Goddard, Mr. Murray and Mr. Duckenfield, but the

 substance of the evidence is very similar.      .

          The next thing that appears to have happened i's-, thath

 they noticed Mr. Bichard had put the camera on to the

 Leppings Lane area and they noticed that the crowd had

,,got denser and that there was a Police horse which was

enclosed.     Mr. Duckenfield did not give any orders to

send in reinforcements     but it was in fact done probably

by Mr. Goddard who asked Sergeant Soresby to send some

 extra staff and arrangements were also made for a Serial

.to go to Leppings Lane,     This is Sergeant Higgins'
Serial.

          It stuck, if l can put that word at Gate A,

because by the time Sergeant Higgins got there he perceived

the need but there did not appear to be any evidence that

it had been sent to Gate A.

          There was some activity taken subsequently to put

Serials at the North Stand once it was realised that

Gate A was open or was about to open and I think

Mr. Duckenfield accepted that this was done and the

evidence is that he accepted and the others in the Control
 some of the fans have said-,--apart f-rjc«n^what other people

 have said in relation to the pens.

          The sum total of the evidence from the Control Room,

 that is Mr, Duckenfield, Mr, Murray, Mr. Goddard and

 Mr. Bichard, was that none of them had noticed any problems

 with the pens until people came over or the gates were                                         .

 opened.           In other words, shall we say in round terras, three

 G ' C^X GC k «     .. ......... .   ......... , .,.   —


         This was partly because their attention was focused on

 what was happening outside Leppings Lane, though I think

certainly Mr. Goddard said he did glance around and he had

noticed nothing unusual.

         He have spent a lot of time discussing the

discrepancies in the fillings, that there was very much more

space at the side, shall we say, particularly in pen 6 than

there was in the centre.                                   You have seen the photographs

which were taken from both ends.                                  The 1988 photographs, of

course, are not directly in point because they were taken in

1988, but at least they show the sort of view which one

might get across the terraces'''tr0m'“'tte'T'Oliee^^H-oora.;.;t.pwards

pen, €'*          You also heard Sergeant Goddard who said that in %

"fact the front of the pens is quite difficult to see because
.of _ the angles.                                                   -.-...... -   """~"

        You have heard, and I have recounted to you, the views

°f people around the stadium who looked at the pens.                                      You

can make your own assessment as to what they felt the state
