               HOME OFFICE
               Queen A nn e’s Gate L ondon SW1H 9A T

                                     Direct line 01-273
                                   Switchboard 01-273 3 0 0 0




Dr  SL Popper, LL.B       B.MED.Sci
     B.M. B.S. M . R . C . G . P . ,                    Your reference
HM C o r o n e r
Me dico- Le gal Centre                                  Our reference
Watery Street                                           CRN/90           28/37/1
Sheffield                                               Date
S3 7 E T                                                8 January           1991


Dear      Dr   Popper

T h a n k y o u f o r y o u r l e t t e r of 15 N o v e m b e r .
As r e q u e s t e d I e n c l o s e a c o p y of the
P a r l i a m e n t a r y U n d e r S e c r e t a r y of S t a t e s
r e p l y to S i m o n H u g h e s M P a b o u t the i n q u e s t
t o u c h i n g the H i l l s b o r o u g h d i s a s t e r .

                               Yours      sincerely


                               MISS Y BUXTON
                               E Division




 S 363A
                                                   QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                    LONDON SW1H 9AT

PARLIAMENTARY U NDER
SECRETARY OF STATE


 Our Ref:      CRN/90 28/37/1




 Thank you for your letter of 10 October about the Sheffield
 Coroner and the inquest into the deaths of those arising from
 the Hillsborough disaster.  I am sorry that you have not
 received an earlier reply

You suggest that it is inappropriate for the coroner to hear
an inquest touching on the possible liability of the
City Council. However, although coroners are appointed by and
receive a salary from the local authority, they are not
employees of the council. Coroners are independent judicial
officers who hold office under, and are officers of, the
Crown. Once appointed, the local authority has no cont.ro]
over a coroner's activities. He may only be removed from
office by the Lord Chancellor or, in certain instances, by the


Secondly, it is not the function of an inquest to determine
liability. The law states that the purpose of an inquest is
to ascertain the identity of the deceased and how, when and
where he came by his death. The Coroners Rules provide that
neither the coroner nor the jury shall express any opinion on
any other matters. In addition, the Rules specifically
prohibit the framing of an inquest verdict in such a way as to
appear to determine any question of criminal liability on the
part of a named person, or civil liability. Any issue of
civil or criminal liability is a matter for a civil or
criminal courts and not the coroner1s inquest.

The Coroner, Dr Popper, has advised that this particular
request was opened in April 1989, was resumed between 18 April
and 4 May, and again on 19 November. If anyone is
dissatisfied with any aspect of an inquest, under Section 13
°f the Coroners Act 1988, it is open to them to apply with the
authority of the Attorney-General, for the High Court to quash
the verdict and order a fresh inquest to be held, either by
the same coroner or by a different one. Coroners inquests are
also subject to judicial review.



                                                  \As you will

Simon Hughes Esq MP
As you will know, there has already been a public incm-i-rv infn
i ^ SheJent   L°rd Justice Taylor whose subsequent report
                conclusi°ns    the cause of the event,


                           cause °f the gross over-crowding and
         hence the disaster was the failure, when gate C was open
         over-fullf aCC6SS to the central Pens which were already'


         c ^ a S t L r ^   / ^ 6^   °JeJ_fu1^ becaus® no safe maximum
         feS i i 4.?       ■.          down (in the safety certificate
         xssued by the     local authority), no attempt was made to
         control entry     to the individual pens numerically and
         density     ^        ectlve visual monitoring of crowd
                           {


         In order to avoid a similar occurrence in future,
             .^ stlce Taylor has recommended that such safety
         certificates should be reviewed annually and this is
         fully supported by the Government.

              °f .tJe ^ n c i l ' s possible negligence over        the
      °f tie_s, a ?ety certificate has been considered by           thJ
         of 5u^J"Lc Prosecutions but he has decided not             to
relatives a V t h T •PJ;oceedin9s • However, I understand           that
the councilf           ^      haV6 lnitlat«a » civil action         against




th SUS    2 Tf                                   th a t 1 have c la r if ie d




                                                         PETER LLOYD
                                   OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                    WATERY STREET
                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                    SHEFFIELD
                                                (West District)
                                                                    S3 7ET
      STEFAN L PO PPER, LL.B.. B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                    CORONER


                               Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721     26th November, ig90
SLP/BW
CRN/90 82/1/1                                                                   al, 2 - - 7 3 2 . n o

                                                                      TS l .   0 1 1 2 -7 = ,2 s o l

Mr J H ROWLANDS
Home Office
Queen A n n e ’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT

Dear Mr ROWLANDS,

Further to my letter of 15th November, I have recollected that on 2nd August I
wrote to Miss HARRISON regarding the financing of the Hillsborough Inquest.

In order to avoid any misunderstanding, I think perhaps I ought to say that
both that letter a.sl well as this, is and was written entirely on my own
initiative without any prompting or consultation from or with the Local
Authority.

However, the point which Simon HUGHES has raised and which you will probably
know has now been canvassed in the Press a few days ago, both reinforces and
indeed adds a further dimension to the need and appropriateness for some
central financing of inquests arising out of major disasters like Hillsborough.

I do not wish to bore you with the detail but both the direct costs to the
Local Authority in connection with the Inquest and the indirect costs arising
out of their contribution to Police funds, are likely to be of a very
substantial nature.

I entirely accept Miss HARRISON’s point that if one wanted to make a
fundamental shift of responsibility from Local Authority financing to central
funding, eg the Lord Chancellor’s Department or the Home Office, then primary
legislation is likely to be required.

However, what I have in mind is that there must be some contigency funds
available and accessible to the Home Office or some other appropriate
Department in order to fund, or at least make some contribution to the costs of
unusual and, hopefully, rare Inquests of this nature.

I would be grateful in the light of the points raised for this matter to be
reconsidered again and look forward to hearing with interest whether funds
could now be found.

As Mr Simon HUGHES wrote to the Home Secretary personally, and as I think this
is an important matter, I would be grateful if this point, is brought to the
personal attention of the Home Secretary.

Yours sincerely,




S »L. P o p ^ r ^
H.M. Coroner
                                                                                     >   •



                             OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR        MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE
                                                               WATERY STREET
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                             (West District)
                                                               SHEFFIELD
                                                               S3 7ET
STEFAN L. POPPER, t_L8., S.MED.Sci., 8.M., 8.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                               CORONER


                         Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721      15th November   .19. 90

Your Ref: CRN 90 28/37/1


Mr. J. H. Rowlands,
Home Office,
Queens Anne's Gate,
London,
SW1H 9AT




Dear Mr. Rowlands,

Thank you for your letter of 13th November enclosing a letter from
Simon Hughes MP for Southwark Bermondsey.

1. I have to say that I am somewhat surprised :

a. by the fact that I was first made aware that there was a letter
from Mr. Hughes to the Homes Secretary when a reporter from a National
Newspaper visited me at home shortly after 2 p.m on Sunday 9th Nov.
1990.

b. that the MP for Bermondsey is concerning himself with the running
of inquests in Sheffield as I assume that neither Sheffield City
Council nor myself nor an unnamed Liberal Democratic councillor nor
for that matter Liverpool or Nottingham fall within his constituency.

c. that a concern regarding a possible conflict of interest should be
raised with me three working days before the recommencement of the
Hillsborough Inquests particularly when I had already spent several
days in April 1989 opening the inquests and had resumed with a jury
between 18th April - 4th May 1990. The transcripts of the evidence
of these hearings run to over 1000 pages. In addition there was
extensive national publicity regarding those proceedings. The
conclusion of the interim hearings on 4th May are themselves 5 months
prior to the date of Mr. Hughes letter.

2. Everything that is referred to in Mr. Hughes letter (apart from any
references to Committee meeting matters of Sheffield City Council of
which I have no knowledge) was known in April 1989. That was the time
when anything regarding possible conflict of interest should have
been raised and not 18 months or so later.

3. I would remind you that a Coroner is an independent judicial
officer and is an appointee and not an employee of the local
authority. The latter have inter alia a duty to remunerate him and
pay his costs and expenses but they do not control what he does or how
he does it. They are not able to remove him from office which is a
right reserved for the Lord Chancellor, and in presumably very rare
instances, the Crown Court.
1 have sought to maintain good relationships with the officers of
Sheffield City Council, to behave responsibly with regard to the
incurring of costs and expenses and to keep them informed possibly to
a greater extent than was strictly necessary.

4. As I understand it I was the only eligible coroner under the
legislation unless the provisions of Section 14(1) Coroners Act 1988
had been implemented and some other coroner had agreed to take the
transfer, or the provisions of section 14(3) or 13(1)(a) and 13(2)
Coroners Act 1988 had applied which I do not think was or is the case.

Although a large number of the deceased came from Merseyside by no
means all did, and it would not in my opinion have been right to ask
the coroner in Merseyside or Liverpool to take over the inquests.

If I could have divested myself in April 1989 of the responsibility
for the inquests into the deaths caused by the disaster I have no
doubt I would have gladly assented and it certainly would have made an
enormous difference to my life.

5. It is inherent in  the coronal system   which is territorial in nature
that the coroner may  come into conflict   with the local authority.
This is no doubt one  of the reasons why   the coroner's position is as
is described in paragraph three of this    letter.

The Coroners Act 1988 specifically mentions various disqualifications
from appointment to coronal office. I draw your attention to Sections
2 (2) and 2 (3). It seems therefore to me that had parliament wished
to include provisions to cover the sort of situation described by Mr.
Hughes, it would have been childs play to legislate for it
particularly as sections 2 (2) and 2 (3) actually deal with the
appointment of a coroner who is or was a councillor or alderman.

6. Whether it is a good thing that a coroner's jurisdiction is
territorial and that he is locally appointed as opposed to centrally
by say the Lord Chancellor is another question.  I do not think
that this letter is the appropriate place to deal with these issues
though I may write to you again on this after the inquests are over.

The seperation of powers is very fine in principle but not so easy to
achieve in practice. For instance even the head of the judiciary is
himself a political appointee.

7. It goes without saying of course that should someone feel that
proceedings are defective then judicial review or the provisions of
Section 13 Coroners Act 1988 are open.

8. You will no doubt be aware that in the normal course of things
should I require some expert legal help I ( and I believe coroner's in
general ) would in the first instance look to their local authority's
legal Departments for help.

I was however conscious from very early on that there was the
possibility of criticism of the Council's involvement in connection
with the disaster. I felt that it would be inappropriate to
consult with them as this could give rise to a conflict of
interest if I were to discuss matters with them when the officer's
or the Council's conduct might be called in question.  I therefore
arranged for a meeting with the then Chief Executive and inter alia
agreed with him that it would be right that in the Hillsborough
disaster I would seek independent legal advice if I felt that I needed
it and instruct independent solicitors which I have done. I had
thought about the problem and in so far as it was necessary I had and
have continued to take steps to avoid difficulties arising.
   In fact I seem to recollect that T



  8. X must say that T a
                                  sSStSF^-
           riaM z
 ::: ^ *- ^ - - ^                       ^      555?^
 3 °0pPy ^ • rS S g " ' s brepfy“ Sistan“ ^ ^ u . Please   let me have




 Yours sincerely,




S* L. Popper.
H.M. Coroner.
                  h o m e o ffic e
                  Queen A nne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT

                                       D irect line 01-273 2 8 0 7
                                    S w itch b o ard 01-273 3 0 0 0


     Dr S L Popper
     H M Coroner
     Medico-Legal Centre                                  Your reference
     W a t e r y St
     Sheffield                                           Our reference

     South Yorkshire
                                                         Date         CRN   90 2 8 / 3 7 /
     S3   7ET
                                                                      13 N o v e m b e r   1
     Dear    Dr   Popper

    rerpivpH                  I e n c l o s e a c o p y l e t t e r we have
    r e c e i v e d from S i m o n H u g h e s M P a b o u t the
    H i l l s b o r o u g h i n q u e s t . (Iam a s s u m i n g that t h 1
    I S the case r e f e r r e d t o by Hr H u g h es ? )
                              1 w o u l d be g r a t e f u l for any
    to    a s s ^ t ° n that y ° U raay be able to P r o v i d e
          as s i s t us m   our r e p l y to Mr H u g h e s



                                              You r s      sincerely




                                               J   H ROWLANDS




S 36 3A
                           From SIMON HUGHES, MP




                           H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                               LONDON    SW1A OAA



Rt. Hon. David Waddington, M.P.
Secretary of State,
Home Office,
50 Queen A n n e 1s G ate ,
London SW1


10th October, 1990




                                                         9 o


                                                         /
Sheffield Coroner

It has been brought to my attention that the Sheffield Coroner is paid at
a full time rate but does other jobs.

I am also troubled by the at least apparent conflict of interests between
somebody, although Her Majesty's Coroner, who is paid for by the City
Council, when he is at the same time conducting an Inquest Inquiry into
the liability of the same City Council.

I have discussed this matter with my colleague Alex Carlile, Q.C., who shares
rny concern.

I could set out the details further if this would be helpful and am aware
that this matter is now a matter of public debate in Committee on Sheffield
City Council.     One of the Liberal Democrat Councillors in Sheffield asked for my
v i e w on the subject and I said I would write to bring the matter to your
attention.

I am happy to discuss the matter with you if this would be the most
appropriate way to proceed.  I should be grateful for a reply as soon
as possible.




Simon Hughes
M P for Southwark Bermondsey
