                        IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE



Applicant's Reference        Notice of Application for       Crown Office Reference
Number                       Leave to Apply for              Number     ,      ,
      JH 1                   Judicial Review                          Co J         pt
           This form must be read together with Notes for Guidance
                      Obtainable from the Crown Office
                         To the Master of the Crown Office
                               Royal Courts of Justice
                                      Strand
                                London WC2A 2LL
Name, Address and Description       ( 1)    Sandra Stringer & Donna Carlile, the
of Applicants                               mother and sister of Paul Carlile,
                                            deceased.

                                    (2)     John & Theresa Glover, the father
                                            and mother of Ian Glover, deceased.
                                              <2 a*--* F-K   ( j g A J t £   m+Q

                                    (3)      Joan Sinclair, the sister of Michael
                                             Kelly, deceased. 1

                                    (4)      Leslie & Doreen Jones, the father and
                                             mother of Richard Jones, deceased.

                                     (5)     Peter & Joan Tootle, the father and
                                             mother of Peter Tootle, deceased. ^

                                     (6)     James Stephen & Anne Williams, the
                                             father and mother of Kevin Williams,
                                             deceased.                  ^
 Judgment, Order, Decision or        (1)      Various decisions of Her Majesty’s
 Other Proceedings in Respect                 Coroner for       Yorkshire in the
 of Which Relief is Sought.                   course of the inquest held between
                                              the 18th day of April 1989 and the
                                              28th day of March 1991 into the
                                              deaths of the deceased hereinbefore
                                              mentioned and others at the
                                              Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April
                                               1989.

                                      (2)     Conclusion or verdict recorded by the
                                              Coroner’s jury at the end of the said
                                              inquest that these were cases of
                                              "Accidental Death".
          /
          /




                                  RELIEF SOUGHT



(1)     Leave to move for judicial review out of time.



(2)     An Order of Certiorari to remove into this Honourable Court and quash the

        conclusion or verdict of Accident Death recorded by the jury at the end of the

         inquest hearing on 28th March 1991.



(3)     Such further or other relief, including declaratory relief, as this Honourable

         Court thinks fit to grant.



                   GROUNDS ON WHICH RELIEF IS SOUGHT



                              FACTUAL BACKGROUND



The background facts of this case are set out in full in the Memorial to the Attorney

General which is exhibited to the Affidavit of Jeremy Hawthorn, the Applicants’

Solicitor. This Honourable Court is respectfully referred to the said Memorial whose

contents will not be reported here.



                                REASONS FOR DELAY



The reasons for the delay are set out in full in the summary of the steps taken by the

 Applicants to challenge the inquest verdict and other related decisions which is
      *ed to the Affidavit of their Solicitor, Jeremy Hawthorn.       It is respectfully

  ymitted that the delay is excused by the extreme difficulties the Applicants

experienced in obtaining legal representation, the difficulties of a new solicitor and      *'•

counsel in obtaining details of whfiTwent on at the unusually protracted inquest, and
  - .                    .                                                            I <>^/
the discovery of new evidence = a process which is going on till this day. It was            ^

necessary to settle a Memorial to the Attorney General since at first this appeared the

more appropriate remedy where subsequent developments were a relevant factor. But

it has also become clear that, whereas the statutory procedure initiated by the Attorney

General’s Fiat can provide only one remedy, namely that the inquest be quashed and

a fresh inquest be held, this Honourable Court has a more flexible range of remedies

in judicial review proceedings and could strike down the conclusion without ordering

a fresh inquest. It is therefore submitted that leave should be granted in the public

interest, even so far out of time, so that the High Court, in reviewing this matter, can

have available to it the fullest range of remedies and the alternative option of striking

down the conclusion without necessarily having to order a fresh inquest. [This option

was exercised by the Divisional Court in the case of R -v- St. Pancras Coroners’ Court

ex parte Higgins Co/1285/87, in which judgment was given on 23rd May 1988].



           GROUNDS ON WHICH SUBSTANTIVE RELIEF IS SOUGHT




(I)      The Learned Coroner wrongly conducted the mini-inquests into the question

          of "who the deceased were, where and when "they met their deaths by

          reference to summaries of the statements of eye witnesses which were read
out and whose contents could therefore not be tested by oral evidence and

questioning.   This was particularly unfortunate and improper because the

statem e^s^^^^^sedTcontroversial issues of whether the deceased’s deaths

^ f^ '^ j^ ta n ta n e o u s" or not, wh)A\ in turn raised important questions as to

Whether thos^jwhamay have been alive for some time after they sustained the

crush injuries which ultimately proved fatal could have been saved by

prompter and better responses by the emergency services.



The Coroner failed to comply with Rule 37 of the Coroners’ Rule* when he 5 y j

announced his intention of introducing documentary evidence into the mini-
                                                                                       n)
inquests without going through the procedures laid down of first summarising

the contents and ascertaining whether there was any objection to the                                    *
                                                                                       /L                   ;
proposed course.

                                                                                        fK O ?


The Coroner wrongly introduced a cut-off point of 3.15pm into the scope of tn ^
                                                                                         f - 3' 1
the inquest s inquiry at the outset of the main inquest into the issue of "how"

the deceased met their deaths.         He wrongly rejected the submissions of ^

Counsel for the family against the imposition of this limitation on the scope
                                                                                        y   \ i   w   r y



of the inquest. The decision was particularly wrong because there was clear &

evidence that at leafst four opthe deceased were, or may have been, still alive .

after 3.15pm and lack of evidence in relation to the other two that left the »
                                                                             'j( i »>.
issue open that they too were alive after 3.15pm. Moreover, the decision
                                                                                        ti\ cA
meant that there was no inquiry into whether or how far their deaths were
                                                                                       v
caused in part by the delay in calling the emergency services, and any
      shortcom ings in the response of th e police, and emergency services to th e

      plight of th e deceased after S.lSpm.



(4)   T he C oroner wrongly refused to call as witnesses D r. John A shton an d D r.

      Glyn Phillips, th e significance o f w hose evidence is summarised in parag rap h s

      12 and 13 o f th e Memorial to th e A ttorney G eneral. A gain this had th e effect

      of restricting th e scope o f th e full inquiry into "how" th e deceased m et th e ir

      deaths which th e law requires.




(5)   T h e C oroner wrongly lim ited th e inquiry into "how” th e deceased m et tljeir                    |

      deaths so as to exclude inquiry into w hether lives could have u              saved by       * **


      calling th e emergency services sooner and providing b etter em ergency ca re for                  I- %


      the injured thereafter.




(6)   T h e C oroner wrongly failed to direct th e jury as to th e availability o f a v erdict

      o f "lack o f care" or a verdict incorporating some reference to th e fact th a t th e

      cause o f d eath was "aggravated by" lack of care, o r not prevented from

      proving fatal by "lack o f care". It is subm itted th a t th e verdict of "lack o f care"

      should have been left to th e jury both:




      (a)       because there was clear evidence th ^ n e g lig e n c e h / t h e police had

                caused the original build-up th a t res K ltedinJfreejrus h injuries w hich

                proved fatal; and                                                              I» Let-



                                            -5-
        (b)      because there was clear evidence that despite the limitations p /

                 imposed on the scope of the inquiry, a more timely summoning of
                                                                                           fKJtn/
                 the emergency services and/or a more systematic response by them f

                 could have resulted in the saving of lives.



7.      Finally, there is now available some evidence that the Coroner and his jury

        were not given a full picture of the evidence of some of the witnesses whose

        statements were partially summarised at the mini-inquests, and that the result

        was that the proceedings were vitiated by the omission of certain facts

        [although it is recognised that the motives for such omissions as there were,

        were well .mentioned],                                 ^   ^



                  CONSEQUENCES OF AFORESAID DEFECTS



It is submitted that it is open to this Honourable Court, in exercise of its common law

powers of judicial review, either to quash the inquests as a whole and order fresh

inquests into the deaths of these six deceased or, alternatively, to strike down the

conclusion or verdict without going on to order a fresh inquest - as was done by the

 Divisional Court in the case of R -v- St. Pancras Coroners’ Court ex parte Robert

 Higgins (23rd May 1988).
                                                                       EDWARD FITZGERALD




 INVOLVED APPLICANTS SOLICITORS                                    Malcolm J Gregg & Co
                                                                   31 North John Street
                                                                   Liverpool, L2 6RG

DATE                                                      SIGNED
