  Stefan Popper

  From:        "Norman Muir" .....— ^ ------------ ^ _______
  To:          "Stefan Popper" — ..... ^
  Cc:          <hmcoroner@sheffield.gov.uk>
  Sent:        0 7 October 2005 15:45                                              H „ DC
  Subject:     RE: Autumn issue of Summons- The vegetative state by Prof. Bryan Jennett C


‘ ?hankDvoPu°foPrevour email raising you, disquiet on Professor Jennett's article. The thrust of the article was a
? m edical review o f the vegetative state over the thirtysom e years that the professor has spent studying th
• condition. W ithin that context he outlined the UK position in the legal issues raised by_wr,ltin9 br|efly ° nj ^ e
' Rland case I can see how this brevity has led him to use initiate crim inal proceedings.,        w hereas you nghtiy
  noint out th at coroners do not do this, but refer to the police for investigative action, which ultim ately could end
  up being one and the sam e. However, I find it im possible to read any direct or indirect criticism o f any action
 on yo u r part in th at part o f the article from the professor.

 I fullv aoDreciate that you as the coroner in the case, faced a m ost difficult and com plex situation w hich you
 h a v e eloquently described. I can therefore see th at a more com prehensive outline o f your role and actions a
 the tim e w ould be helpful, along the lines o f the content o f the email you sent m e,.' w ij discuss y o ur concerns
 with Bryan Jennett, with the intention o f inserting a suitable addendum in our next edition.
 Yours sincerely
 Norm an M uir
 Editor
                                                                                                 Page 1 o f 2




 Stefan_Po£ger______________________

 From:       "Dorries Christopher" < hmcoroner@sheffield.gov.uk>
 To:         '"Stefan Popper'" 1
 Sent:       07 October 2005 13:15
 Subject:    RE: Autumn issue of Summons - The vegetative state by Prof. Bryan Jennett CBE

Stefan,
M any thanks, I share yo u r concern about a m isleading com m ent. Perhaps you would keep me inform ed of
how this progresses. I really do th ink they should publish a correction forthwith.
Hope you are well.
Chris
                                                                                          Page 1 of 1




 Stefan Popper

 From:      "Norman Muir" I ..
 To:        "Stefan Popper" ^
 Sent:      07 October 2005 13:06
 Attach:    ATT00061.txt
 Subject:   Read: Autumn issue of Summons - The vegetative state by Prof. Bryan Jennett CBE

Your message

 To:    Norman Muir
 Cc:    hmcoroner@sheffield.gov.uk
 Subject: Autumn issue o f Summons - The vegetative state by Prof
Bryan Jennett CBE
 Sent: Fri, 7 Oct 2005 13:06:08 +0100

was read on Fri, 7 Oct 2005 13:06:24 +0100




                                                                                          A 7 /1 A /O A A ' n
 Stefan Popper

 From:        "Stefan Popper'
 To:
 Cc:         <hmcoroner@sheffield.gov.uk>
 Sent:       0 7 October 2005 13:06
 Subject:    Autumn issue of Summons - The vegetative state by Prof. Bryan Jennett CBE

Dear Mr Muir,

In the Autumn issue of Summons In the article on the vegetative state (page 11 the paragraph beginning with
the words " the UK position") Prof. Brian Jennett CBE writes:

"When his parents requested that tube feeding be stopped his doctor sought advice_from the coroner who
replied that he would have to initiate criminal proceedings’. In contrast he says the BMA published! a
sympathetic document leading to court proceedings which eventually allowed nutntion and hydration to be
withdrawn.

I was the coroner who was consulted. I do not agree with the statement made by Prof. Jennett about my
 eDf   | happen to still have copies of my two letters in 1989 to the consultant involved one of which is quite
[enothv I S o      speak to the consultant on the phone but have no notes of the conversations so can now
longer s a y wh^t was^aid . do not propose to repeat a ll. said in the letters but summarised, this included
the following-

       1. That I as coroner had no jurisdiction over any living person.

       2.That I could not approve or give consent to the course of conduct and that there was a serious risk of
       criminal liability.

       3. That it did not appear from the information I had received that the patient fulfilled the cntena for brain
       death.

       4. That clinical decisions were the Consultant's sole responsibility and that he should be able to defend
       these as being within the law of the land.

       5 Importantly in vievi of Prof Jenrrett’s comments I advised/suggested that in consultation with his tegal
       advfeorshe should see if it would be possible to make an application to the High Court for directrons
        and guidance.

        6 . 1 made it clear that I felt for the lad, family and caring teams involved in the terrible tragedy which
        had befallen the young man.


  In the light of the advice mentioned in 5 above I think it is not unreasonable to say that it was I who first
 suggested Court proceedings which as you know were eventually taken.

 I hope that you will understand and accept that even though I had made it clear that I did not hsivei jurisdiction
 it would have been unwise of me at that time not to have made it dear that I could not give either direct or
 indirect consent to either a negative or positive activity. This was necessary not only for my own Prof®ctlon’

                                       b* aiso to avoid someone acting on a pre               00
  finding themselves in possibly serious trouble with the law.

  I do not know why there was a delay in taking this matter to the High Court nor was Ila pa
  proceedings.. It is however significant that the matter was so novel and so serious that «t was felt necessary
  by the powers that be to take the matter all the way up to the House of Lords.

  Even now as I understand it in a similar situation to Tony Bland application has to be made to the Court for
  authority and presumably a doctor who ignores this lays himself open to possible criminal/civil proceeding.

  Coroners do not themselves bring criminal prosecutions and only initiate them to the extent that they may

                                                                                                           07/10/2005
                                                                                                        Page 2 o f 2



refer a matter to the Police for investigation. It is up to the Police and or the Crown Prosecution Service
( (neither of which are under the authority of the Coroner) to initiate criminal proceedings if they think it is
appropriate.

It is also significant that when I was approached only four months or so had passed since the injury. As Prof
Jennett has pointed out in the article it is now thought that a vegetative state should not be declared
permanent till 12 months had elapsed from the date of the traumatic injury. I am not claiming I had a time
span in mind but even today it would have been inappropriate to given consent even had I authority to do so
which I did not.

I would therefore say that contrary to the criticism of my actions made by Prof B Jennett I was right with
regard:



       a. to the limit of my power,

       b. the risks associated with the proposed conduct, and

       c. with my advice/suggestion to seek directions and guidance from the High Court.



Please would you correct the misleading impression about myself and coroners generally. Perhaps you could
also inform Prof B Jennett so as to avoid a similar comment elsewhere.

I am sending a copy of this e-mail to the Mr. C. Domes the present Coroner in Sheffield for him to do with as
he will.

Yours sincerely,




                                                                                                       07/10/2005
