File Note 1st July 1999 about 5 p.m.

I had a conversation with Chris Domes shortly before writing this note..

We discussed the documents claimed to be held on behalf of the coroner by Mr. Dames
and it would seem that that statement is not correct though he does hold originals and
perhaps other copies of documents which were used by the coroner in the proceedings.

I told Chris that we worked of the copies and that the originals were not used.
Note: I seem now to recall that arrangements were madefo r the original documents
to be available in respect o f the witnesses giving evidence in case we needed them. I
do not recall that that was ever necessary. I did not say this to Chris as I had not
remembered it at the time.

Chris Dorries told me that the reason why SYP held the papers was because the WMP
had made the enquiry on their behalf. This is in line with my recollection of the reason
why the papers were handed over to them.

I told him about my contact with Mr. Croston and the file note of 5th March 1991
which I had sent to Mr. Croston. Mr. Croston had disclosed the contents of the file
note to Ms. Adlington (in fact rather overstated what it contains though it is of course
implicit that I had seen a statement but the contents can only be based on my recall).

I had agreed with Mr. Croston that although I would prefer my personal note not to be
released he could do so if he thought it necessary.

I suggested that it would be a good idea if we searched through some of our archives.
I seemed to recall there were a couple of boxes with misc. statements to see if we
could find the statement of Ins. Harry White. Mr. Dorries said that if we found it we
should sent it to Mr. Croston and I agreed.

I mentioned to him that Mr. Croston had been sent some hand written notes of Insp.
White which he told me had been prepared for the coroner. I could not recall these
and when I saw them I did not recognise them. I did recognise one of the paragraphs
which in fact is quoted in LJ Stuart-Smith’s report and apparently this paragraph was
omitted from the original statement of Insp. White. If that was correct then it could
not have been prepared specifically for me.

We discussed the initial preparation of the statements. I thought that the order of
priority had been LJ Taylor then the DPP and then us. Mr. Dorries felt that a possible
criminal prosecution would have come first as it is always the responsibility of the
police to investigate to see if there is any wrong doing.

 I said that I did not think LJT enquiry was a statutory one but that he had been
appointed by the Home Secretary.

I called Chris back just to say that it was more convenient for us to get copies of any
documents from SYP because they had it on the Data base and that this might help to
explain Mr. Daines comment. Chris was not impressed with the point.
