      ROTHERHAM            GENERAL         HOSPITALS

                     1STHS    TRUST

              Department of Histopathology
           Rotherham District General Hospital
                     Moorgate Road
                  ROTHERHAM S60 2UD U.K.

                             Tel: Rotherham (01709) 820000
                             Fax: 01709 - 824019


Consultant Histopathologist & Cytopathologist
DR. D.N. SLATER BMedSci MBChB FRCPath

DNS/OK

17th July 1995

Mr. C.P. Dorries,
HM Coroner,                                        .r > n ^
The Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD S3 7ET


Dear Mr. Dorries,

Re:   Kevin WILLIAMS (Deceased)

Many thanks for your recent telephone    call    relating     t'o   your
letter of the 2nd June 1995.

I note that your letter deals with two queries placed by Mrs.
Ann   Williams  in relation to the Coroners After Inquest
Certificate.

The queries,   in essence, centre around two areas.

1.  Part of the body injured.
I sympathise with your comment that there may be some argument
as to where    the chest begins and the neck ends. Certainly,
however, the 'thoracic inlet1 is well defined in terms of the
first rib. For this reason, I fully support Mrs. Ann Williams'
comment that the most appropriate designation for the part of
the body injured is 'neck' rather than 'chest'.

2. Type of injury.
You will be appreciative from my autopsy report on Kevin that I
used the word 'compression'. The differences between the word
'crush' and 'compression' are difficult to be definitive about
and both,   without doubt,   lie on a spectrum depending on the
force involved. Accordingly, accuracy with regard to the type
of injury suffered is clearly more equivocal. For this reason,
I do not regard the word    'crush'  as wholly   inappropriate.
Clearly,  however, if the word 'chest' is being altered, it may
be that there would be leniency        to  alter    'crush'  to
'compression' to lessen the distress that Mrs. Williams clearly
experienced in relation to this point.

If I can.be of any further help in relation     to   this,   then
pleased do not hesitate to' contact me.

Kind regards,
Yours sincerely,




D.N. SLATER
Consultant Histopathologist
