                                                      J / > ’>   '




                    -i       6        t     h        September

SLP/JT.
                                          Tour Hef: VJB/CT/AED.

V.J. Bobson,
F.3.C.S. Consultant — A.3.D.
Rcyal Liverpool Childrens Hospital,
Alderhey,
Eaton Hoad, •1
Liverpool. L12 2AP.

Bear Dr. Bobson,

Thank you very much for your letter of the 1st of September,
the contents of which I have noted.

I think it would be very helpful if I could ae® a copy of
the booklet which you are preparing. This sounds a very
interesting idea and night well be of use in other situations
as well.
Yours sincerely,         ■..-..-•/a ...             ^.r



S.lj.Popper,
5.M. Coroner.
                          LIVERPOOL HEALTH A U T H O R IT Y
        ROYAL LIVERPOOL CHILDRENS HOSPITAL
                    ALDER HEY
                            Eaton Road, Liverpool L12 2AP
                               Telephone: 051-228 4811                         j
                       Our Ref:   W J R /C T /A E D   If telephoning please ask for: E X T .   2261


                                                                     1st September, 1989



Dr. S. L. Popper,
Coroner,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield,
S3 7ET




Dear Dr. Popper,

Thank you for your helpful letter of the 16th August which I received on
return from leave today.   There have been several developments since my
letter of the 27th July.

The situation about the report displayed in a library was  clarified to me by
one of the parents.  As you point out, this has now been withdrawn.

Several of the post mortem reports which you sent to solicitors have been
photocopied and sent to relatives for the purpose of bereavement counselling.
I have found this situation satisfactory and therefore now require no personal
copies of post mortem reports.

Following a request from social workers and parents I am preparing a glossary
of medical terms which are commonly used in post mortem reports.  I do not
think this will interfere with any potential legal proceedings.  However, if
you wish to have a copy before the booklet is distributed   to social workers
and relatives please contact me as soon as possible.

Yours sincerely,




W.MJ. ROBSON, F.R.C.S.,
Consultant - A.E.D.
