Discussion;with Dr Popper in his.office at the Medico-Legal
Centre^Sheffield. :Items discussed were as follows:- -

He has not yet. received his copy of the transcripts for Day
32-(the-closing date of the Inquiry). Nor has he seen the
submission-;-.made by Counsel to the Inquiry or those
representing.interested parties.     (Police Sergeant Parkes to
arrange-;^ copy of the-transcripts to Dr Popper. Nechells to
arrange a^;copy of the submissions to Dr Popper).

We had,a; discussion with regard to the allegations made by
Counsel- for the bereaved and injured parties concerning the
allegation of "unlawful killing", Dr Popper referred to
Section 16 of the Coroners' Act 1988 and the Coroners' Rules.
It was thought appropriate that Dr Popper, myself and
Detective- Chief Superintendent Foster should meet with the
Director- of Public Prosecutions, or his representative, at
the earliest opportunity.    (I will arrange).

Dr Popper asked if we could find out what time he was first
telephoned by South Yorkshire Police on Saturday 15 April
regarding the disaster (I have established from the South
Yorkshire Police Log that Dr Popper was telephoned at 1616
hours. I have also established that PC Thompson arrived at
the mortuary at 1647 hours. Also that Dr Popper left the
mortuary at 1830 hours to go to the ground).

Dr Popper drew my attention to the Daily Telegraph of 15 July
1989 where he indicated the words used in a report on the
closing day of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, which could be
construed in contempt of court. The relevant words used in
relation to the forthcoming Coroner's Inquests were
» .... . is likely to return verdicts of unlawful killing".
Dr Popper was raising this matter with the Attorney General.

Note for diary - Dr Popper will be away on leave out of the
country on 26 September and..for the two weeks following.

Dr Popper would like a full set of the statements taken.
(I have already discussed this with Detective Chief
Superintendent Foster and the matter is in hand).

I advised Dr Popper that a copy of the Channel Four programme
will be sent to him in the very near future.  (Detective
Chief Superintendent Foster to Action).

 I discussed security at the Medico-Legal Centre and other
 logistical matters with Dr Popper. Dr Popper has no
 objection to us providing appropriate locks and extra power
 points should we so require.
We had a discussion about the release of statements to
solicitors representing the injured and bereaved. Also the
request from Sheffield Social Services for a copy of the
compilation video., The principle that Dr Popper would like
to adopt is that which would appertain had this been a
straight forward fatality, ie material would not be released
until after the inquest had concluded. Given the
extra-ordinary circumstances Dr Popper understands the
difficulties and says he would like to release as little as
possible without being too unhelpful. At the present time
Lord Justice Taylor has permitted statements to be released
to solicitors representing the' person who has made the
statement. This also can continue as far as Dr Popper is
concerned.') However, requests for other statements will have
to be considered on their merits by myself, in consultation
with Dr Popper.

With regard to the compilation video, Dr Popper agreed that
this has already been in the public domain and that there
would be no objections by him for it being released to a
professional body such as Social Services. We have received
one request from Sheffield City Council - Hillsborough Task
Team. I intend to make the Chairman of that Team responsible
for one copy of that video which he may care to have copied
for other Social Services a£ he sees fit, placing the onus
upon him to ensure that its use is properly controlled and
that any copies made are properly accounted for.   (I will
write to Sheffield Social Services on this matter).

I advised Dr Popper that Mr Benen Hytner QC had approached
Lord Justice Taylor through Mr Andrew Collins QC, for
permission to show some or all videos recorded on the 1989
Semi-Final. The reason for this was that the relatives of
the deceased wanted re-assurance that there was no cover up
and they felt that this can be best achieved by viewing of
the video material. Lord Justice Taylor had agreed that this
could take place and I have been advised accordingly by
Andrew Collins QC. I am decidedly unhappy about this aspect,
not least of all the distressing nature of much of that film.
I advised Dr Popper that Elizabeth Steel, the solicitor and
Chairman of the Hillsborough Steering Committee, had written
to me to follow up the earlier discussion with Mr Hytner.
(Letter at Policy Book Number 883). Elizabeth Steel will be
visiting Nechells in week commencing Monday 24 July 1989 to
discuss this in greater detail. Miss Steel also included in
her letter an indication that they would like copies of the
photographs in appropriate cases. Dr Popper and I agree
that this is rather like the statements and the request
should not be acceded to at this stage. A good point at
this time, made by Dr Popper, was that in the light of the
suggestions of "unlawful killing", it would be highly
inappropriate to release material during the course of an
investigation. Our views also coincide over the showing of
video material, although that may create a lot of
difficulties, should we refuse, now that the request has
                already been agreed. (Detective Chief Superintendent Foster
                will meet with Miss Steel and discuss this next week. He
                will not be in a position to, agree anything at that time for
                what we will be able to do will have to be subject of
                discussion with Dr Popper and possibly the DPP's Office).

      11        We had a discussion on the part that the Health and Safety
                Executive played in Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, and in
                particular, aspects of Dr Nicholson's report such as rate of
                flow, capacity of pens, density of packing. Dr Popper is of
                the opinion, and I agree, that more work will be necessary
                from the HSE for the purposes of the Inquest.  (I am to
                arrange a meeting between Dr Nicholson, myself and Dr Popper
                early in August. Det Chief Supt Foster or Det Supt Tavlor
                to attend if possible).

     12    .    Finance - we had a general discussion about the financing of
                the investigation. The Coroner has no responsibility to
                meet police costs, for this is a matter which is normally
                dealt with by the police.
                   t
     13.       I discussed the possibility of Dr Popper's secretary using
               our word processor facility at the Medico-Legal Centre. We
               will make one key available to Dr Popper personally to hand
               to his secretary to use the machine where appropriate. Mrs
               Chalcraft will undertake the training of Dr Popper's
               secretary as soon as is convenient. Dr Popper will be
               supplied with his own word processor facility in the
               (hopefully) not too distant future.

    14.        We discussed the availability of the key to the photocopying
               machine. ^Inspector Sawers to raise this matter with the
               Admin Officer, John Batley, on his return to work, in the
               meantime Inspector Sawers to borrow the South Yorkshire
               Police Coroners Officer's key.

    15.        We have now installed a fax machine at the
               r.Pnt-T.o        ________
               Centre, the telephone     ,_______________
                                     number   is                                        LC0 di
                . . .              . *      ■-                         If Dr Popper
               with8thp0Hi'n8hV8               ®esSa£es’ or send them, in connection
               this ^ . ^ l l s b o r o u g h disaster then he is most welcome to use
               this facility.

               We had a^general discussion about security matters and it was
               agreed that items that we would supply Dr Popper which can be
               c o n n e d as "sensitive" would be kepi under L k and ke“
               (T s, of course, applies to all documents of that nature
               kept by our officers in the Medico-Legal Centre, including
               the copy of my policy book).


A copy of these notes and the letter from Miss Steel at Policv Book
Item Number 883 to be sent to Dr Popper.                     y Book
