                                                        25th August 1997



Mr. Christopher P. Dorries,
HM Coroner,
The Medico Legal Centre,
Watery St.,
Sheffield,
S3 7ET

Dear Chris,

I enclose a copy of the letter I am proposing to send to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

Please let me have any comments, criticisms, or corrections as soon as possible so that
I can get it off to him.

I expect to be at home for at least part of tomorrow afternoon so you could ring me if
you wish.

I hope you had a good bank holiday break.


Yours sincerely,



S. L. Popper




                                                                                cJco      *
                                                                       25th August 1997



     Mr. C.F. Bone,
     The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
     Room 528,
     50, Queen Anne’s Gate,
     London,
     SW1H 9AT

     Dear Mr. Bone,
                                               Hjlilsborough

      1 have a copy of your letter to Mr. DO™ * dated 7* August 1997 and of his reply
      dated 18thAugust 1997.
    , As Mr. Domes has already m    e n tio n * * !   there is no comprehensive list of the statements
f     and other material which was put b ^ f o ^ ^


      You will I am sure appreciate that it is flow several years since the disaster and the
      conclusion of the inquest and the passage o f time and increasing age has undermined
      my memory and recall. What I have to say bias to be read subject to this caveat.

      I paid a short visit to the Medico Legal Centre on 18lh August and as far as I
      could see there is on site:

             1. A copy of the transcripts of Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry

             2. A copy of the DPP submission (wfich as you will know includes a substantial
             number of copy statements).

             3. A copy of the transcripts of the proceedings of the Inquest starting on 19th
             November 1990.

             4 .1 did not notice but I am sure th«re would also be a copy of the transcripts of
             the hearings which commenced on 18th April 1990 and finished on 4thMay
             1990.

             5. A copy of the ‘body files’ in respect of each of the 95 deceased
             who were dealt with at the Hillsborough Inquests in Sheffield.

             6. A number of files and folders which contain a number of copy statements
             and questionnaires, correspondence, file notes, working schedules including
             I think various lists of potential witnesses. I do not think these lists are
             comprehensive but they would at least give a partial view of the names of
       witnesses whose evidence at any p .articular point of time was being considered.
       Unfortunately being working papei rs they may not be as comprehensible now as
       one would wish. There is an index : to the files but it is rather general in nature.

I understand that in addition to the foregoi ng there are further documents in the
archives. It is possible that these might c< ^tain at least some of the copy statements
which I saw.

Although there is no comprehensive list q? if documents which were put before me there
are indexes to the witnesses who were h' eard by Lord Justice Taylor, and by me at the
resumed Inquests starting in November 11 9 9 0 , There is also an index to the DPP
submission. The witnesses who are inel. uded in the ‘body files’ are not indexed but I
looked at one or two of the folders and ^noticed that they contain a list of the
statements which were submitted. (The! se lists again are not entirely comprehensive
for if I asked for an additional witness tt j be traced the name may not have been
added).

As far as I can remember once the Pu|jjjc Enquiry and the DPP submission was out of
the way I was able to access through ^ West Midlands police any statement or
questionnaire that was recorded on t ^ HOLMES data base provided of course that it
could be found when a copy was req uested.

I was aware that it would not be a Practical proposition for me to try ap^ead d the
documentation that was available. ( I             that +h«re             <nnn
                                 ?                       fck&w..'••«*' VVvlc SOillc
 statements and 90UU questionnaires or so) ; 1 g had put before me statements for
 example the DPP submi ssion and the statem ents in the ‘body files’ most of which
 would have been searched for by the West IVlidland Police with a view to enabling me
 to answer the coronal questions of ‘who’, ‘w-hen’, ‘where’ and ‘how’ the deceased
 came by his/her death.

In addition to the statements which were put before^ would also ask for copy
statements to be provided. Although I cannot now recollect the detail or the volume
involved such requests arose for example as.4 a result of aspects drawn to my attention
my interested parties. Although I cannot now remember with certainty I imagine there
were also matters or aspects where I wished! to explore the evidence available. It is
possible that the correspondence files may t ihrow some light on this.

I obviously had access to the Post mortem 1 reports. I also had access to the Northern
General Hospital files. I imagine these wens returned to the Hospital. You may
however wish to note that Mr. Wardrope g jave evidence regarding these on IB* April
1990 and his evidence is in the transcript ft pr that date.

I decided that it would be wise that at sonr j® stage I should have the whole corpus of
statements and documents directly availat *le to me. Arrangements were therefore
made shortly before the commencement oi f the hirings in November 1990 for a copy
set of all the statements and questionnaires to be delivered to my house. I repeat that I
did not read them all but I dipped and looke sd at about 40 documents, I did make a list
of these^aad-fef^youijnfbrmation enclose a <;opy of the copy which I have. I cannot at
this stage say whetherTdra hear any of thest 3 witnesses. One would have to find their
names from the Data bas&jaad-thea-Qompao gJtes^with the alphabetical list of witnesses
which was prepared in respect of the witnesses who were heard at the hearing
starting in November 1990.


I hope that the foregoing is of some use to you and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

No doubt you will get in touch with me directly or through Mr. C. Domes if you feel
that I could be of any further assistance.



Yours sincerely,




S. L. Popper.




cc. Mr. C. P. Domes
S. L. Popper.
