7th December 1996

Although I had initially decided not to give interviews I did eventually agree to speak
to Yorkshire TV (after discussion with Chris Dorries). Having decided that, it was
more difficult to refuse to give interviews with various other organisations and
persons.

Except for two TV recordings Yorkshire TV and BBC all the interviews were on the
phone. These two TV interviews lasted about 30 - 40 minutes including setting up
shots and preparation. I did not take recordings o f the face to face or telephone
conversations.

The first call was from the Sheffield Star before even the credits were off the air. I
only spoke very briefly with them.

On 6th December I spoke with :

Radio Merseyside this was a live recording . It included a question from Mrs.
Robinson a mother o f one o f the deceased about the choice o f accidental death instead
o f misadventure. She also criticised the choice o f witnesses. I had not been warned
that there would be this sort o f confrontation.

I also spoke to BBC Radio Sheffield and Radio 4 News at One.

I spoke with some one at the Press ?association

I spoke to Fiona at Daily Post Liverpool

Some one Frank Callus on    \             | had rung for or from the Daily Mirror. I did
not speak to him . Some also spoke to me on behalf o f the Daily Mirror who said he
was in Nottingham. I made it clear to this person who said he was a free lance
reporter that I was not willing to speak with the Daily Mirror or with some one
representing them. I told him that I had spoken to the TV stations and the Press
?association. NB therefore that I gave no interview to the Daily Mirror.

The contact at the BBC was from Mancheste                I am told the editor of
Northwest Tonight was Richard Porter New Broadcasting House, Oxford Rd.
Manchester N60 1 ST The editor in Nottingham Peter Hagan                     The
reporter who came was Emma Barnett.

The Reporter for Yorkshire TV was Julia Lockwood. Although I cannot recollect the
interview with certainty I think I may have said something to the effect that there was a
witness who I wished to call but could not call for various reasons but who on
hindsight I wished I had. To be certain I would have to see the transcript of the
interview in connection with this . Also that at the Judicial Review another witness
was mentioned who I did not call but who the court suggested I might have done had I
known of him.

P S, Neither witness is the sound engineer mentioned in the TV drama.
