                  with compliments
                         of
                   H.M. Coroner

Christopher P. Dorries
The Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield                     Telephone: (0114) 273 8721
S3 7ET                              Fax: (0114) 272 6247
  BROADCASTING STANDARDS COMMISSION
Complaint about unjust or unfair treatment from Dr D. N. Slater
submitted on 21 January 1997 about Hillsborough, on Granada
Television, broadcast on 5 December 1996.               RECEIVED

A d ju d ica tio n                                                         2 4 DEC 1998
                                                                         H.M. CORONER'S OFFICE

t. Introduction

On 5 December 1996 Granada Television broadcast a drama-documentary called
Hillsborough about the disaster that occurred on 15 April 1989 at the FA Cup semi­
final soccer match, between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough
Stadium. Ninety-six people died and over 400 people required hospital treatment as a
result of the disaster. A series of investigations and other proceedings, including a
coroner’s inquest followed. The programme examined the injustice felt by the
survivors as well as many of the bereaved as well as the creation of a dramatic
reconstruction of the disaster and its aftermath. The programme included Dr Slater, a
pathologist, giving evidence at the Coroner’s Inquest and his telephone conversation
with one of the police constables who had been involved in the tragedy. The
programme was repeated on 24 February 1998.

Dr Slater complained that he had been unjustly or unfairly treated in the programme.

The Commission discontinued its consideration of the complaint on 22 July 1997
while Lord Justice Stuart-Smith conducted his Scrutiny of the Evidence Relating to
the Hillsborough Football Stadium Disaster. The complaint was reinstated on 10
March 1998 following the conclusion of the Scrutiny.

2. The Complaint

Dr Slater complained that:

a) His portrayal in the telephone conversation with PC Bruder had been unfair; and
b) the programme had misrepresented his evidence to the Coroner’s Inquest.

At the hearing Dr Slater withdrew his complaints that the location of the Inquest at
which he had given his evidence had been inaccurately portrayed and that the
programme had aimed to create false impressions.

a) The portraval of Dr Slater in his telephone conversation with PC Bruder.

At the hearing Dr Slater acknowledged that the programme had been highly acclaimed
and deservedly so. However he said that his portrayal in the telephone conversation
with PC Bruder had been unfair. This had been confirmed by an article in the British
Medical Journal on 7 December 1996 which had said that:



                                                                                       1
 “the pathologist...is not let off McGovern’s barbed hook either. The programme
shows him ringing a police witness and persuading him to change his evidence about
the time at which he was still resuscitating one of the victims.”

Dr Slater said that the police witness’s evidence related to whether the victim was
alive or dead and not to the time of resuscitation. However the article’s use of the
word persuasion was important and acknowledged that the programme had given the
impression that Dr Slater’s actions had been clandestine. He submitted statements
from colleagues which confirmed that that impression had been given..

Dr Slater said that the impression had been achieved by filming the conversation
taking place after dark, by the background music used and by the comments actually
made. The police witness had shrugged his shoulders implying that he was not in
agreement with Dr Slater and had said “you’re the pathologist” and then “ok I ’ll
change my statement, clarify a few points”. There had been a strong implication that
Dr Slater had applied pressure or coerced the witness to change his evidence and that
the witness had not been in full agreement. It was the duty of a pathologist at an
inquest to present the pathological facts and findings, and offer unbiased opinions that
would assist the Coroner and jury. He said that it had been incongruous to suggest that
a pathologist would coerce a witness to change his evidence with the resulting
potential for a miscarriage of justice.

Dr Slater said that, in its opening credits, the drama had claimed that it was based
entirely on fact, using court transcripts and eyewitness reports. The telephone
conversation had formed no part of any documented evidence or court transcript and
the programme-makers had not sought clarification or agreement from him. The
telephone call had resulted from a request by the Coroner that Dr Slater should meet
the witness to discuss specific medical points. Pathological opinion on the time of
death could be extremely difficult and therefore the Coroner had asked that Dr Slater
should discuss PC Bruder’s observations with him to ensure that he interpreted those
observations correctly. This was not unusual practice and the telephone conversation
had taken place during the day and had been simply to arrange a meeting at the
Medico-Legal Centre in Sheffield. The purpose of the subsequent conversation had
not been to initiate change to the statement and at the Commission’s hearing Dr Slater
said that he had expected PC Bruder to keep to his original statement and give oral
evidence at the Inquest.

Dr Slater said that the programme had portrayed him as causing PC Bruder to change
his statement. However, Dr Slater said that he had only asked PC Bruder what he had
meant by three phrases in his statement, none of which related to the subsequent
changes that PC Bruder made. The programme’s portrayal of the content of the
telephone conversation had been completely fictitious. Contrary to the comments
made by PC Bruder in the programme, his original statement had made no specific
mention of 3.30 p.m. as the time for reaching the casualty Kevin Williams. The timing
had been obtained from independent video evidence at a later date. The programme
had also ignored PC Bruder’s second statement in which he said that he had been
assisted in making his “clarifications” by additional first aid training he had received


                                                                                      2
after the Hillsborough disaster. At the hearing, Granada emphasised that there had
never been any intention in the programme to allege any impropriety by Dr Slater or
to question his integrity.

Granada said that the programme had intended to explain the reasons behind the sense
of injustice shared by many of the bereaved and survivors of Hillsborough. The
programme had been exhaustively researched for more than a year by a senior
producer from World in Action and an assistant producer from Granada’s factual
drama unit. It was because of the nature and volume of this research that the
programme had carried the caption that it was “based entirely on fact using court
transcripts and eye-witness reports”, which had under-stated the level of research that
had been carried out.

Granada said that the programme had not portrayed Dr Slater as persuading the police
officer about his evidence nor had the programme shown Dr Slater and the police
officer discussing the time of death or resuscitation. With regard to the article in the
British Medical Journal, Granada said that the reviewer (Dr Walker) had disagreed
with the Coroner’s ruling and in a letter published in The Independent on Sunday on
22 December 1996 he had described the Inquest as “farcical” and had suggested that
there may have been a “less [than] altruistic” reason for the so-called 3.15 p.m. “cut­
off point”. Granada said that Dr Walker might have been influenced in his review by
his involvement in the case of Philip Hammond on whom Dr Slater had conducted a
post-mortem. It said that Dr Walker had not accurately reviewed the programme as
broadcast. Granada said that it was not aware of any other reviewer or journalist who
had reached the same conclusion as Dr Walker.

Granada said that with regard to the portrayal of the telephone conversation, the scene
had been filmed and lit as late afternoon. PC Bruder had told them that the
investigating West Midlands officer, depicted in the scene, had been with him for
several hours going over the details of his first statement to obtain a revised version. It
had been late afternoon or early evening by the time that the officer had left. The
scene had sought to reflect this impression and by the time PC Bruder had made his
second statement he had spent a considerable amount of time with the officer and both
had been quite weary. The programme’s timing was supported by evidence from
Inspector Matthew Sawers of West Midlands Police to the Coroner’s Court the
following day, in which Inspector Sawers stated that he had visited Mr and Mrs
Williams the previous evening following his visit to PC Bruder. In any event, Granada
said it had been the conversation that had been important and the depiction o f the time
of day had not been used to create a sinister connotation.

Granada said that the music in the scene had been used under ordinary dramatic
conventions to draw the viewers’ attention to the significance of the events being
portrayed, but not to impart improper motivation or sinister connotation. The fact that
the conversation had taken place was documented within the inquest transcript and the
words shown as spoken by Dr Slater had been reported to Granada by the police
officer and had reflected what the jury had been told of the conversation. PC Bruder’s
remark “OK, I’ll change my statement, clarify a few points...” had not been shown as
being made during the telephone conversation with Dr Slater. PC Bruder had finished
                                                                                            \
the telephone conversation, thanked Dr Slater and said “Bye”, before putting down the
receiver. He had then addressed his remark to the West Midlands officer. At no point
had it been suggested that Dr Slater had discussed with PC Bruder changing his
statement or making a new one.

Granada said that there had been no suggestion that Dr Slater had coerced or
pressurised the witness and there had been nothing unpleasant or threatening about
either his words or the tone in which they had been delivered. The only detail of the
conversation between them had been a proper indication that Dr Slater wished to
discuss medical details. PC Bruder had been very clear that the telephone
conversation had taken place during the West Midlands officer’s visit and the date had
been confirmed by PC Bruder having signed his statement on the same day. The mini­
inquest into the death of Kevin Williams had resumed the following day, May 4,
when Dr Slater had confirmed that he had “had a word with PC Bruder” to inform his
opinion more fully and testified to the cause and nature of Kevin Williams’ death. It
had been the fact that the conversation had taken place outside the court which had
been significant and not whether it had taken place on the telephone or face to face.
Granada said that the programme had included the Coroner’s reference to Dr Slater
having spoken with PC Bruder and it had been clear that Dr Slater had acted with the
Coroner’s knowledge and/or approval.

Granada said that the programme had not shown the time for PC Bruder reaching
Kevin Williams as being part of his statement, but rather as part of the discussion
between PC Bruder and the West Midlands officer. PC'Bolder had said that the
discussion had covered whether or not he could have seen an ambulance entering the
ground after 3.30 p.m. when he was tending to Kevin Williams. The scene had
reflected the discussion and not any written statement. The timing had been fairly
stated and PC Bruder maintained that he had seen an ambulance which had been the
fixed point for his time estimates.

Granada said that the programme had not ignored PC Bruder’s second statement. It
had been obvious from the programme that the statement’s significance lay in his
description of the signs of life he had found in the victim and that these had befcn the
significant details that he had changed following his lengthy discussion with the West
Midlands officer and his conversation with Dr Slater. It had also been obvious that PC
Bruder had made a further statement changing some of the detail contained in his first
statement. Dr Slater’s dialogue and the following scene which had referred to the
conversation between Dr Slater and PC Bruder had reflected the fact that the first
statement had not been relied upon at the inquest.

Granada said that there had been no justification for Dr Slater’s assertion that PC
Bruder had made his “clarifications” because of his improved understanding
following additional first aid training. PC Bruder had only ascribed his clarification
about the length of time that Kevin Williams had been convulsing, to his knowledge
gained from further training. PC Bruder had told the programme-makers that it had
been his discussions with Dr Slater, rather than his further first aid training, that had
convinced him that he must have been mistaken about the medical detail in his
original statement. He had said that he had taken on board the knowledge of an expert,


                                                                                       4
hence the telephone dialogue “you’re the pathologist”. Only PC Bruder knew why he
had made those changes.

Dr Slater said that he had referred to the article in the British Medical Journal because
it provided evidence of the way that the programme had been unreasonable and had
shown or potentially misrepresented him as having inappropriately influenced a
witness. He noted that Granada had not sought an official statement from Dr Walker
and said that he was saddened that Granada had sought to blame the Hammond case
for Dr Walker’s views rather than the programme. He said that Dr Walker’s
interpretation of the programme had reflected the views of his professional colleagues
and acquaintances.

Dr Slater said that although several pathologists had been involved in giving evidence,
his evidence had been the most extensive and specific in relation to the time of death
as he was the pathologist who had given medical evidence in relation to Kevin
Williams, and this had been one of the prime issues that Granada felt that the
programme had had to address. Dr Slater said that he had been portrayed as a central
character in relation to the pathological evidence and although the screen time devoted
to him had been small the issues had been of primary importance to the programme’s
purpose. Viewers had not been presented with expert pathological opinion about why
individuals were deemed to have died before 3.15 p.m. but rather with lay impressions
that victims were still alive after that time. This had been a serious omission of
evidence, a misrepresentation and totally inappropriate. Dr Slater said that he should
have been consulted by the programme-makers, as PC Bruder had been. The
programme had shown the phone call and then PC Bruder changing his mind from
thinking that Kevin Williams had been alive at 3.30 p.m. to his having been dead at
3.15 p.m.

Dr Slater said that the programme had not stated that the interviewing officer pictured
with PC Bruder during the telephone conversation had been a West Midlands police
officer. The officer, Inspector Sawers, had not been specifically identified nor had he
been listed in the programme’s credits. Dr Slater said that it had not been clear who
was interviewing PC Bruder and he said that the nature of the conversation continued
to cause him concern. Dr Slater said that he had been shown raising his eyebrows
when he had asked PC Bruder to clarify a few points and also PC Bruder had
shrugged his shoulder indicating that he was reluctant but had been persuaded to
accept Dr Slater’s comments.

Dr Slater said that PC Bruder’s second statement should have been given greater
prominence, particularly where he gave his reasons for changing his first statement.
Dr Slater said that he was not mentioned by PC Bruder in his second statement as a
factor in his changing his mind. Dr Slater accepted that PC Bruder’s comment in the
programme that he would change his statement had not been made during the
telephone conversation. The scene had suggested that Dr Slater had been the
persuasive causative factor for PC Bruder changing his statement and Dr Slater firmly
believed that his telephone call with PC Bruder had taken place well before PC Bruder.
had changed his statement.



                                                                                       5
Granada said that it did not accept that the BMJ review constituted “clear public
evidence” that the programme had misrepresented Dr Slater. It said that the objective
general view did not reflect the interpretation Dr Slater had placed on the scene.
Granada supplied the Commission with the national press coverage for the seven days
following the programme’s broadcast which contained only one reference to the scene
in question and that article made no reference to an impression having been given that
the “pathologist” had behaved improperly or had pressurised a witness. Granada also
said that contact with relatives of the victims had not influenced its view o f Dr Slater.

Granada said that the fact that the 3.15 p.m. cut-off time remained a prime issue for
the Hillsborough families did not render Dr Slater a central character in the drama.
The cut-off time was only one of 10-12 issues that had been raised by the programme.
Granada said that it had studied the pathological evidence, including the Inquest
transcripts, in great detail with the assistance of three independent experts. There had
been no doubt about the accuracy o f what Dr Slater had said at the Inquest and
Granada had not considered it necessary to consult him as part of the research for the
programme. However, it accepted the significance of the pathologists’ evidence and
said that the programme had made it clear that the Coroner, in confirming the cut-off
time, had based his opinion on the views of several pathologists who shared or
complemented the views of Dr Slater. The programme had also made it clear that
differing specialist opinion had only been gathered subsequently. Granada said that
evidence of lay individuals had not been presented “at the expense of medical witness
information”.

Granada said that the ordinary viewer would not have Dr Slater’s close interest in the
portrayal of the telephone conversation. The scene had made it clear that PC Bruder
had been speaking to a police officer and the first words of dialogue had been “Look,
Pm a copper too. It was a year ago but...”. Dr Slater had accepted that the context of
the scene had been an interview. It had clearly been with a police officer. Given that
PC Bruder said subsequently “okay, I’ll change my statement...” there had been no
doubt that he had been asked by the police officer to make a second statement.
Granada said that there had never been any suggestion that PC Bruder had disagreed
with Dr Slater or that he had been pressurised or persuaded to accept Dr Slater’s
comments. The scene had portrayed PC Bruder as at most “bowing” to the knowledge
of an expert because he was “only a police officer, not a doctor”. At the hearing,
Granada said that its research had not revealed overwhelming evidence of pressure
having been applied and therefore Granada had not sought to suggest that PC Bruder
had been pressurised. The incorporation of a time had been based on time-coded
actuality video footage and their discussion with the Inspector Sawers about timing
and had not been based on hearsay. Granada accepted that PC Bruder had been more
knowledgeable at the time that he had made his second statement due to his further
training in first aid. However, he had revised only one aspect of his original statement
 in the light of that training.

Granada said that there had been clear sound and visual cues between the termination
of the telephone conversation and the resumption of the conversation between PC
Bruder and Inspector Sawers. PC Bruder had thanked the pathologist, said “Bye”, put




                                                                                        6
the phone down and then resumed his conversation with Inspector Sawers. He had
then referred to changing his statement when speaking to the officer.

b) The portrayal of Dr Slater’s Inquest evidence.

Dr Slater said that the first scene in the programme of him giving evidence to the
Inquest had been reasonable and accurate. However, subsequent scenes had given the
mistaken impression that he had said that the deaths at Hillsborough had been
instantaneous with no discomfort or pain. Dr Slater said that his comments about the
speed with which unconsciousness occurred had been made in his general evidence in
relation to concepts of death by crush asphyxia and not the individual deaths at
Hillsborough. „

Dr Slater said that the programme’s editing had presented his comments about pain
and discomfort out of context. His comments had only applied when the victims were
unconscious. While unconsciousness may have been implied his comments could
easily have been understood to be referring to a conscious situation. The implications
had been endorsed by relatives who had said “if you are going to die get crushed at
Hillsborough... it didn’t hurt a bit!” The programme had failed to reflect that until
unconsciousness occurred traumatic pain would have been experienced.

Granada said that Dr Slater’s evidence had been included because he had provided
complementary evidence at the inquest which helped the coroner to reach his decision
that 3.15 p.m. would be the “cut-off time”, or the latest time at which any of the
deaths had occurred. The families had strong feelings about this decision and Granada
said that there was eminent medical opinion which conflicted with it. The families had
been upset because the overwhelming majority had only been told the generic facts
about the death of their relatives. It had been difficult for them to reconcile the
pathological evidence that death inevitably followed crush and unconsciousness with
the knowledge that others who had been in the crush and lost consciousness had
survived. They had also heard evidence indicating that in a number of cases, victims
had been alive some time after 3.15 p.m. and this raised the question o f whether an
individual might have survived had the emergency response and treatment* been
different.

Granada said that the programme’s editing had made it absolutely clear that the
evidence portrayed had been taken from Dr Slater’s general evidence and a series of
different cases separated by the passage of time. The programme-makers had taken
extreme care to ensure that only words spoken by Dr Slater himself were used in the
mini-inquest scenes. Granada said that it had been satisfied that the dialogue was
representative of Dr Slater’s evidence, and this had been corroborated by the summing
up by Dr Slater, the other prominent pathologist Professor Alan Usher and the
Coroner. Dr Slater had referred to “instantaneous” death in two scenes. Granada said
that in the dialogue used in the programme Dr Slater had said “unconsciousness
occurs very rapidly, certainly within a few seconds, and there is one reported case of it
occurring apparently instantaneously.” This had clearly been referring to a text book
case and not to individual Hillsborough deaths. Secondly an extract from Dr Slater’s
evidence about the death of Phillip Hammond, who had suffered a lacerated lung


                                                                                       7
leading to oxygen deprivation, had been used which said “unconsciousness would
have occurred extremely rapidly if not instantaneously”. Granada said that the
programme had not distorted Dr Slater’s evidence about an individual case nor the
generality of the evidence as presented by Dr Slater and other pathologists. There had
been no doubt that it had been the speed of unconsciousness and not death, that the
references had been concerned with.

Granada said that sound mixes had been used, where one sentence is merged into
another, to reflect that the scene was a condensed version of events which covered a
much longer passage of time and evidence relating to a number of cases. The
technique had not been indistinct. The programme had made it clear that the reference
to victims being unaware of pain or discomfort only applied after the victim had lost
consciousness. The words of relatives spoken at a later scene depicting a meeting of
the bereaved had said “If you are going to die get crushed at Hillsborough... it didn’t
hurt a bit”. Granada said that this had been a proper and justified reflection of the
relatives’ strength of feeling and their reactions to the pathological evidence. Granada
said that the programme had given a fair, if brief, summary of the weight and impact
of the pathological evidence. It had reflected the fact of conscious discomfort and pain
in a piece to camera representing the point of view of one of the relatives which also
stated that this had been established from further specialist opinion and not from the
Inquest.

Dr Slater said that one of the most important parts of his evidence to the Inquest had
been the words “unconsciousness occurs very rapidly, certainly within a few seconds
and there is one reported case of it occurring apparently instantaneously. Following
unconsciousness there is no discomfort and no pain. Death occurs after approximately
3 to 5 minutes, Sir”. Dr Slater said that he had not appreciated the words “following
unconsciousness” had been included in the programme, although he said that they had
been barely audible because of the sound mixing. He said that the mixing of sound
and visuals had been confusing and had misrepresented his opinion. He said that the
programme should have included this important evidence as he had presented it. He
said that it had been inappropriate and unfair for the programme to have distorted his
words in the way that it did.

Granada said that the sound and visual mixes had been used as an ordinary part of
film vocabulary which had made it plain to the viewer that these had been edited
extracts from a series of cases. The technique had not been deployed to suppress or
distort evidence but to convey a volume of similar evidence in an accessible form.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny of the Evidence Relating to the Hillsborough
Football Stadium Disaster.

Dr Slater said that during the delay, while the Commission awaited the outcome of the
Scrutiny, Granada had repeated the programme on 24 February 1998 and requested
that his original complaint be considered against both broadcasts. With regard to the
Scrutiny Report, Dr Slater said that this had clearly exonerated him with regard to any
allegations that he had brought pressure to bear on PC Bruder to change his statement.
He said that it was clear from the Scrutiny that there had been considerable concerns


                                                                                      8
about the West Midlands police officer pressurising witnesses and the programme
should have given the officer far greater prominence. Dr Slater said that he had
suffered adverse innuendo that would have been more appropriately directed at the
police force. At the hearing Dr Slater said that there had been a distinct period of time
between his conversation with PC Bruder and his being informed that PC Bruder had
changed his statement. He said that there was no way that PC Bruder had spoken to
him while preparing a new statement. The questions that Dr Slater had put to PC
Bruder had not been related to the changes that were made.

Dr Slater also submitted a statement from Dr C Milroy the Home Office pathologist
which said that the portrayal of Dr Slater had been professionally improper. At the
hearing Dr Slater said that in his evidence to the Scrutiny, PC Bruder had said that
Inspector Sawers had rung someone at the Coroner’s office because they were having
difficulty understanding medical details. PC Bruder had not named Dr Slater in his
evidence and Dr Slater said that he had no recollection of speaking to anyone who had
been discussing their statement with a police officer. He said that PC Bruder had not
spoken to him on the occasion referred to and Dr Slater said that he did not work in
the Sheffield Coroner’s office. Dr Slater also said that he had not provided a medical
brief for Inspector Sawers’ interview with PC Bruder.

Granada said that the programme had achieved part of its purpose by stimulating
further official inquiry into aspects of the Hillsborough disaster and said that the
Scrutiny had been instituted by the Home Secretary largely as a result of the
programme. Granada provided a copy transcript of PC 'Bruder’s evidence to the
Scrutiny. Granada said that this evidence made it clear that a medical brief had been
provided, apparently by Dr Slater, in preparation for the police officer’s interview
with PC Bruder. It was clear that the telephone conversation with Dr Slater had been
the overwhelming factor which had led to PC Bruder making a revised statement. At
the hearing Granada said that the programme had made no suggestion that Dr Slater
had acted improperly. Granada said that the scene had accurately reflected what PC
Bruder had told them but that he had subsequently changed his version of events in
his evidence to the Scrutiny.

Granada said that the exoneration referred to by Dr Slater related to allegations that
police officers had been pressurised by West Midlands Police. The programme had
not shown the West Midlands police officer pressurising PC Bruder because
Granada’s discussions with PC Bruder had revealed that he did not feel that he had
come under improper pressure from the officer. Dr Slater had not suffered adverse
innuendoes because the programme had fairly reflected the run of events involving Dr
Slater and PC Bruder’s evidence as supported by examination of PC Bruder’s
evidence to the Scrutiny.

Granada said that it was clear from PC Bruder’s evidence to the Scrutiny that the
telephone conversation with Dr Slater was undertaken to clarify medical details, as
stated explicitly in the programme. PC Bruder had made it clear that in his second
statement that he had bowed to Dr Slater’s opinion and knowledge. Granada
acknowledged that Dr Slater held very different views, but said that it had relied on
the documented run of events. The second statement had been misleading or


                                                                                       9
                                                                                           *




erroneous as it appeared to withdraw the first statement’s description of feeling a
pulse on Kevin Williams and PC Bruder, in his evidence to the Scrutiny, said that he
had definitely felt a pulse. Granada said that PC Bruder had believed that conflicts of
evidence and opinion between himself and Dr Slater would be finally resolved by his
giving evidence to the Inquest. PC Bruder had not been called to give evidence to the
Inquest and misleading or erroneous evidence was given about the presence of a
pulse following PC Bruder’s visit from Inspector Sawers and his conversation with Dr
Slater. Inspector Sawers testified the following day that PC Bruder could not be
“categoric it was a pulse.”

Granada said that the statements obtained by Dr Slater in support of his interpretation
of the programme remained irrelevant and did not reflect opinion shown to be held
elsewhere.

3. Evidence

The Commission had before it a complaint from Dr Slater, a written statement from
Granada, the complainant’s written comments, and a written response to these
comments by Granada. The Commission also had before it Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s Scrutiny of Evidence Relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium Disaster,
and further comments thereon from both the complainant and Granada. The
Commission watched a video-recording of the programme as broadcast and read a
transcript. The Commission held a hearing attended by Dr Slater and representatives
of Granada Television.

4. The Commission’s Findings

The Commission recognises that this was an important programme of high quality
which had been extensively researched. It also recognises that the programme focused
on the families of the victims and the role of the police and that Granada did not see
Dr Slater as a major character in the drama. However, given that the 3.15 p.m. cut-off
time set by the Coroner was of crucial importance to the views of the parents, the
Commission considers that the programme-makers should have consulted Dr Slater,
as they had PC Bruder, as part of their research. In addition, the Commission notes
that there wa.s a direct conflict of evidence between the recollections of PC Bruder and
Dr Slater which was not addressed by the programme.

While PC Bruder’s evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny supported
Granada’s submission that Dr Slater played a part in causing PC Bruder to change his
statement, the Commission considers that the programme, albeit unintentionally, went
further. Viewers, including some of Dr Slater’s professional colleagues, were likely to
have formed the erroneous impression that Dr Slater had, in some way, improperly
influenced PC Bruder causing him to alter his earlier statement. The effect of that
alteration was that PC Bruder appeared to have withdrawn his earlier statement that
one of the victims had survived beyond 3.15 p.m. Since this was a principal element
in the sense of unfairness felt by the families and one of the major themes of the
programme, the Commission finds that it was unfair to Dr Slater.




                                                                                     10
The Commission notes that the opening scenes in which Dr Slater gave his evidence
to the Inquiry clearly stated that in cases of crush asphyxia unconsciousness occurred
very rapidly and that thereafter the victims were not aware of any pain or discomfort.
However, subsequent scenes gave the impression that Dr Slater had been suggesting
that the victims had not suffered pain or discomfort and therefore he had not given
proper guidance to the Inquiry. The Commission acknowledges that the scene was
verbally correct, but considers that the sound mixing together with the comments of
parents in the following scenes, undermined the dialogue and inadvertently was likely
to have misled viewers about the nature of the evidence that Dr Slater had presented
to the Inquiry. The Commission finds that this was unfair to Dr Slater.

Accordingly, the complaint is upheld.

22 September 1998




                                                                                   11
