14/4/97

Spoke to Mr. Grofton CPS. He confirmed that it was in order to wait with my letter
till after 15,h April. I explained that I wanted to write to him about Mr. White’s
evidence re the tunnel gates but I preferred not to send the Setter so as to arrive on 15th
April. He indicated that that was OK. I indicated to him by reference to the letter
which I had already drafted what it was about.

He took the opportunity to ask me whether I could recollect whether the Jury had
asked for additional video evidence. 1 said that as far as I knew everything the jury
asked for was recorded and as far as I could recollect notes sent by the jury were also
made public but I could not say at this stage whether all of them were. As far as I
knew all the notes had been retained.

He asked me about the videos that were shown. I could not really help him much as I
did not have it all in recollection but told him that there were video recordings at H.M.
Coroner of the proceeding s and if he requested these he might be able to see and hear
what was put before the jury and if one was lucky one might be able to see the video
on the TV screen but I did not know.

I said that what had been available to LIT would have been available to me but I did
not show the jury all the Video evidence as there were many hours of it. 1 said I
thought I recollected that we had made arrangements for the families and other
interested parties to view all the videos but in another room if they wished and this did
not form part of the evidence before the jury. I could not help him with a list of what it
was.

We talked about the claimed missing video. I referred to Mr. Bichards evidence which
I had heard in part and in which I seem to refer to a missing video. I knew that a video
was missing from the club video room but I could not say what other video I might
have been referring to . I said I would try and get a copy of the statement and see if it
became cleared.

I also said that I would let Mr. Dorries know that he might wish to view the inquest
videos.

4.53pm
