                                                                          STATION

              JAMES
              WARDROPE

                33, NORTHERN GENERAL HOS, HERRIES RD
                HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE, S57AU

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 35

OCCUPATION:   CONSULTANT IN ACCIDENT & EMERGENCY


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060689                                                 J WARDROPE (SIGNED)



        I am Consultant in charge of the Accident and Emergency Department at

        the Northern General Hospital, Sheffield.    My qualifications are

       M.B.Ch.D. F.R.C.S. (Edinburgh) General Surgery and Accident and

        Emergency Medicine and Surgery, F.R.C.S. (England) General Surgery.

        From my appointment as Consultant on the 1st May 1987 (010587) up

        until the 1st May 1989 (010589) I was sole Consultant in the Accident

        and Emergency Department and therefore first on call to the Senior

       House Officers.

       On Saturday the 15th April (150489) at approximately 1.00 pm (1300) I

       telephoned the Accident and Emergency Department at the Northern

        General Hospital to let them know I was going to be available on my

        long range bleep as I was taking my family to the park.      At

        approximately 1520 (1520) I was returning heme in the car when my long

       range bleep went off.      I was heme within a minute and answered the

       telephone.     I spoke to Charge Nurse BATTY who was at that time Nurse

        in Charge of the Accident and Emergency Department.       He told me that

       he had received a message from the police saying that there was seme

        form of incident at Hillsborough and we were to expect seme casualties.


                                                                                    £6
At that time there was no indication that this was a major incident,

j laft home immediately at 1523 (1523), arriving at the Northern

General at 1533 (1533).

Qn my arrival at the Northern General Hospital it was obvious that

this was a serious incident, since there were already three ambulances

at the ambulance entrance.    I immediately ran into the department and

confirmed with Charge Nurse BATTY that he had implemented the Hospital

Major Incident Plan.    At that time there were three patients in the

Resuscitation Room undergoing cardio pulmonary resuscitation and sane

less seriously injured in the Accident Department.

Preparations were well under way to ready the department for a Major

Incident but I would point out we received no adequate notification of

the scale of this event.

Almost immediately a second wave of ambulances arrived.    These vrere

carrying large numbers of seriously ill patients frcm the incident at

Hillsborough Stadium.     Seme were having active cardio pulmonary

resuscitation, being in a state of cardiac arrest.    Others vrere deeply

unconscious. Others were having severe fits. At this tame I

attempted to sort the patients into various categories (TRIAGE), but I

found myself having to help with the treatment of these patients.

As more staff arrived I was able to concentrate on the triage and

management role and by about 1345 (1345) there was adequate staff in

the department and also the documentation triage point had been set

up, allowing the use of the pre-planned Major Incident hospital

notes. Also about this time the resuscitation area was becoming full

and we were still receiving many seriously ill patients and about this

point I took the decision to send patients who had no cardiac output

direct to the mortuary.     Prior to this point patients with no^cardiac

output who were having active cardio pulmonary resuscitation had been
sent to the Resuscitation Roan to try and re-start the heart and

assist with their breathing.

I fael I must give this background since our documentation of the

earlier treatment of many of the patients is not satisfactory, but I

wish to make it absolutely clear that the staff were stretched in

trying to provide urgent life saving treatment to the huge number of

patients.

Thirteen patients were brought to the Northern General Hospital on

that day and subsequently died.      From the medical records in my

possession and also with the help of post mortem evidence provided by

HM Coroner, I am able to give the following details of the treatment

of these patients.

N.G.H. Major Incident No.

(Majax No.)

2.          Lee NICHOL
                                  O/ S
            This young boy was brought in as a cardiac arrest.

            Resuscitation resulted in return of normal cardiac output,

            but he did not breath on his own.    He was therefore

            transferred to the General Intensive Care Unit and I believe

            he died on the Intensive Care Unit three days later.

8.          Philip HAMMDND     ft*
            There is no definite documentary evidence in the medical

            notes that Mr HAMMDND received resuscitation, but the post

            mortem states that there were three E.C.G. electrodes

            attached to his chest.

            I would interpret this as it being probable he did enter the

            Resuscitation Roan of the Northern General

            Hospital, but a cardiac tracing showed no cardiac activity
                                                              *
            and in view of the large number of patients present at the
             JAMES                                              4


time, resuscitation attempts were not taken any further.

Barry BENNETT

There is no documentary evidence in the hospital notes

to suggest that Mr BENNETT received resuscitation.

However the post mortem reports shows there was a needle

injection mark on one of his arms which would indicate same

attempts had been made at resuscitation.

Victoria HICKS          ^ °!

There is definite hospital and post mortem evidence             1

that Miss HICKS received intensive resuscitation efforts

after being brought in in a state of cardiac arrest but

unfortunately, these efforts were not successful.

Stephen HARRISON         ^o ^ (
There is definite evidence in the medical record and from the

post mortem report that Mr HARRISON received intensive

resuscitation efforts.

M a m SPEARRITT                    ^

There is definite evidence in the medical notes that Mr

SPEARRITT was brought into the department in a state of

cardiac arrest and resuscitation attanpts were initially

successful in re-starting his heart and he was transferred

to the Intensive Care Unit.        However, shortly after his       ?     ^
admission to the Intensive Care Unit his heart stopped again

and could not be re-started.

Gary JONES                     L                                    J   /J0
There is definite documentary evidence in the hospital notes

and from the post mortem record that Mr JONES received

intensive resuscitation efforts in the Accident and

Emergency Department.
           JAMES                                                  5


Stephen O'NEIL

There is no documentary evidence in the hospital notes that

Mr O'NEIL received any treatment.     However, post mortem

report states there was a needle placed in Mr O'NEIL'S arm

and it is therefore possible that Mr O'NEIL did have seine

attempt made at resuscitation.

Paul BRADEY               ^
There is no definite documentary evidence in the hospital

notes nor any evidence from the post mortem findings that

Mr BRADEY received any resuscitation. / I think it likely that         ^^
he was triaged as deacuj

David THOMAS

There is no evidence in the hospital notes that Mr THOMAS

received resuscitation.    Similarly, there is no evidence in

the post mortem report and I think it likely that Mr THOMAS

was triaged as dead.

John GILHOOLEY

Although there is no definite medical record of Mr GILHOOLEY

receiving resuscitation.      There is definite post mortem

evidence of intensive resuscitation attempts.

Philip STEELE

There is no evidence in the medical record nor any evidence           />   Qi/JL,
from the post mortem findings that Mr STEELE received any             ^
                                                                             n
                                                                                ~As
               f                                .                     / a rtMr*
resuscitation./ I think it likely that he was triaged as

dead, j

Arthur HQRROCKS           p.]() ^2^
There is no evidence in the medical record of any

resuscitation attempts and there is no evidence in the post
                                                                           /JCM   ■




mortem findings of any resuscitation attempts.      I therefore
                                                                                  30
                                            atsati^a^W ijgi 'SfitSS
                                   t S t l S a ll l



                                                      SifisP   pS^iSSS


                                                  IIP IIIIII
  3DR0PE

                                                                  was- triaged as dead,
            t:.'_ -•:
                                                                    frcrn the hospital records
In si
                                       six patients received resuscitation

                        further three patients there was some evidence that,.

               "may have received seme resuscitation attempts.                       In four

           there is no evidence of resuscitation and it is likely that

these patients were triaged to the mortuary on arrival at the Accident

and Emergency Department.

I feel.-it maybe helpful to give a brief summary of our experience of

traumatic asphyxia.          Traumatic asphyxia is a fairly unccmmon

condition, normally occurring in sporadic cases, either in car

accidents or heavy injury.          There are a number of well documented

instances where large numbers of people have died in crowds as a

result of traumatic asphyxia.               Such events are fortunately rare.             The

Northern General Hospital Accident and Emergency Department admitted

                   f severe traumatic asphyxia within a space of one hour

                  cil      150489) and this is in addition to the patients

mentioned above.

No patient admitted in a state of cardiac arrest has survived.

Of the other fifteen patients who were admitted with cardiac output

and breathing albeit deeply unconscious or fitting, two patients have

severe brain damage, three patients have significant brain damage and

ten patients have made good recoveries. Those patients with the worse

outcomes were those who were most severely affected clinically
on. admission.
                          JAMES

                                                    J WARDFOPE SIGNED


STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE
                        DATE:     060689

WITOESS TO SIGNATURE   JULIE APPLETON      PS7844

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
