                                              13th May 1993




Professor the Lord McColl of Dulwich,
House of Lords,          ;
Westminster,
London,
SW1


Dear Lord McColl

      Select Committee on Medical Ethics - Anthony Bland Deceased

On 29th March 1993 Mr.Dorries H.M Coroner for South Yorkshire (West
District) sent me a copy of your letter to him dated 19th March 1993
together with his reply dated 29th March. I am sorry that I have not
written to you sooner and I hope that this will not have
inconvenienced your committee.

I understand that you have been sent a copy of my letter to Dr. Howe
dated 24th August 1989. You will see from that letter that there
were a number of conversations with Dr. Howe and it may be that there
would be file notes of these amongst the papers. Unfortunately I am
not in a position to search for these as the papers,if any, are
located in Sheffield.

However I agree with Mr. Dorries that the substance of what I said to
Dr Howe would probably be in the letter which you already have. It
may however be worth pointing out that in the fourth paragraph of a
letter of 7th September 1989 to Dr. Howe I said:

"As you had raised the problem of future management with me it was
essential that I should point out that this was outside my
jurisdiction and that clinical decisions and management must be for
you but that they have to be reached or taken within the terms and
provisions of English Law both civil and criminal. This is of course
not only in your interests but also in the interests of Tony's
family."

You will see both from the above quotation and also my letter of 24th
August 1989 that I tried to make it plain that as coroner I had no
jurisdiction. Nevertheless in the event of Tony's death a coronal
interest might well arise and it would not therefore have been wise
to find myself in a position where I might have to hold an
inquest on actions taken by others on what may have been
construed as permission from me.

Furthermore I was also of the opinion that even if I disclaimed any
jurisdiction there was nevertheless the risk that any direct or
indirect consents which I may be held to have given to a particular
course of conduct might still have been acted upon with possible
unfortunate consequences of liability in law, civil or criminal, to
the parties involved and possibly even to myself as a person having
knowledge of such actions.
Any advice given should therefore be on the side of caution.

You will see from my letter to Mr. Howe that although I included
antibiotic cover within the terms of my letter I seemed to have
distinguished to an extent between what might be called tender loving
care including the provision of the necessities of life on the one
hand and medical care as such on the other. As you will notice from
the 7th paragraph of my letter Dr Howe had apparently indicated that
he wished to withhold antibiotic cover and it was therefore not
possible for me to simply ignore this point in my response to him. I
have already stated the need for caution in any response that I might
give particularly as I had no power or authority to grant any
dispensations nor did I have jurisdiction over for example the crown
prosecution service.
You will also see from my letter that I was well aware that there
were clinical situations where it might be proper not to seek to
prolong a person's life by medical means including drug therapy. The
difficulty that I saw with this young man was that it was arguable
that he was not even terminally ill.
I understand from a report in the Times on 20th November 1993 that
the BMA in a discussion paper proposed that "intensive efforts"
to stimulate patients in a persistent vegatative state should be made
for at least 6 months and that no decision should be taken to
withdraw treatment for at least a year. Various other safeguards are
also laid down.
You will be aware that the Hillsborough disaster occurred on 15th
April 1989. My letter to Dr Howe is dated 24th August 1989 ie a
period of just over 4 months. I cannot now remember whether the time
element was a factor which at that time I took into account (possibly
my file notes might reveal this). However whether I did or did not it
seems that my view with regard to withholding treatment then is in
line with current thinking in cases such as these. Perhaps
serendipity played a part.
You will also see that I did not have the clinical management of the
patient and I was anxious that nothing should be done which might be
held to contravene the law and in particular the criminal law which
neither I nor the family or Dr Howe had power to dispense with.

Nevertheless I could see the dilemma that was facing Dr Howe and I
did even at that time suggest that advice should be taken as to
applying to the High Court for directions. This as you know was
eventually done and the case turned out to be both difficult and
novel and needed a decision from your House before final resolution.


in a nutshell then whilst recognising that in certain defined
situations clinical decisions regarding the discontinuation of
medical treatment might be taken by the clinician in charge of the
case I did not have the authority nor did I wish to give the
appearance of authorising any act or omission which might lay any of
the parties (including myself) open to liability and in particularly
criminal liability. In the events if the the BMA's view quoted above
prevails then the timing of the proposed actions would not have met
the BMA critiria.

I hope that the foregoing is of assistance to you. If there is any
thing further that I can usefully add please let me know.



Yours sincerely,




S . L . Popper




cc. Mr. C. Dorries     for information
    Rev. J. Turnbull     "     "
                 OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER                                MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE
                                                                            WATERY STREET
                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                                 SHEFFIELD
                 (West District)
                                                                                      S3 7ET

                 H .M . C o ro n e r                                                    Telephone:
                 Christopher P. Dorries                                     Sheffield (0742) 738721
                                                                    29th March 93



                 Doctor Stefan L Popper




                 Dear Stefan

                 Tony Bland (Deceased)

                 I am enclosing a copy of a letter received from the House of Lords today
                 which is self-explanatory together with a copy of my proposed reply.

                 You will note that I have suggested that it is inappropriate for me to
                 comment on Tony Bland’s case specifically because you dealt with that.
                 I have however tried to set out some general background.

                 I will be grateful if you would consider replying direct to Lord McColl at
                 the House of Lords, London, SW1.  If I do not hear from you within the next
                 two or three days I will assume that you have no objection to my proposed
                 reply insofar as it goes and will therefore despatch it.

                 I hope that you are well and continue to enjoy the immigration appeal work.
                 It is really rather busy round here at the moment.

                 Best Wishes




                 C P Dorries
                 H M Coroner

                  encs




        SS1ADZ
R8606                                          Fax: (0742) 726247
                                                           29th March 93



         Professor the Lord McColl of Dulwich
         House of Lords
         Westminster
         London
         WW1




         Dear Lord McColl

         Select Committee on Medical Ethics
         Anthony Bland (Deceased)

         Thank you for your letter of 19th March which only arrived at my office on
         the 29th March.

         I think that particular comment on the Tony Bland case ought to come from
         Dr Popper rather than myself.  I have therefore sent a copy of your letter to
         Dr Popper today and asked him to reply to you direct. It may assist you in
         the meantime however if I deal with the point involved in general terms.

         A Coroner’s powers only arise from the presence of a body.  It follows
         therefore that a Coroner has no power at all to give any form of directions
         or permission to a doctor in respect of a living patient (with the possible
         exception of transplant donors).  However, not unnaturally, there are
         isolated occasions when the medical profession are wanting to know what
         attitude the Coroner will take (after death) in respect of a proposed course
         of action for a particular patient. Any Coroner must treat such a request
         for advice with extreme caution for a number of obvious reasons.

         If a doctor approached a Coroner with a proposal that treatment be
         discontinued for a patient in circumstances that might amount to a criminal
         offence of murder or manslaughter it is not, strictly speaking, up to the
         Coroner to either forbid or encourage such an action.  Indeed it might be
         argued that giving active encouragement to do so is coming rather close to
         aiding and abetting the criminal offence involved.  I suspect that most
         Coroners would, if faced with this situation, go out of their way to ensure
         that the doctor understood the general criminal law and that the Coroner had
         no power to condone or permit such an action, nor would he be able to turn "a
         blind eye" to possible criminality at the subsequent Inquest just because the
         doctor had asked permission first.  I suspect that the doctor would be
         advised strongly to obtain his own legal advice before proceeding further.




SS1ADX
I would be happy to let you have sight of any documentation relevant to your
enquiry which is held in this office but the only paperwork that I am aware
of at all on this particular point is Dr Popper’s letter to Dr Howe a copy of
which is attached.

Finally, might I also ask you to bear in mind that an Inquest has been opened
into the death of Tony Bland by Mr James Turnbull, HM Coroner for West
Yorkshire, accordingly I would feel it discourteous if I did not let him have
a copy of this letter as well.

I hope that my general comments are of assistance to you, if I can be of
further assistance please do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely




C P Dorries
H M Coroner

enc
Mr Christopher Dorries
The Coroner
The Medico-Legal Centre .
Watery St
Sheffield
F3 7ES


                                                                   March 19th 1993

Dear Mr Dorries,

As I am sure you are aware, the House of Lords Select Committee on Medical Ethics
is considering amongst other things the decision by the Law Lords in the case of
Airedale NHS Trust and Anthony Bland.

As a member of the Committee, I am researching into the outcome of the case and
would gladly receive your assistance in clarifying one point. I understand from my
reading of the papers that when Dr Jim Howe made his first request to your
predecessor Dr Popper to withdraw treatment in the face of infection, he was advised
not to. I am thinking particularly of the fact that he treated the infections that
Anthony Bland contracted.

I would be most grateful if you could inform me why this advice was given, if it was,
and if possible, I would appreciate any copies of the Department’s records on this
particular point

J am soisy;to-- trouble, you with this, however as yet I   read nothing in the papers
I have received which clarifies this point.

Yours sincerely,




Professor the Lord McColl of Dulwich
