EXHIBIT "SLP.l"
                                 PAUL CARLISLE


(1)    I opened the Inquest on Paul Carlisle on 19th April 1989 when evidence
       of identification was taken.     The autopsy was carried out by Professor
       Alan Usher.


(2)    On 3rd May 1990 the Inquest on Paul Carlisle was reconvened. Mr Fraser
       appeared for the deceased's family.        I explained the procedure I was
       proposing to adopt. No objection was made by Mr Fraser.


(3)    Professor Alan Usher gave evidence and in answer to me stated:


       "The typical signs of traumatic asphyxia were present both externally
       and internally."
        "... I gave his cause of death as traumatic asphyxia".



(4)    Mr Fraser put one question to Professor Usher who answered as follows:


        "... The reason for Paul's death was that his chest was held so tightly
        that he could not breathe in or out and, once that had happened, then he
        would have been unconscious in a matter of seconds, between 10 to 20
        seconds. He would have died within a few minutes but at the time, of
        course, subsequent to his unconsciousness, he would not have been aware
        of any pain."



        There was no other challenge to the pathological evidence.


 (5)    WPC Geraldine Evans provided the summary of the evidence collected
        relating to Paul Carlisle.    She summarised the evidence of 15 witnesses.



                                            2
      Mr Fraser neither objected to this procedure, nor did he wish to ask any
      questions of WPC Evans.


(6)   Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence available.
      Again, Mr Fraser neither objected to this procedure nor did he have any
      questions of the officer.


(7)   At the conclusion of this part of the Inquest on the 3rd May 1990
      relating to Paul Carlisle, Mr Fraser read a note from the family:


      "The note is from the family in general, Sir, and I read it out as it
      stands. They want to thank Michael Layton and Peter Hogan who, I
      understand, is an officer who assisted Inspector Layton, Sir, for their
      help throughout the Inquiry.        They want to thank the two officers,
      Goulding and Pont, for the assistance which they gave to Paul on the
      day, together with the ambulance man whose name has not been traced.
      Sir, they want to thank Maureen Rowe and Peter Hyde from Moseley Social
      Services and they have been, in the family's words, Sir, a 'lifeline for
      us throughout the last year'.           Sir, they want to thank Michael
      Hollinghurst for trying to save Paul. They say, 'Words will never
      express how we feel but knowing that he was with Paul, we are all
      grateful.' Finally, Sir, they want to thank you for being, again, their
      words, 'so thorough and a gentleman' as you have been throughout these
      Inquests and, in particular, the Inquest into their loved one."



(8)   The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest commenced on the
       19th November 1990. Much of that evidence was common to all of the 95
       Inquests.    With particular respect to Paul Carlisle, I called Michael
       Hollinghurst and Ian Feams.       Mr Timothy King who appeared for the
       family during this part of the Inquest had the opportunity to question
       both of them arid did so.     H&-hari a1so.-r,oon all the statements collected
       by~the-West-MidliiidsTolicc




                                          3
(9)    At no stage during this last part of the Inquest was it suggested on
       behalf of the family that Professor Usher's evidence was inaccurate or
       wrong.


(10)   There was no further responsible or relevant medical or other evidence
       available to put before the jury to suggest that in Paul Carlisle's case
       (in terms of medical or rescue efforts) that anything different could
       have been done which would have had an impact on the cause of death.


(11)   There was plentiful evidence before the jury for this Inquest and the 94
       othersconcerning the acts of those responsible     for crowd control and
       safety.


(12)   The only formal request I received in relation     to the evidence of Dr
       Phillips, Dr Ashton and Mr Eccleston
       [This requires to be completed,.]




                                           4
                                 IAN GLOVER


(1)   I opened the Inquest on Ian Glover on [                  ], when evidence of
      identification was taken. The autopsy was carried out by [      ].


(2)   On [       ] the Inquest on Ian Glover was reconvened.
      [The remainder o f this commentary requires to be completed.]




                                          5
                                  RICHARD JONES


(1)    I opened the Inquest on Richard Jones on the 18th April             1989 and
       evidence of identification was taken.       The autopsy was carried out by
       Professor Alan Usher.


(2)    On the 3rd May 1990 the Inquest concerning Richard                 Jones was
        reconvened.      Mr Fraser   appeared      for the family.   I did not in this case
        specifically explain the procedure I was to adopt, since Mr       Jones (the
        father) had been present on the previous day when I had gone through the
        explanation.     I reminded him of this.   Mr Fraser made no objection to
        the procedure.


(3)    In answer to me Professor Usher stated:


        "There were obvious signs of traumatic asphyxia both externally and
        internally."
        "This young man died essentially because he could not move his chest in
        or out and that meant, of course, he could not breathe andthat meant
        oxygen was cut off to      his vital      organs and, once that chestwas fixed,
        he would have been unconscious in a matter of seconds, probably between
        10 and 20 seconds, and he would be completely unknowing of anything that
        happened subsequent to that, though he would take a matter of minutes,
        perhaps between 4 and 6 minutes, to die".



        Whilst Mr Fraser did ask some questions of Professor Usher directed
         towards a blood alcohol measurement, the pathological evidence relating
         to the cause of death was not in any way challenged.


 (4)     Police Sergeant Killock provided the summary of the evidence collected



                                            6
               and relating to Richard Jones.           He summarised the evidence of 9
               witnesses.    Mr Fraser neither objected to this procedure, nor did he
               wish to ask any questions of Police Sergeant Killock.


        (5)    Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence available. Mr
               Fraser neither objected to this procedure and nor did he have any
               questions of this officer.


        (6)    The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest commenced on the
               19th November 1990.          Much of the evidence was common to all 95
               Inquests.    With particular reference to Richard Jones I called Stephanie
               Jones (his sister). Mr Timothy King who appeared for the family during
               this part of the Inquest took the opportunity to question her.


         (7)   At no stage during this last part of the Inquest was it suggested on
               behalf of the family that Professor Usher's evidence was inaccurate or
               wrong.


         (8)   There was no further responsible or relevant medical or other evidence
                available to put before the jury to suggest that in Richard Jones' case
                (in terms of medical or rescue efforts) anything different could have
                been done which would have had an impact on the cause of death.


         (9)    It is correct that Mr and Mrs Jones wrote to me asking me to call Dr
                        cK                                           7
                Phillips, Dr Ashton aftd~Dr 'BcnTre~aiid Mr Ecclestoil I did not do so for
                the reasons set out in the body of the Affidavit.         In short, they could
^               not add anything of relevance to the Inquiry before me.             It is
    (ZucU ^

                                                    7
                                                                         IA
    on correct that they submitted a report from Dr James Bums which contained
       a letter dated the 11th March 1991 addressed to a Liverpool firm of
       solicitors.   This—w-as--received by me [include the date].
       stage all of the pathological evidence h^tT been giyen'.'     None of the
                                              Seen puT'to any .of the pathologists.
f   ) Furthermore, it appeared to m e'on a careful reading that Dr Bums did
       not suggest any particular/or identified case in which he challenged the
       evidence given.        ftr those—eircumstancosr ~ I—did"
       appropriatc~to~c<dl.




                                          8
                         MICHAEL KELLY


I opened the Inquest on Michael Kelly on the 18th April 1989 and
evidence of identification was taken.    The autopsy was carried out by Dr
Clark.


On the 1st May 1990 the Inquest concerning Michael Kelly was
reconvened.   Mr Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.    I explained
the procedure that I was proposing to adopt.     No objection was made by
Mr Fraser.


Dr John Clark gave evidence and in answer to me stated:


"Cause of death was crush asphyxia. This was based on findings of signs
of asphyxia in his face. His face was rather congested and had a bluish
discoloration.   These changes, I have to say, were fairly mild in
comparison to a lot of the other people and one of the other features of
asphyxia is to find little haemorrhages on the skin. These were not in
fact present."
"... In any event there was nothing to indicate he suffered for any
great length of time. He probably lost consciousness within a short
period of time, 10 or 15 seconds or so, and then knew nothing about it
after that. As I said, there were not any major injuries internally."



Mr Fraser had no questions for Dr Clark.


Dr Clark was a Forensic Pathologist from the University of Glasgow who
had been in Sheffield on the weekend of the tragedy. Towards the end of
my questioning he said in an entirely unsolicited comment after I had
thanked him for his invaluable assistance:




                                   9
      "Can I say in turn as someone dealing with this sort of work and
      investigation of death very regularly how impressed I have been with the
      professionalism and sensitivity with which the proceedings have been
      carried out here, in particular your handling and explanations to the
      relatives of the bereaved people.      I think it has given comfort to
      everyone who has worked here and I felt it a very appropriate
      atmosphere".



(5)   Inspector Sawers presented the summary of evidence collected which
      related to Michael Kelly.        He summarised the evidence of 9 witnesses.
      Mr Fraser did not object to this procedure.      He had one question to ask
      Inspector Sawers relating to the likelihood of whether Michael Kelly had
      a ticket for the match.


(6)   Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence available.
      His answers relating to the observable condition of Michael Kelly on the
      photographic evidence were the result of questions from me.             The
      relevant exchanges were as follows:


      "Sir, on a photograph referenced PR2/21 which is timed at 15.08 that
      shows Michael in Enclosure No. 3 and whilst the detail again is not
      great it appears to show him certainly alive at that time but I cannot
      say at what stage of the process medically he is at."
      "Question: He looked a bit distressed you think in that? - Answer: That
      is my impression".
       "Question: You can't say whether he is conscious or unconscious, alive
       or dead at that particular point? - Answer: It is difficult. I would
       say he is probably still alive, Sir, but certainly in distress."



       There was no objection from Mr Fraser to these questions. Mr Fraser had
       no questions of this officer.



                                            10
At the conclusion of this part of the Inquest on the 1st May 1990 Mr
Fraser said:


"Again, Sir, before you conclude the evidence in this case, Michael's
mother who as it were is the head of the family, is unable to be with us
today.     She is in Liverpool but through her son .and daughter they
specifically want me to thank through you everybody who helped Michael
on the day obviously. Everybody's efforts are very much appreciated and
they want to offer their thanks to the officers of the West Midlands
Police as well."



The evidence relating to the main part of the Inquest commenced on the
19th November 1990.        Much of the evidence was common to all 95
Inquests.      With particular reference to Michael Kelly, I called Police
Constable John Maughan.


There was no further responsible or relevant medical or other evidence
available to put before the jury to suggest that in Michael Kelly's case
(in terms of medical or rescue efforts) anything different could have
been done which would have had an impact on the cause of death.
                                  PETER TOOTLE


(1)    I opened the Inquest on Peter Tootle on 19th April 1989 when evidence of
       identification was taken. The autopsy was carried out by Dr Slater.


(2)    On the 18th May 1990 the Inquest concerning Peter Tootle was
       reconvened.    Mr Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.           I explained
       the procedure I was proposing to adopt.         No objection was made by Mr
       Fraser.


(3)    Dr Slater in answer to questions from me stated:


       "My examination of Peter showed that the general findings were those of
       asphyxia.     These were indicated by extensive blueness on the face
       extending to the upper part of the chest."
        " . . . I submitted my cause of death, Sir, as traumatic asphyxia."
        " ... Sir, unconsciousness occurs very rapidly, normally within 3 to 5
        seconds, and after that there is no awareness of any pain or discomfort
        and death supervenes after another 3 to 5 minutes".



        Mr Fraser had no questions for Dr Slater.


 (4)   Police Sergeant Killock presented the summary of the evidence collected
        which related to Peter Tootle.            He summarised the evidence of 8
        witnesses.   Mr Fraser neither objected to this procedure nor did he have
        any questions to ask Police Sergeant Killock.


 (5)   Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence available.           In
        answer to a question from me Detective Inspector Layton stated:


                                             12
          "That photograph is timed at 15.03 and my perception of the photograph,
          Sir, is that Peter is at that time still alive although it is not
          possible to say at what stage of the medical process he has reached."



          Mr Fraser did not object to the above procedure, nor the specific
          question and had no questions for this officer.
X
    (6)   At the completion of this part of the Inquest on Peter Tootle on the
          18th May 1990 Mr Fraser said:


          "Sir, Mr and Mrs Tootle simply want to express their gratitude to
          everybody who helped Peter on the day. They recognise that everybody
          did everything they could and they are only sorry their efforts were
          unfortunately unsuccessful. They recognise that everybody tried their
          very best."



    (7)   The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest commenced on the
          19th November 1990.         Much of the evidence was common to all 95
          Inquests.    There was sufficient evidence from this source to deal with
          the "how" question in the case of Peter Tootle.        The jury had been
          present throughout the hearings in April and May of 1990 (including the
           18th May 1990) and from the 19th November 1990 onwards.


    (8)   There was no further responsible or relevant medical or other evidence
           available to put before the jury to suggest that in Peter Tootle's case
           (in terms of medical or rescue efforts) anything different could have
           been done which would have had an impact on the cause of death.




                                               13
                                /


                               KEVIN WILLIAMS


(1)   I opened the Inquest on Kevin Williams on the 18th April 1989 when
      evidence of identification was taken.   The autopsy was carried out by Dr
      Slater.


(2)   The Inquest concerning Kevin Williams reconvened on the 2nd May 1990.
      The family of the deceased were represented by Mr Fraser.      I explained
      the procedure I was proposing to adopt.      No objection was made by Mr
      Fraser.


(3)   Dr Slater in answer to me stated the following:


      "My examination of Kevin showed that the main finding was that of
      asphyxia. This opinion was formed through the extensive blueness on the
      face and other part of the chest.           In addition there were small
      haemorrhages in both the face and internal organs including the brain,
      heart and lungs. This asphyxia had clearly resulted from compression of
      the neck and chest and this opinion was supported by the presence of 3
      small scratches on the left side of the neck and also over the front of
      the voice box. This had also resulted in 4 fractures to the small bones
      in the actual voice box. In addition there was evidence of bruising to
      the lungs, again supporting compression of the chest."
      " ... In terms of the mode of death the compression of the neck or chest
      has occurred here and unconsciousness occurs very rapidly, certainly
      within a few seconds ...       Following unconsciousness there is no
      discomfort and no pain. Death then occurs after approximately 3 to 5
      minutes, Sir."



(4)   I was very well aware of the evidence of Debra Martin and I put her
      evidence specifically to Dr Slater for him to deal with.   His answer was
      as follows:




                                         14
"Well, Sir, I was aware of this statement and therefore I have clearly
given this matter considerable thought, Sir. I think there are several
comments to make but on the moderately large number of autopsies I did
from this incident, Sir, this was certainly the most severe case of
traumatic asphyxia that I actually dealt with. This was both in terms
of blueness of the face and also the area of pallor whiteness around the
mouth. Sir, it was a very very severe form of asphyxia. I do not think
that unconsciousness would have been quicker than 3 or 5 seconds. I
have no reason to alter what I have already said on that aspect."



The evidence of Dr Slater in commenting upon Debra Martin's evidence was
not challenged by Mr Fraser.        I explained to the family that I had
specifically taken the course of referring to this evidence so that
nothing of relevance was hidden or concealed.           After the summary of
evidence set out in (6) below, which covered the evidence of P.C. Bruder
about convulsions, Mr Fraser put the following question to Dr Slater
(relating to the convulsions):


"It is difficult to find the phrase to sum the situation up. Kevin at
that stage was beyond help. He was as good as dead? - Answer: Yes, that
is right, absolutely.
Question:   And would feel nothing and know nothing? - Answer:
Absolutely. He would know nothing."



Police Sergeant Killock presented the summary of the evidence collected
relating to Kevin Williams.         He summarised the evidence of 15
witnesses. No objection was taken to this procedure by Mr Fraser and he
did not ask any questions of Police Sergeant Killock.


Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence. No objection
to this procedure was raised by Mr Fraser and he asked no questions of
       this officer.


(8)    I explained to the family present why I felt it important that the
       evidence of P.C. Bruder and Debra Martin be commented upon by Dr
       Slater.   However, I continued to be concerned about the evidence of a
       convulsion and later of a word spoken and so I invited the Police to
       further investigate these aspects of the evidence and for Dr Gumpert to
       attend the Inquest.    I understand that Dr Slater contacted P.C. Bruder
       direct to ask him in detail about what he saw.


(9)    I must emphasise that at no stage did I speak directly to either P.C.
       Bruder or Debra Martin.        Dr Gumpert, a Consultant Neurologist and
       Clinical Neurophysiologist, made himself available for the^th May 1990.


(10)   On the Ji(h May 1990 Inspector Sawers reported the results of his further
       enquiries. Mr Fraser raised no questions on behalf of the family.


(11)   Dr Slater in an effort to explain his evidence on the 2nd May 1990 and
        incorporate his evaluation of the further evidence of P.C. Bruder and
        Debra Martin said:


        "Death is a sequence of events. It is not one set of events and the
        sequence I will put to you is an individual becoming unconscious; whilst
        they are unconscious they quickly lose         all sensation of pain and
        discomfort; then there is a period of various tissues in the body which
        are susceptible to a lack of oxygen, dying. The most important one of
        these is, of course, the brain and after about 3 to 6 minutes the brain
        undergoes irreversible brain damage. There is then a point which we
        call brain death.        This is a difficultconcept, but by this I am
        implying that the brain is irreversibly damaged. The brain is no longer
        able tocontrol respiration and in fact that person, for effective
        purposes,is dead, irreversibly. That is       a medico-legal definition, at
        least one medico-legal definition, of death."


                                           16
       "... Having said that, Kevin had extremely severe asphyxia. I have no
       doubt in my own mind that he had suffered irrecoverable brain damage and
       death within the 3 to 6 minutes that I said."



(12)   Dr Gumpert having listened to the evidence said:


       "It seems clear to me, Sir, in this case that poor Kevin was probably
       dead before he was got out of the area in which he was standing."
       "I cannot explain the Liverpool Police Constable's term 'convulsion'
       because to me a convulsion is a major epileptic attack and he has quite
       clearly said he does not mean that, so I don't know what he does mean".



(13)   I did what I felt was necessary to put before the jury at the conclusion
       of this part of the Inquest into the death of Kevin Williams all that
       was relevant on the issues of who, when and where.              I must emphasise
       that I was then and remain today wholly unaware of any allegations of
       improper pressure applied to witnesses.        I must say that in the light of
       all that I knew of those officers who investigated the tragedy, I find
       such allegations highly improbable.


(14)   The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest commenced on the
        19th November 1990. Much of the evidence was common to all 95 Inquests.
       I   specifically   called   Andrew    Duncan    in   relation    to the Inquest
       concerning Kevin Williams.


(15)    There was no further responsible or relevant medical or other evidence
        available to put before the jury to suggest that in Kevin Williams' case
        (in terms of medical or rescue efforts) anything different could have
        been done which would have had an impact on the cause of death.


                                             17
