                      Y(              uoh*1
J MERVYN JON ES
              SS M S *c                          ^                      FURNIVAL HOUSE                   J^TTr
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                               Furnival Gate
  Hillsb o r o u g h in q u ir y t e a m                                Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                        Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                 Fax:        0742 731483
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                  M ed ico Legal Centre
Cotmore Circus Q ueensw ay                                              Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                       Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 0 ^ 1 -2 3 6 5 0 00 , extn. 2 0 2 5

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                           Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                       Our Ref:        JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                        Date:           22 March 1990



            Dr S L Popper LL.B B.MED Sci BM BS MRCGP
            HM Coroner
            South Yorkshire (West District)
            Medico-Legal Centre
            Watery Street
            Sheffield
            S3 7ET




               I have prepared a note for your file with regard to the meeting of
               6 March 1990. I am satisfied that it contains a reasonable resume of
               what took place, although the narrative has been rearranged to ensure
               a logical flow. If you would like to alter any part of the record
               please let me know.




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                      Lloyd _Hpu_se_,_ Birmingham
 DRAFT NOTE FOR FILE - to be agreed,

 Megting between HM Coroner Dr Popper and, legal represen-tabivealsk^ersona
 who died at the Hillsborough Disaster     ,:,t                           :


 At 2 pm on Tuesday, 6 March 1990, HM Coroner for Sheffield, Dr, Popper,
 held a private meeting in the Coroner's Court, Medico-Legal Centre,
 Sheffield to discuss interim measures with interested parties.


 Dr Popper explained that although the court-room was being used
 a judicial process was not taking place, quite simply the room and the
 layout was suitable for the numbers and business involved.


 Dr Popper asked the various people present to identify themselves which
 they did as follows:-


     Mr Fraser, Solicitor for the Steering Committee, Liverpool
     Solicitors.   He represents about 150 practices of which about 50 were
     directly involved in litigation.    All told these practices represent
     the families of 92 of the deceased.


     Mr Gregory, Solicitor representing Sheffield City Council.


     Mr Peter Doyle, Solicitor? representing Sheffield Wednesday Football
     Club.


     Mr Callaghan, Solicitor? representing Trent Regional Health Authority
     and South Yorkshire Ambulance Service.


     Catherine Thorpe, representing Eastwood and Partners.


     Belinda Norcliffe, Legal Assistant, South Yorkshire Police.


     Mr B Devonside and Mr Trevor Hicks, Hillsborough Support Group.


     ..........    (The man who came in late.     Details not obtained)


Also present were members of Sheffield City Council Social Services
Department.


Dr Popper asked if there were any relatives in the room who were not
represented by a solicitor      No-one indicated.
                                                        /Cont1d ....
                                        -    2   -


 ACC Jones sat on the right of Dr Popper and was introduced as the
 "Coroner's Officer" for the purpose of the inquiry.


 Dr Popper explained that the purpose of the meeting was to seek the best
way forward for the bereaved families bearing in mind that the inquiry was
nearly a year old and they had not received, in an official sense, clear
explanations of where their loved ones died, how they died (in a
pathological sense), what efforts were made to revive them and where they
were identified.     He explained that if the authorities     could somehow hold
a "mini-inquest", it would    provide an interim stage in the proceedings, so
that the healing process for the bereaved could be brought one step nearer
a conclusion and'''that this would be of enormous help to the relatives.


Dr Popper said that this proposal did not mean that the DPP had
informed him of any decision.     He reiterated this again and explained that
the DPP has not, indeed could not quite simply because, as yet he did not
have the papers and would not for some time to come.         Because of this
prolonged phase of the inquiry he was proposing an interim step.
                                                                    /




He explained that this present course of action was brought about by a
letter from Miss Steel who highlighted the advantages of allowing the
relatives an official explanation (albeit limited) of what had happened
without compromising the criminal inquiry that was taking place
simultaneously.


Dr Popper adumbrated three scenarios that would have to be followed if an
interim measure was not adopted.      They were:


1.   If a prosecution for a   major offence was commenced (such as
     manslaughter)   then the inquests would be adjourned in accordance with
     Section 16 of the Coroners' Act and after the criminal prosecution it
     would be open to the Coroner to resume the inquests. Regardless of the
     Jury's verdict this was a practice not followed in his jurisdiction.


2. If the DPP declined to prosecute         for whatever reason, but a private
     prosecution was commenced, then the post trial circumstances described
     in (1) above would also apply.


3.   The DPP decides not to prosecute       and no-one else does, then inquiries
     WQUld be completed in the normal way via an inquest with a jury...


                                                          /Cont'd
It was explained that whatever the case, these would be lengthy procedures
and so an interim solution had been sought.    The DPP had been consulted
and, subject to any comments made by the representative parties today, the
"mini-inquest" interim measure would seem to offer some relief to the
families.


The inquests would seek to establish:
a. How the person arrived at the stadium.


b.   Where they were in the stadium.


c.   When they died.


d. Cause of death.


The sequence of events at the "mini-inquest" could take the following form:


a.   Prior to the inquest the Coroner's officer would prepare a summary of
     the case that was factual and non-adversarial.


b. After approval by the Coroner the summary would be offered      to
     representatives of the deceased for their comments.


c.   Subject to the approval of the deceaseds' representatives the summary
     would be presented at the "mini-inquest" by a Summary Officer after
     evidence - probably written - from the pathologist as to the cause of
     death and injuries.   It was anticipated that Dr Forest and   Professor
     Usher would give general evidence covering most of the cases in the
     first day or two of the "mini-inquests" so that their time    at the
     hearings was reduced to a reasonable level.   If possible eight cases
     per day would be the objective of the interim inquiry.


     Cases would not be taken in numerical or alphabetical order because
     listing was seen to be a difficult problem in terms of minimising the
     waiting time for the families involved. It was hoped, that where several
     deaths related to the same family, these would be dealt with
     together regardless of the order that the pathologist examined the
     bodies.


     The Coroner reserved the right to set the order of cases according to
     the best interests of justice and with due regard for the feelings,of'
     the bereaved.
                                                           /Cont'd ....
                                             -   4   -


    d.   Plans and "Ana-Kappa" diagrams would be available to the representatives
         prior to the hearing but it was likely that these would be viewed at a
         time and place suitable to the Coroner's officer and the
         representatives.


    e.   Witnesses may be called to assist the Coroner and the Jury, but
         specifically no member of the South Yorkshire police force will be
         called to give evidence.


    f.   The use of video .tapes or photographs would not be used as they have
         already been seen by the families and their representatives.


    g.   Transcripts of      the hearings    would be made available but theywould          not
         be immediately      transcribed,   there will be delay, and there will be      a
         charge.

C
    Dr Popper summarised his proposals to the representatives and families
    by saying that he was asking their approval to hold a limited inquiry
    taking evidence in       a particular    form that would not obstruct theDPP's
    options.      He asked   if there were any questions.


    Mr Fraser asked when the summaries would be available?        Dr Popper said that
    they would be sent out in a steady stream as and when they became available
    to him.       It was anticipated that the first drafts would be available in
    the very near future.


    Mr Fraser asked Dr Popper to specify the time period covered by the summary
    and was told that it was hoped that each report would span the period from
    when the deceased left home to when he or she was identified in the
    temporary mortuary.       In some cases it would be possible to extend that
    time span.


    Dr Popper was at pains to point out that the short inquests would not deal
    with how or why each person died.        He took time to explain that the
    hearing would not admit evidence of a controversial nature or which was
    critical of any person or which would imperil the scope of action that
    the DPP might want to take. He said that this was not a new approach to
    such cases. There have been precedents set elsewhere.




              .                                               /Cont'd..„..

                                                                                                  f
Dr Popper then asked for the views of all those present.     Mr Fraser
expressed "a warn feeling for the idea" and commended the 'Coroner on his
pragmatism and his empathy with the deceaseds 1 families.    Other persons
present also indicated their approval for the proposal.     There were no
objections made at all.


Dr Popper proposed that the "mini-inquests" begin at 10.30 am on Wednesday,
18 April and thereafter at 9.30 am.     Sittings would be from Monday to
Friday, there would be coffee breaks for the families and lunch would be
taken at about 1 pm resuming at 2 pm.     Early estimates tended to indicate
that this stage would be completed by the 4 May but a few days have been
set aside from the 21 May to deal with difficulties encountered in the
early hearings.


As far as scheduling the cases was concerned the Coroner proposed to give
provisional warnings.     Re-scheduling may be a major problem and so the
representatives were given notice that non-availability to attend the
hearing would need to be for an extremely persuasive reason simply because
the knock-on consequences for such a large operation may frustrate a great
deal of careful planning not only of the Coroner's arrangements but also
of the families involved.


The venue was proposed as the -Sheffield Medico-Legal Centre which would be
too small on the first day but once the initial rush of press interest has
subsided will be eminently suitable for the families. Arrangements were
in hand to ensure that the press were given as much access as was
reasonably possible in the circumstances and the question of the venue for
the first day would be considered further.


Mr Fraser asked the Coroner to curtail the activities of the national and
local press as some of their comments had caused a great deal of distress
to the bereaved.   Dr Popper said that he fully understood the problem but
the press would flout any requests he made and that it was probably the
best course of action to say nothing.


Mr Fraser queried the Coroner's view on representation stating that as far
as the solicitors of Liverpool were concerned he would represent them but
some families may want their own solicitor there on the day.      Dr Popper saw
no problem with this.                                         ■o' ::     .     :


                                                       /uont'd.
Mr Fraser thanked Dr Popper for the way he had proposed a sensible
modus-vivendi and in particular the way the officers from the West
Midlands Police had shown care and sympathy for the bereaved families.
Dr Popper thanked him for his kind comments.


Mr Callaghan queried whether attendance at the meeting today carried with
it an automatic right for audience at the "mini-inquests."   Dr rcpper said
it did.


Mr Peter Doyle expressed thanks to the Coroner and promised the full help
and support of the football club throughout the difficult times to come.


Dr Popper closed the meeting by sending Superintendent Starkey to see if
any member of the press required a briefing in the presence of all those
who had taken part in the meeting.   After returning from the foyer
Superintendent Starkey said that no member of the press were in attendance.


The meeting closed at 3.05 pm.
