                              f j,sj I   fjCl)             1 ^   ^     h f>

                                                             isg.d J


      — — E NOTE OF a MEETING WITH MERVYN JONES, STAN B E E C HE V .

      CAROLINE HIGHTON AND S .L .P .14 .8 .90 . AT THE MEDICO LEGAT.
      CENTRE STARTING AT ABOUT QUARTER TO TWELVE.

      The meeting convened and it was noted that no decision from
      the D.p .p . had yet been reached.         it was being rumoured

      that a decision might be announced within the next 2 or 3

     weeks and it was felt that we should perhaps start thinking
     about what we would do etc., on the assumption that no
     prosecution were to take place.

     We spent a little time talking about the possibility of

     prosecution including possible Health & Safety Executive

     aspects, but of course we were not able to take or reach
     any definitive decision on this.

     It was noted that the civil proceedings were apparently
     going to commence in October.         We discussed what the

     position would be with regard to those, whether the Inquest
     should be postponed in particular whether if thecivil

    proceedings were completed, whether this would take any
)   heat out of the proceedings.

    I felt that bearing in mind that South Yorkshire had in

    fact underwritten their claim, the main thrust'of the

    proceedings as far as the participants were concerned would
    be: -



             A. To try and obtain a verdict of Unlawfully Killed
                on the one hand and

             B. To redress the balances as       perceived by some of

               the other parties    with regard to the involvement
               of the fans.
    BABABJ
    I did not personally think that the e i v U side ^
    such a major role.

    It was Of course understood and acknowledged that strictly

   speaking a coroner’s Inquest should not seek to determine
         er civil or criminal liability but because of the
   possibility of a verdict of Unlawfully Killed, it was

   necessary to carry out a fairly extensive inquiry.           „e did

    j-scuss whether there was any way of perhaps dealing with

   t e Inquests on a more limited basis, but it was felt that
  we either had to do virtuallv nni-h-
                                   Y nothing, or probably a very
  extensive investigation.

  We discussed Lord Justice        Taylor's report   i   h h
                                            P o r t .I did not think
  that we would be able to use it as such and particularly as
    • jury of course were not aware of its contents,

 we started thinking about        the scope of the inquest.    It „as

   Vious that west Midlands        officers were anxious to have

 SOme guidance as to V     thinking, particularly as some
 decisions had to be taken with regard to the size of the

 team which would be required and/or retained.           , thought
   at once we had got things up and running, „e probafaly
would'nt need that many officers
                      x oncers.         Mervyn felt that
probably 20 might be the rirrht-
                              9     number, with scope for
increasing if necessary.

we discussed the scope of the inquest, x drew the analogy




BABABJ
   matters and on the whole I fe l t that we s h ould d r a w a line

   at the disaster, and not deal with what happened on the

   field or in the mortuary,    particularly as we had already

  dealt with this quite extensively at the previous hearings
  in April/May.

  On the other hand, it might be necessary to deal with some

  of the other aspects in rather more detail.       „e spent quite
  a bit of time discussing this.     We were all well aware of
  the criticims which had been made of the police and the

  club and no doubt this evidence would have to be dealt with
  as appropriate (though we noted that the officers

 themselves might well refuse to give evidence on the basis
 of anything they said might incriminate them).

 On the other hand, I felt that we would have to explore the

 aspects of crowd behaviour,     in particular, we had to try
 and deal with the reasons if any why there was the pressure
 outside the turnstiles and the outer perimeter gates.         The
 effect if any of alcohol on this as well as the effect of

 mass behaviour (Mervyn's point).     We also felt that we

 could not avoid dealing with the broken barrier as that was
seen to have played quite a part in the number of the

deceased equally it was important to try and deal with what
seemed to be the case that a lot of the people who died

actually came in fairly late on.      I felt that it was

essential that we should actually get this pinpointed

accurately.   I also felt that it might be worth then,

having analysing alcohol levels to see if a.       what they




BABABJ
/
     showed and b. whether any statistically interesting matters
     would be drawn.




     I felt that in the interests of justice and fairness, one

     had to try and weave together the behaviour mood of the
     crowd, the effect if any of alcohol in crowd behaviour on
     them and the contagion which this might have spread to

    everybody there.   The effect if any that this might have
    had on officers, the physical nature of the stadium

    together with assigning turnstiles etc., the broken barrier
    and finally and by no means least, the organisation and
    policing efforts which had been put in place,

    we noted that in the discussions we were spending quite a

    lot of time on issues of crowd behaviour and the psychology
    etc. and it was interesting to note that if these avenues
 were going to be pursued and were going to be fruitful,

 that this aspect of the inquiry would in fact differ to a
 certain extent from what had happened in the Public
 Inquiry.

 We discussed the timing,    i said if „e were to start this

 year I would like to complete before Christmas if at all

possible.     We felt that maybe starting at the beginning of
November might be a possibility, provided of course a
decision was announced fairly soon,     i also said that if
the civil proceedings were going on, it might be very

difficult to resist an application for an adjournment.




BABABJ
         Midlands officer.     We also discussed briefly the
    difficulty of givi„g proper „elghtlng ^    the proponderance

         herwise of evidence in one direction as opposed to

   -other, but it might be possible to get information about
   this out of the computer.




BABABJ
