                                                              :f   Cs
                           NOTES FOR OPENING REMARKS                            ^   /

1. WELCOME

2. SELECTION OF JURY
   EXCLUDE    A. Related or close friends of bereaved
              B. Related to or close friends Police jofficers involved
                 at H.
              C. Related toor close friends of stewards involved with
                 L.L. end or who directly involved with any deceased
              D. Any other reason of bias tKat you are aware of.
              E. Any personal reasons whi<fh might make you unrealiable
                 for attendance during/flie days of the inquest.

3. CONTINUE WITH SELECTION AS NECESSARY Reserve j urors who might be
suitable notwithstanding any of^fbove because eg distant relationship.

4. CHECK WITH LEGA REP. re ally other points to be put. No preremtory
challenge.

5. EXPLAIN    method ^ s w e a r i n g in the jury.

6. READ NAMES    ALPHABETICAL ORDER

 "THESE ARE^ESUMED INQUESTS TOUCHING THE DEATHS OF THE FOLLOWING"

7. SG ^ ^ R I F F I T H TO SWEAR IN THE JURY

 J^SGT GRIFFITH TO AFFIRM ANY MEMBER OF THE JURY WHO WISHED TO AFFIRM.

   REPRESENTATIONS IE LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES

foT SWEAR/AFFIRM PRESENTING OFFICERS           check with Legal Reps if happy

' l l . ? EXPALIN INTENTION OF SWEARING PATHOLOGIST IN RESPECT OF EACH OF
    THEIR PM’S AT ONE GO.

INTRODUCTION

12. HISTORY OF CORONER         ANCIENT OFFICE ABOUT 800 YEARS
                               COURT OF RECORD
                               INQUISITORIAL- AND NOT- ADVERSARIAL
                               LIMITED OBJECTIVES see below.

13. REASON FOR PROCEEDINGS

A. Duty to hold inquest. —       see sec. 8 (1) C. A. 1988.

B. Need for Jury.

   i. sec 8(4) C.A. 1988       May summons jury if he think appropriate

   ii. sec. 8 (3) (d) C.A. 1988 ie:

  if it appears to the coroner either befoe he he proceeds to hold an
inquest or in the course of an inquest begun without a jury that there
is reason to suspect (d) that the death occurred in circumstances the
continuance or possible recurrence of which is prejudicial to the
health and safety of the public or any section of the public
he shall proceed to summon a jury.......

                                          Page     1
In the circumstances   vide LJ. Taylor inquiry   jury summons

14. WHAT ARE THE OBJECTIVES OF A CORONER'S INQUEST,

summariesed in rule Rule 36     READ THIS RULE IN FULL.

15. ALL INQUESTS THREFORE LIMITED IN NATURE BUT SPECIAL CONSIDERATION
APPLY TO THE PRESENT PROCEEDINGS.

16. THERE IS AN ONGOING DPP INQUIRY. RESULT OF DELIBERATION OF DPP
 NOT KNOWN . Apart from any other considerations it is common sense
 and in the interest of justice not to impede the investigations of
the DPP.


17. However there are many items which could be dealt with and which
fall within the ambit of an inquest without impeding theDPP
enquiries. After appropriate consultation I decide to resume these
inquests on a limited basis.

What we are going to listen to is evidence (as to form see below)
on who the deceased was
    where and when he died as far as it is possible to do so.
    and incidentally the registration particulars.

we will   not deal with HOW .

18. The extent of How is always a difficult question but
we will not deal with this problem today at all.

19 to avoid misunderstanding then :

 a. Present hearings limited in scope
 b. No criticism or attack of any person or corporations.
 c. Nothing detrimental to DPP inquiry

20. Whether or not I will deal with How and if so to waht extent will
depend on the decision of the DPP.

I will outline two scenarios:

a. DPP decides NOt toprosecute in respect of offences within section
16 (1) (a) (i) of the Coroner Act 1988. In that event I will make
arrangements to resume the inquests after further consideration of the
evidence and will decide the extent of the inquiry that still requires
to be made. There is bound to be a gap between the DPP's decision and
the resumption of the inquests.

b. The DPP decides to prosecute any of the offences within the
aforementioned section and that someone or more persons or bodies are
charged.

In that event I would expect the provisions of Section 16 (1) a and b
to apply and I would adjourn the inquest as      provided in that section.
Bearing-in mind the evidence which we are taking during these hearings
that adjournment would be a rather short and more or less formal
affair. If that were to happen once the inqust stand adjourned under
section 16 I would give approriate notice to the Registrar of birth
and eaths and the death certificates could be issued.

(I could also if I thought it right discharge the jury, (sec 16 (1)).)
                                   Page   2
I should also make it clear that section 16(3) provides that after the
conclusion of the relevant criminal proceedings the coroner may ...
resume the adjourned inquest if in his opinion there is sufficient
cause to do so.

I am not stating what decision I will in fact take but I can say that
it is Not normal practice to resume after criminal proceedings and
bearing in mind that there has already been a judicial inquiry and by
definition a prosecution it may be that I would folllow my normal
practice.

21. To return to today.

Because of the limitations which we are faced with regarding this
inquest at the present time I have decided that the evidence
which will be presented to you will consist of the following:

1. The opening evidence which was taken in order to enable me to
release the bodies for funeral purposes. It was realised that there
 might be some errors because of the speed with which I attempted to
deal with the matters as not unnaturally the families wanted to have
the bodies of their loved back with them at Liverpool or olsewhere
where they lived and also because they wanted to make funeral
arrangements. A standard form was prepared and the opening followed
a standard format. We have identified some cases were mistakes were
made and when we come to each individual inquest I will read the
opening as it is and then if I am aware of any error I will mention
it so that the record can be corrected. Families to listen carefully
and draw legal representatives attention to any inaccuracies such as
names and pace of birth etc as these are important when registration
is effected.

2. Post mortem evidence. Call Pathologists unless not required.

3. Summaries prepared by WMP officers these will be in two parts:

i. a resumee of the witness evidence and a
   b a resume of the visual evidence

ii. with regard to visual evidence I do not propose to use the video
or photograph directly. Instead I will use were appropriate plans
which have been prepared and which show by dots positions of the
deceased as far as can be established. The advantage of this is that
it is much easier to follow and more importantly much less stressful
for you the jury. The families have in many instances spent a
considerable time looking at the photgraphic and video evidence and
without their invaluable help it would not have been possible to
establish many of the identifications. Some families have not wished
to view visual evidence and obviously their wishes have been
respected.

There is one more aspect regarding these plans. Instead of passing
plans around the court I will ask the presenting officer to point out
on the model or the large plan the positions which we may be talking
about. This I think will be easier to follow for all of us. I hope
however that it will be possible to bind up within the transcripts
copies of the plans which are used as exhibits. Please note that not
every available plam etc will be used but only those which I consider
necessary.

22. Today will be a little different to normal. I am going to ask
                                   Page   3
a few witnesses to give evidence which either applies to all or
which can be more conveniently be given together.

23. Apart from the witnesses whom I have mentioned there will be
very few if any other live witnesses. In particular to avoid
misunderstanding no SYP officers   are being called to give evidence
viva voce at these hearings. Nor   for that matter any stewards or club
or other officials.

24.   I now want to turn to the Rules.

Rule 20. 1. b. the coroner shall disallow any question which in his
opinion is not relevant or is otherwise not a proper question.
For the purpose of these hearings questions which fall outside the
 defined scope of the hearings will be deemed irrelevant or improper
and disallowed. I do not anticipate any problems as the legal
representatives are well aware of the position and have indicated to
me that they are content.

Rule 20 2. lists certain persons who are entitled to examine witnesses
usually refered to as interested parties. It reads as follows:
READ FROM RULES
It is because of this rule that there are so many legal
representatives present today. It may well be that some of the
representatives may feel that they do not wish to be present at each
days sitting. That is a matter entirely for them. It would be helpful
though if they indicated either to me or to one of my officers if they
decide not to be present on any particular day/days.

Rule 22. Rule against self incrimination. Not likely to arise at this
stage.

Rule 24. READ. Represented anyway today but in view of the
limitations on the present hearings conduct not intended to be called
into question as this as this falls ifit falls any were into HOW.

RULE 26 AND 27 these rules deal with adjournements at the request
of DPP and chief officer of police in certain circumstances.and RULE
28 deals with the obligation of the coroner to adjourn in certain
circumstances in the light of the evidence adduced.

RULE 36. I have already drawn this rule to your attention. It must be
kept in mind as it defines the scope of the inquest. Please note that
there is no provision for the adding of Riders to verdicts. This was a
common practice at one time but is now no longer permitted.

RULE 37. documentary evidence. Because of the limitations on the scope
of these hearings it is not practical to seek to comply with the
detailed provisions. In particular it would not be possible to supply
copy statements at the present time as these in many case contain
references which might be contrued as being criticisms of others or
which go to the HOW rather than the matters with which we are dealing.

The summaries are ofcourse based on the statements but have been
prepared to give an accurate a picture as it is possible of the facts
relevant to the present inquiry. In some case I will ask the officers
to elaborate on the summaries where I think that it would be helpful.
In some cases it may seem appropriate to read a portion of a statement
as something of the humaness of the situation is lost by using only
the summaries. If that were to happen I will read the relevant parts
but it must be understood that my reading would be an edited version
                                   Page   4
designed to leave out criticism and attack and conversely praise and
credit. Anything that is read will ofcourse be in the transcript
and I hope that the legal representatives will be happy with this,
they insist on seeing the document than either they^will have to
accept that at present they can only see the part that is read or I
cannot readit at all.

Whether any part should be read is a difficult decision as the actual
words sometimes bring the situation much more poignantly home to one.

RULE 38 EXHIBITS. The rule provides that they should be numbered
consecutively and preceded with a letter C. I will endeavour to do
this when say a plan is in fact produced but m my view it is far
better in complex multiple inquest such as this to use the exhibit
numbers which have been assigned by WMP and when referring to exhibits
I will use those letters and numbers. I think every one will in the
end find this more convenient.

RULE 39. Notes of evidence. As is well known tape recording satisfies
this Rule. I have arranged because on the whole I think the quality o
the transcript is better to have the proceedings transcribed by
shorthand writers (who I understand use taperecording for back up;.
These transcripts will constitute the note of the evidence m these
cases.

24. We will not be in a position to reach a verdict at the end of
these proceedings and therefore inquest will be again adjourned.
Because of this I do not propose at this stage to consider the
possible verdicts which you members of the jury may in due course
have to consider.

 25. What then is your function. In a nutshell to listen to the
 evidence so that if you are called upon to reach a verdict in due
 course you may be able to do so according to the evidence. Of
 course I will before you have to take that step sum up for you
 and remind you of what you have heard a very necessary exercise in a
 mammoth undertaking such as this.

 26. You members of the Jury through no fault of your own have been
 catapulted into a niche of history. You have both an arduous and
 distressing task before you. For all people in caring professions
 say nurses or doctors or indeed social workers a balance has to be
 struck between detachment from the problem and emotional involvement
 with the individual or case. If they are too detached they may appear
 cold and indeed worry that they are to cold whilst if they are too
 emotionally involved they cannot cope and indeed are unable to fulfil
 there function. You too must strike the right balance. You have a
 task to perform and must approach it with a strong degree of
 detachment remembering that you have to bring in a verdict according
 to the evidence. On the other hand I do not want yo to think that I
 expect you to be automata without feelings and you must not let
 the numbers or the evidence make you careless of the real hurt and
 loss which the loss of each individual life has and will cause.
 Because of your individual backgrounds and your own particular
 circumstances some cases or some evidence may affect you more than
 others. This is natural and do not be surprised at it.

 You may also find that you have some sleep disturbance and that you
 may possibly have dreams which are in some way related to the
 incident or jury service. Recognise this for what it is and do not
 be too concerned about it as I belejj^ethai= it will pass.
Fortunately there are 11 of you and in a sense you are able to give
each other support.

If at any time during the hearing you feel that you wish to have a
short adjournment because of the way you feel please ask your
foreperson to make a request and I will do my best to grant it.

 27. I have to tell you that you are not to discuss the evidence
that you hear in this case outside the court room.
That is not as easy as it sounds as you will have many people
who will approach you expressing sympathy and making enquiries.
Thank them for their sympathy but refrain from discussion. You will
not be kept under lock and key and so the onus is on you.


I must confess I have worried about this restriction as it affects
you as obviously although I do not think that any of you will not
be able to cope with these hearings it could be that I might be
mistaken in respect of some one of you. Neither I nor anyone else
I am sure would want any of you to suffer or be ill. Whilst I would
prefer it if you could avoid having to seek counselling or other aid
should you feel that you real cannot cope than you must ofcourse
do what is necessary for your own well being. If that contingency were
to happen than whilst you must still not discuss the evidence I think
it would be in order to seek help from professional persons such as
for example your GP or social workers not with the facts or evidence
of the inquests but with the effect which this is having on you.

AS LEGA1 reprs   if they have any comments on this direction.

28. We have a tight schedule. On a normal day I scheduled 8 inquests.
We'will start at 9.30 am have a coffee break during the morning. Rise
for lunch at about l.pm. Resume at 2.pm. sharp have another break
during the after noon and then finish as near to 4.30 - 5pm as
possible. I am anxious that whilst we cannot afford to waste time
that we should nevertheless give to each inquest as much time as
is necessary to do it justice.

29. Tomorrow we meet here. On Friday and thereafter we are at the
Medico Legal Centre Watery Street, Sheffield. If yo do not know where
it is please ask Sgt Griffith or Mrs. Taylor to explain its location.
Please do not be late as it would throagk out the schedule and
inconvenience a great number of people not least the bereaved families
and I ma sure that nome of us would wish to do that .

 30. Please remember that at the Medico Legal centre normal work
 continues. Each of the persons who comes there has also lost a loved
 one and are mourning that loss. There may not be the press attention
 which this tragedy has attracted but the pain and distress is non
 theless as real and as personal. Be sensitive therefore when you come
 to MLC and remember that people there are not getting the same level
 of support which has been provided for the bereaved in this case.

 31. This brings me conveniently to the Media. I quite understand that
 you have a legitimate interest in reporting newsworthy matters. I must
 however remind you that you have not always had a good press yourself
 regarding the reporting of the disaster. It goes without saying that
 I expect you to report accurately what is said at these proceedings.
 However it is not always what is said that is hurtful but how it is
 said and how it is presented. I now you have to sell your papers
 but you your sub editors and editors please remember that you are
                                    Page   6
writing about personal losses and sorrows of people . Please do not
make things worse for them.

32. Do not harrass relatives, particularly within the precinct of my
court. I would take a very dim view of that.

33 Please do not wander around the building or enter unauthorised
corridors or rooms. You have no authority or licence to do so.

34. Families will know that there are social workers and others
who seek to reduce any stress that the inquest proceedings may bring.
I am most grateful to all these support services for all the work
and effort which they have put into helping the bereaved.

35 I am also am grateful for the WRVS who have agreed to provide tea
and coffee for a charge. There help is most gratefully acknowledged.

36. There are a number of matter which have been r a i s e d by families
which are really outside the bounds of an inquest and which will no
be dealt with. I will however say this.

a. We were fortunate that a building like the g y m n a s i u m was available
to serve as a temporary mortuary. It was large enough for the purpose
and madeit possible for the bodies of the deceased to be segregated m
such a way that people only had to view one body rather than many.

 b. The Polaroid photgraphs were taken at my request as I felt that
 this was a better and kinder way of achieving identification.

 c The decision to move bodies back to the temporary mortuary from the
 hospitals was authorised by me. In the circumstances relating to
 Hillsborough to have started identification without each body being
 at the same place would have lead to very great distress. A moments
 thought will convince you of the correctness of this.

 d The bulk of the deceased were unidentified. There were a few who
 had some identification on them. However it would I think have been
 unwise to rely on this until positive identification had taken place.

 e I authorised the taking of blood samples for alcohol I do
 not require alcohol estimation in every inquest death report to me
 but it is done in quite a few particularly nearly all RTA deaths,
 emember I am dealing with the victims not the drivers unless they are
 deceased.

 f. Viewing . Some were not happy with the viewing arrangements. First
 remember the numbers involved, secondly MLC is a mortuary and not a
 chapel of rest, third view is for identification purposes, fourthly
 no access to view area except through mortuary. It would have been
 impossible and quite wrong to have taken people through that area,
 fifhly speed was required. It is not possible to do everthmg.

 I will now very briefly turn to the site and with the help of Insp.
 Layton try to identify main features so that you members of the Jury
 can follow the evidence more easily. I will also mention have few
 times events to make the accounts more intelligible.

  Site.

  Lepping Lane.
                                        Page    7
 several gates relevant ones are:

 outer perimeter gate
 Gate C
 Gate in inner perimeter    fence.

 West Stand.  Upper part seating referred to as a stand,
              lower terrace for seating,
  lower terrace divided into pens numbered 1-7
 centre pens looking at the field No 4 on left
                                  No 3 on right
 each of these had a gate.
 on the right of pen 3 is pen 2 with a gate
 on the left of pen 4 is pen 5 which is very narrow with a gate.

On the opposite side of the pitch is the Gymnasium.
Main access point for police and ambulances, lots of people put down
near there.

Once through the outer gates an area in front of the turnstyles
There were 7 turnstyles A-G serving the terrace. Inside the turnsyle
there was a large courtyard or concourse. From there there was a
tunnel leading onto the terraces which at the end was bisected by a
fence so that one could go into the L (4) or right (3).


A crush developed outside the ground and eventually Gate C was
opened to relieve the pressure.

Gate C was opened 3 times

14.48.04 to 14.48.31 to let someone out estimated that about 150 or
so fans came in .

14.52..06 to 14.57.35 main opening large numbers came into ground

14.59 .12 reopened

14.59 .30 kick off

15.04.49   Beardsley hit cross bar

1505.36 Players leave the field

1515.33 St John ambulance on pitch

1616 coroner contacted.


Note that some of the dead were taken through the tunnel and dealt
with in the concourse area and then laid in the LI area from were they
were taken to the temporary mortuary.




                                     Page   8
I
