  Sheffield Health Authority
                         I

Northern General Hospital
                               \




HILLSBOROUGH
                             SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY

                             NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL

                      HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989


1.     Introduction

1.1    On 15th April 1989 the Northern General Hospital and the Royal
       Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield were involved in receiving casualties
        from an incident at the Hillsborough Football Ground which resulted in a
       number of casualties and deaths.   This report describes the Northern
       General Hospital's response to the situation and in particular the role
        of certain key officers in managing the incident, treating the casualties
        and liaising with other departments both within and outside the hospital.

2.     Summary

2.1    The Northern General Hospital received a total of 88 casualties of whom
        11 were dead on arrival or died within the Accident and Emergency
        Department, 56 were admitted including 15 into Intensive Care and 2
        ventillated on Wards. Subsequently, 7» patients were transferred for CT
        Scans and specialised Neurological/Neurosurgical Care to the Royal
        Hallamshire Hospital and two patients died. Most patients were young men
        and suffered crush injuries.

2.2    The first patient arrived at about 1527 hours andwithin    about anhour     87
        patients (plus 5 other routine casualties) were received.  The last
        casualty was received at about 1645 hours.

2.3.   The hospital responded exceptionally well. Staff were summoned but
        because the disaster arose from a major media event many staff had begun
        to make their own way into the hospital.

2.4    The nature of the injuries was very unusual in terms of major accidents
       with large numbers of patients requiring immediate ventilation and only 1
        patient requiring surgery.

2.5    Large numbers of relatives and friends arrived to seek information about
        the injured and about people with whom they had lost contact during the
        crush at the football stadium. Major efforts were employed to deal
        consistently with these people.

2.6    Large numbers of local, national and worldwide media arrived at the
        hospital and stayed for about 48 hours.

2.7    A great number of pre-arranged visits from VIPs took place from Sunday,
        16 April 1989 until Wednesday, 19 April 1989.

2.8    Intensive and comprehensive arrangments are in place to provide group and
        individual counselling to staff.

2.9    A number of issues have arisen in subsequent debriefings and are listed
        in this paper as matters for further action and consideration.


                                        1
Aletting Procedure and Subsequent Call Out Arrangements

The Northern General Hospital Major Disaster Plan states that declaration
of a major disaster will be made.

"By one or other of the emergency services, the most likely of these
being the ambulance service. Notification will be made to the
switchboards of the receiving hospitals. However, if large numbers of
seriously injured casualties arrive without notice at the Accident and
Emergency Department, the procedure may be put into action locally on the
instructions of the senior doctor present in the Accident and Emergency
Department."

At approximately 1520 hours one of the two Switchboard Operators at the
hospital received a call from the Police which indicated, in the words of
the Operator "we were on casualty stand-by". The words stand-by were
used by the Police. The Switchboard Operator contacted the Accident and
Emergency Department and the Assistant Matron on duty and advised them of
the situation. At about the same time two routine accidents were
received in the Department with the Ambulance men reporting that there
was, what was thought to be either a road traffic accident or a problem
at Hillsborough Football Stadium.

Between 1520 and 1525 hours the Assistant Matron contacted Admissions to
ascertain the current bed state and then proceeded to the Accident and
Emergency Department. At about 1520 hours the Charge Nurse on duty in
the Accident and Emergency Department attempted to contact the Consultant
in Charge of the Department at home. He was not at home but the
Switchboard immediately bleeped him and asked him to come into the
hospital. The Consultant arrived at the hospital at approximately 1533
hours. On arrival, the Consultant confirmed with the Charge Nurse that
the Major Disaster Plan for the Accident and Emergency Department had
been put into operation.

At approximately 1525 hours, SYMAS contacted the Accident and Emergency
Department and told them to expect a child who had had a cardiac arrest.
No further details were received from SYMAS. About two minutes later and
therefore approximately 1527 hours, the first casualty arrived from
Hillsborough and the first patient was "the child”, about whom a call had
been received earlier. Precise accounts vary but the Assistant Matron
remembers an ambulance man stating, at this point, that there was a major
accident at Hillsborough Football Stadium. At this point, the Charge
Nurse in the Accident and Emergency Department instructed a Staff Nurse
to call out Accident and Emergency Staff in line with the hospital's
procedure. At the same time a second Assistant Matron arrived in the
Accident and Emergency Department and began to ring for nursing help.
Simultaneously, the Assistant Matron on duty returned to the Switchboard
and it is believed she arrived there at approximately 1535 hours.

At this point the Switchboard had still not received a call to "implement
the Major Disaster Plan". However, they responded to a request from the
Accident and Emergency Department to contact all available doctors. This
they did in a very thorough manner.




                                2
3.6   At approximately 1543 hours, the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Switchboard
       was contacted to ascertain whether they had received information about a
       Major Disaster Plan.  The Operator is said to have stated that they also
       had received a call to be on "stand-by".

3.7   Knowing that both hospitals could not be on stand-by at the same time,
       the Assistant Matron and the telephonists decided to implement the
      communications cascade as in the hospital's major disaster plan.

3.8   The Switchboard at Northern General Hospital also continued throughout
       this time to contact Medical Staff. During this time, as the
      Switchboard's electronic record shows, an enormous number of calls were
      being received particularly from hospital staff who had heard of the
      events at the Football Stadium either by television or radio.

3.9   At about. 1550 hours the Consultant in Charge of the Accident and
      Emergency Department asked the Ambulance Liaison Officer and ambulance
      man bringing patients in to inform SYMAS to divert further
      casualties to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital. This was repeated by a
      member of the Medical Staff at about 1600 hours.

3.2   Comment

      3.2.1     No member of staff has so far acknowledged that the Switchboard or
                the Accident and Emergency Department received an instruction from
                SYMAS or the Police to implement the Major Disaster Plan other
                than a conversation between the ambulance men and staff in the
                Accident and Emergency Department at approximately 1527 hours
                referred to above.

      3.2.2     There was uncertainty amongst Switchboard, Accident and Emergency
                and Senior Nursing Staff on duty as to whether a Major Disaster
                had actually been declared. It is to the credit of the Charge
                Nurse in the Accident and Emergency Department and the Switchboard
                Staff on duty that they took the initiative in implementing the
                hospital's communications cascade.

      3.2.3     Although key Medical and Nursing Personnel were called quickly,
                the length of time taken by the Switchboard Staff in operating the
                cascade system is of some concern. This is not a criticism of the
                Switchboard Operators but the hospital will be investigating ways
                of using modern technology to speed up this laborious task. This
                would also save Switchboard and other staff valuable time, which
                on such occasions is at a premium.

      3.2.4     Whilst the Switchboard do keep and check monthly their list of
                staff who may be needed during a major accident, it seems that
                some key staff had not yet been put onto the list and the ways
                of updating the list more speedily will be investigated.

      3.2.5     Despite all of the above, Switchboard Staff and Nursing Staff in
                the Accident and Emergency Department behaved in an exemplary
                manner.




                                        3

                                                                    \
Accident and Emergency Response

The Accident and Emergency Department received the first patients from
about 1527 hours and initially there were four SHOs from various areas of
the hospital and shortly afterwards, the Consultant in Charge of the
Accident and Emergency Department was available to receive casualties.
By 1545 hours, doctors were arriving in sufficient numbers to have one
doctor per patient.  This relieved the Consultant in Charge of the
Accident and Emergency Department to dedicate himself totally to the
triage team, a task which he had had to undertake previously, whilst at
the same time, treating patients. There were 16 patients requiring
resuscitation and this, together with the fact that 87 patients were seen
in the Department within about one hour, led to considerable pressure
upon the staff in the Department. The last patient was received
approximately 15 minutes after the 87th patient.

It was at approximately 1540 hours that there was a request from SYMAS
for a site team to be sent from the hospital and when sufficent doctors
had arrived at approximately 1545 hours a SHO in Anaesthetics and
SHO from Accident and Emergency were released to attend the Stadium.

The last patient was received in the Department at approximately 1645
hours.

Comment

4.5.1     There were initial difficulties in the Department in not receiving
          clear instructions regarding the implementation of the Major
          Accident Plan.

4.5.2     There were also problems because of the number of casualties
          presenting themselves in a short time scale, although the Medical
          and Nursing Staff coped admirably.

4.5.3     As the hospital was the first receiving Unit, the Northern General
          Hospital should not have been asked to send out its mobile team
          and it is understood that when the team did attend Hillsborough
          Stadium, they returned to the Department as there were sufficient
          doctors in attendance although the equipment was retained on site.
          The Major Disaster Plan clearly indicates that the second
          receiving hospital should be the first one to be asked to semi a
          mobile team. This requires clarification.

Control Centre Arrangements

The Hospital's Major Disaster Plan indicates that three areas should be
set up to act as control centres for major disasters, these being a
nursing base, hospital control and administrative base. The General
Services Manager (Surgery and Accident and Emergency) had witnessed the
incident on television and had telephoned:the hospital at approximately
1515 hours and enquired of the Accident arid Emergency Department whether
the Major Disaster had been declared. At that time, it had not and he
therefore took the decision to come into the hospital to set up the
control centres.  The General Services Manager (Surgery and Accident and
Emergency), upon arrival, quickly established the necessary control
         centres.   The situation delevoped rapidly such that, the dedicated nursing
         base was not established in its planned location, although the nursing
         base was effectively provided within the hospital control and
         administrative base which appeared to work more satisfactorily than if
         the base had been set up in its designated area.

5.2      By this time, Police Officers had also arrived in the Department and
         their control centre was set up in the Sister's Office in the Orthopaedic
         Clinic, this being done by approximately 1605 hours. ^
                                                                                      7
5.3      The Control Centres were fully in operation at approximately 1615-1620        ;
         hours and directing various aspects of the hospital's response and
         dealing with enquiries from Relatives, etc. when sufficient staff had
         arrived at the hospital (although they had begun to function before
          then).

5.4      Comment

         5.4.1     Although the Major Disaster Plan clearly indicates that three
                   hospital controls should be set up (ie. Nursing Base, Hospital
                   Control and Administrative Base), with a fourth area being set up
                   for the police, it is felt beneficial to have the three hospital
                   bases together with the police base all in the same area. This
                   view is shared by the Police who attended the hospital to staff
                   their control base. It is felt that the Police Officers manning
                   the control base should have local knowledge and be of a
                   sufficient seniority to make independent decisions.

         5.4.2     The hospital Control Room was closed down at about 1830 hours on
                   Sunday and comprehensive Management On-Call arrangements were
                   made. Very many enquiries continued and were taken by on-call
                   Managers at home. Hith the benefit of hindsight, it would have
                   been better to have kept the control centre open until the
                   following morning.

6.       X-Ray Department

6.1      On-Call Radiographers were alerted by Staff in the Accident and Emergency
         Department. The Radiographers immediately implemented their own cascade
          system. Meanwhile, other staff attended who heard via their media.

6.2      There was some concern that there might not be enough Radiographers
          available so the Department asked local radio stations to broadcast for
          assistance, which they did.

6.3      The staff within the Department acted in a very efficient manner and the
          procedure was fully implemented.

7.       Ward Admission Arrangements

     1   Receiving Ward and Other Admitting Arrangements

         At 1545 hours the first patients were being admitted to Ward 60, which
         had, by this time, been cleared to receive casualties, their patients
         Having been transferred to other Wards in the hospital.


                                           5
Intensive Care/Intensive Treatment Units

The Northern General Hospital has a General Intensive Treatment Unit
which can accommodate 10 beds but is normally staffed for 6 and a Cardiac
Intensive Care Unit which is normally used for the immediate post
operative care of patients having undergone cardiac surgeryand which has
8 staffed beds. The General Intensive Treatment Unit had 5 patients
transferred and 3 patients had to be transferred from the Gadiac
Intensive Care Unit to Wards accommodate the overflow from the General
ITU. Initially 19 patients required ventilation, one died and seven were
transferred to Royal Hallamshire Hospital for CT Scanning. Within five
days this had reduced to only one continuing to occupy an Intensive Care
Bed.

Patient Documentation

Patient documentation was initially hampered by the initial lack of
clarity that the Major Disaster Plan had been implemented. This resulted
in the first cases not being recognised as being from a Major Disaster.
There were also some cases of patients not involved in the Hillsborough
Disaster being documented as part of it but this was later rectified.

Comment

8.2.1     The difficulties highlighted above resulted in problems being
          experienced in matching documentation with patients and
          consequential problems of identification of patients. This
          resulted in some lack of clarity regarding information to friends
          and relatives. This is one area of concern which will be further
          investigated. However, once the Major Accident Plan is
          implemented, it is inevitable that some other routine   casualties
          could be included in the number of major accident patients.

Operating Theatres

Theatres were informed by the Assistant Matron that there had been a
Major Accident at 1530 hours and 9 nursing staff were called in for
Theatre and Recovery areas. All theatres and patient trolleys were
checked for stocks. One Sister was sent to A & E and a Charge Nurse and
Staff Nurse to Ward 60 to give assistance with resuscitation, and to act
as liaison people with Theatre.

When it became apparent that some of the injured needed intubation and
resuscitation on Ward 60, other nurses and equipment were sent there to
help, leaving the Acting Assistant Matron as Theatre co-ordinator and two
theatre teams within Theatre.

 In the event only one patient came to Theatre for abdominal
 investigation.

Theatres were then restocked, help offered to CICU and GITU but was felt
to be more necessary for the next day and staff stood down at 2030 hours.
10.    Patient Care/Treatment

10.1   Patients arrived in large numbers in the two hours from approximately
       1527 hours resulting in a total of 88 patients being treated of which 56
       were admitted, including 15 to Intensive Care areas, 4 of whom were
       transferred to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Intensive Care Unit and 3
       patients transferred direct from Wards to Royal Hallamshire Hospital. 11
       were dead on arrival or died in the Accident and Emergency Department, and
       a further 2 deaths occurred on the General Intensive Therapy Unit.   In
       addition to being admitted to the General Intensive Treatment Unit,
       Cardiac Intensive Care Unit and Ward 60 patients were also admitted to
       wards 65 and 66 with one patient being accommodated on ward 3A and one on
       Ward 63. In addition, during this time, 5 patients were treated who were
       not involved in the incident.

10.2   The hospital plan requires the walking wounded to be treated in the
       Physiotherapy Department and there appeared to have been some delays in
       contacting the Physiotherapist on-call and therefore a delay in opening
       the Department.

10.3   Comment

       10.3.1 Some difficulty existed in patients locating Physiotherapy and
              this requires attention.

       10.3.2 Ways of ensuring this important area is unlocked should be
              investigated.

11 .   Support Departments

11.1   It would appear that the majority of support departments responded
       extremely well. There was an initial problem with a shortage of oxygen
       flow meters but this was very quickly rectified by the Technical
       Equipment Department.

11.2   Comment

       11.2.1 Hie Portering Staff performed in an exemplary fashion.

       11.2.2 A regular supply of refreshments were available from Catering
              Staff (and also volunteers) throughout the incident and its
              aftermath. Hie Catering Staff manned the servery in the hospital
              snack bar throughout the night as it doubled as the Relatives
              base.

       11.2.3 Linen Services were very well covered.

       11.2.4 Messengers were generally well available but it is felt that
              consideration should be given in any revisions of the plan to
              allocate Messengers to key areas.

       11.2.5 Bags and envelopes are available for personal property within each
              case note folder for major accident patients. These do not appear
              to have been used and this requires review.



                                       7
       11.2.6 The Mortuary was prepared for the bodies of deceased patients.
              Soffie relatives of deceased patients were distressed that even
              though their kin had been identified, all bodies were removed by
              the Police.    It is suggested that this is reviewed for the future.

       11.2.7 Arrangements for clerical, secretarial, laboratories, CSSD,
              Supplies and Pharmacy all worked exceptionally well.

12.    Communications and Access to Hospital Site

12.1   The main problem with communications appears to havebeen that distraught
       relatives were ringing the hospitals for information which was not
       speedily available particularly regarding the fatalities.  It was clear
       that the vast majority of callers had already tried the Police emergency
       number without success. Relatives were therefore ringing the hospital
       in desperation.  The Police Hospital Control appears to have closed too
       early resulting in many calls being received by the hospital (about   _
       midnight on Saturday 15.4.89).                                       ^0

12.2   Communications were however soon established between the Royal
       Hallamshire Hospital and the Northern General Hospital with a ready ^
       exchange of information between the two.

12.3   Access to the Accident and Emergency Department was maintained within the
       Hospital grounds although with some difficulty as described below.

12.4   Comment

       12.4.1 There would appear to be a need to improve communications with the
              Police, especially regarding traffic control arrangements along
              the Berries Road drive which became severely congested. This
              resulted in a member of staff acting as "Control Officer" within
              the hospital.

       12.4.2 The special telephone lines set up by the Police were constantly
              engaged thereby creating additional calls being made to the
              hospital. It is suggested that the Police should need to re­
              assess that requirement for the future.

                 (It is interesting to note that the hospital Switchboard normally
                 deals with 2,000 telephone calls at the weekend with these
                 increasing to 7,000 over this particular weekend).

       12.4.3 It would be helpful if a member of staff could be deployed in
              front of the reception desk to deflect queries made to staff on
              the desk by friends and relatives trying to gain information
              regarding the casualties. This should then reduce the amount of
              queries being received by the reception staff.




                                         8
13.    Inter Agency Liaison

13.1   The Social Workers, Psychologists and Chaplains of all denominations
       responded to the incident and quickly set up a patients relatives centre
       in the hospital's dining room which is situated one level lower than the
       Accident and Emergency Department but, owing to the sloping nature of the
       site, also has ground floor access. The various voluntary organisations
       also responded with ther Hospital's League of Friends, Salvation Army,
       WRVS and Red Cross amongst others comforting distressed relatives and
       friends.

14.    Press

14.1   The Press Room was very quickly set up, this being in the Out Patients
       Area 1 of level 'C' adjacent to the main entrance of the hospital.
       Whilst the majority of the press acted with decorum there were a number
       who sought to gain interviews and would appear to go to any lengths to
       obtain them from patients, their friends or relatives and members of the
       hospital staff. This resulted in valuable managerial time being taken up
       with keeping the situation under control.  The Assistant Public Relations
       Officer was invaluable in managing this area.

14.2   In addition, very soon after the commencement of the incident the Press
       started to telephone the Hospital.

14.3   The first Press Conference was held by the Unit General Manager and
       Consultant in Charge of Accident and Emergency at about 1830 hours on
       Saturday.

14.4   In addition, Press enquiries were also dealt with by other Managers,
       mainly over the telephone but on some occasions face to face. A further
       Press Conference was held on the Sunday morning at approximately 1000
       hours involving Unit General Manager, Consultant in Charge of Accident
       and Emergency, Consultant Anaesthetist and Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
       Officer. Another conference was held on Monday morning and many other ad
       hoc statements were issued and interviews given.

14.5   Comment

       14.5.1 Some confusion arose at one point only about information being
              given to the press. In future,the need for only one Senior
              Officer to be designated for issuing press statements and giving
              interviews will be emphasized.

15.    Relatives and Friends

15.1   There were many visitors to the hospital very soon after the event who
       were anxious to have news of their friends and relatives. It is
       estimated that between 200 and 300 people were present at any time for a
       number of hours.  The patients' relatives base was very quickly set up
       within the Staff Dining Room on level 'C* of the Out Patients Department,
       this being manned by members of staff and various voluntary agencies
       including the Salvation Army, League of Friends, Social Workers and
       Chaplains of all denominations.




                                      9
15.2     S e n i o r Managers took full responsibility for co-ordinating activity here.
         The main problem was providing information to people.

15.3     Comment
                                                                                      n
         15.3.1 This does appear to have been one of the major successes of the
                whole operation in that relatives were able to congregate in one
                area resulting in information being more easily disseminated as it
                became available. All those who manned this area should be
                commended for their patience and fortitude under considerable
                pressure.                                                  ^

16.       Volunteers

16.1
                                                                       '
         There was an enormous response from health service workers within
                                                                           ;     s
                                                                                   70<^\
         Sheffield to the media coverage of the disaster, who therefore came to   ______
         the Hospitals. The Major Disaster Procedure necessitates the setting up
         of two reception points for such volunteers to report to, one for nursing
         and one for other staff. The nursing area was set up but is rather
         inappropriately placed within the Orthopaedic Library, the location of
         which is not known by many and relatively inaccessible from the main
         entrance. Most people therefore asked for instructions in the Main
         Entrance area on Floor D or at the A & E Department entrance.

16.2     Comment

          16.2.1 It may be that one reporting point for all volunteers should be
                 indentified in or adjacent to the Main Entrance to the OPD/Ward
                 Block. This should be staffed by an Assistant Matron.

 17.     Visits by VIPs

 17.1     After the event the hospital received a number of visits from celebrities
          and dignitaries, these including on the Sunday Mr David Blunkett MP, the
          Prime Minister and Home Secretary, the Archbishop Warlock of Liverpool, the
          Bishop of Warrington, and the Free Church Moderator of Liverpool. On
          Monday, Liverpool FC, the Lord Mayor of Sheffield, the Leader of
          Liverpool City Council and TRH’s Prince and Princess of Wales. On
          Tuesday, the Leader of the Opposition, HRM Duke of Kent, Bishop of Hallam
          and on Wednesday, Nottingham Forest FC.

 17.2     Comment

          17.2.1 The visits were appreciated by many of the staff and patients
                 however, they did cause significant extra work. It is expected
                 that a number of dignitaries and celebrities will wish to visit
                 patients, their relatives and the staff who are involved an such
                 accidents, but, this does result in additional stress especially
                 when staff are anxious to return the hospital to normal working
                 patterns.

  18.     The Aftermath

  18.1    Managing the consequences of the disaster within the hospital has been a
           major task since the patients were received.


                                            10
18.2   Very comprehensive managerial and clinical debriefing has taken place and
       will continue.

18.3   Counselling sessions were arranged for staff from the night of the
       incident onwards which take the form of group therapy and are being
       organised by Clinical Psychologists, facilities are also available for
       staff to have individual counselling sessions should they wish to avail
       themselves of the facility.

19.    Conclusion

19.1   All staff responded exceptionally well to the incident and reinforces the
       view that an excellent relationship exists at the Northern General
       Hospital between all grades and disciplines.

19.2   As with every other Major Disaster there are undoubtedly lessons to be
       learned from this incident.

19.3   In particular the hospital and other agencies will need to clarify
        the way in which a Major Disaster should be declared.

19.4   The operation of the cascade procedures will require close scrutiny and
        modification to hasten the procedure.  Undoubtedly, the fact the incident
        happened on a Saturday afternoon and received much media attention
        assisted in getting staff into the hospital,

19.5   This accident was a severe test for treating a large number of acutely
       asphyxiated casualties requiring resuscitation. However, because of the
       nature of the injuries, did not test some parts of the plan, for example,
       the Theatres.




                                       11
     }



APPENDIX




Fact and Figures

      Saturday 15th

      88 patients treated
      56 admitted (15 of whom were admitted to Intensive Care Wards and 2
                  ventillated on Wards, 7 subsequently transferred to Royal
                  Hallamshire Hospital)
      11 BID or died in Accident and Emergency Department
       2 subsequent deaths - GITU

      Sunday 16th

      17 discharged

      Monday 17th

         9 discharged

      Tuesday 18th

      1 discharged
      3 transferred to Liverpool
      1 death on GITU

      Wednesday 19th

      1 transferred to Liverpool
      1 discharged

      Thursday 20th

      1 discharged

      Friday 21st

      2 discharged




                                      12
