 GROUP            S O LICITOR           R E P R E S E N T E D BY   ATTENDED
                                                                   30/10/90
 1. BEREAVED      HILLSBOROUGH          MR. KIKG   (C)             YES        REF    DRF/JD
                  STEERING COM.         MR. FRAZER (S)             YES        TEL    051 255 062£
                                                                              FAX    051 236 004'

 2. SYP           HAMMOND SUDDARD       MISS NORCLIFFE(S)YES                  REF: BN/PCM/PAB
                                                                              TEL: 0274 734700
                                                                              FAX: 0274 737547

 3. POLICE FED  RUSSELL JONES           MR. HOLROYD                YES        REF*. NH/LP/HILLSE
    INC SMITH   & WALKER                                                            387044
    ILLINGWORTH                                                               TEL: 061 832 8877
                                                                              FAX: 061 832 7006

 4. SHEFFIELD     DAVIES ARNOLD         MR. CATCHPOLE (C)YES                  REF:   117/743968/
    WED CLUB      COOPER                                                             JAD
                                                                              TEL:   071 936 2222
                                                                              FAX:   071 936 202C

 5. SHEFFIELD     KEEBLE HAWSON         MR. GREGORY          (S)   YES        REF: AHG/TPJ
    CC                                                                        TEL: 0742 722061
                                                                              FAX: 0742,750243
  C                                                                           Or    0742 700813

 6. FOOTBALL      HILL DICKENSON        PETER J A C K SO N(S ) YES            REF: PWJ/KEL/186C
    SUPPORTER     DAVIS CAMPBELL                                                   -001
    ASS.                                                                      TEL: 051 227 315
                                                                              FAX: 051 227 1352

 7. EASTWOODS     REYNOLD PORTER                                   NO         REF: JJW/PDN/DMF/
                  CHAMBERLAIN                                                      EAS.1-2 ;
                                                                              TEL: 071 242 2877
                                                                              FAX: 071 24 2 14 31

 8. SUPT.         WALKER MORRIS SCOTT   MR. MANNING (S)            YES        REF:   R BM /M T /MURR£
    MURRAY        & TURNBULL                                                  TEL:   0532 832500
                                                                              FAX:   0532 459412

 9 . SUPT.        VINCENT HALE          MR. HALE (S)               YES        REF: VH/SEW
     MARSHALL                                                                 TEL: 0742 325842
                                                                              FAX: 0742 325644

lO^SUPT.          BARLOW LYDE &         MR.   RUSSEL       (C)     YES        REF:   7.02/RJH/
      GREENWOOD   GILBERT                                                            6362 001
                                                                              TEL:   071 247 2277
                                                                              FAX:   071 782 8500

11. MR. MCBRIEN                         M R S . MCBRIEN            YES

12. CH. SUE     HEPWORTH & CHADWICK     PAUL ISSACS          (C)   YES        REF: L/CCC/3/MCI/
    DUCKENFIELD                         SOLICITOR?                                 DUCK
                                                                              TEL: 0532 430391
                                                                              FAX: 0532 456188
     HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                  (tjEST DISTRICT)


          INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

        VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                   STADIUM DISASTER

               ON THE 15th APRIL, 1989




                   BUSINESS MEETING




                         Before

DR. S. L. POPPER, L L . B . , SB.MED.Sci., BM, B S , MRCGP

                (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                            At

               The Medico-Legal Centre,
                    Watery Street,
                      Sheffield.

                            on

             Tuesday, 30th October, 1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS



        From the Notes of J. L. Harpham Ltd.,
             Official Shorthand Writers,
          55 Oueen Street, Sheffield Si 2DX
                           APPEARANCES


Mr. T. King - counsel.   Instructed by the Hillsborough Group
of Solicitors, representing the bereaved and injured.

Mr. C. Russell — counsel.   Instructed by Barlow, Lyde and
Gilbert representing Superintendent Greenwood.

Mr. S. Catchpole - counsel.   Instructed by Davies, Arnold,
Cooper, representing Sheffield Wednesday Football,Club.

Mr. V. Hale - solicitor.      Representing Superintendent Roger
Marshall.

Mr. R. Manning - solicitor.     Representing Superintendent
Murray.

Mr. P. Isaacs - counsel.   Instructed by Hepworth and Chadwick,
representing Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

Mr. Gregory - solicitor.   Representing the Insurers of
Sheffield City Colmcil and Sheffield City Council.

Miss B. Norcliffe - solicitor.   Representing the Chief
Constable of the South Yorkshire Police.

Mr. P. Jackson - solicitor.      Representing the Football
Supporters' Association.

Mrs. J. McBrian.   Representing her family.

Mr. Holroyd.   Representing the Police Federation.
                     BUSINESS MEETING

                          Held on

                TUESDAY,:30th OCTOBER, 1990

     THE CORONER:   Welcome.   Can I say first of all that
this is not a part of the inquests proper, because the
inquests proper are actually resuming, as you know, on the
19th of November.   The purpose of this meeting as I said in
my letter to the legal representatives, is for me to have an
opportunity to meet members of the legal profession and
representatives in ordec to sort out procedural matters so
that as far as possible we can run the inquests when we
actually get down to them, in as smooth and as efficient a
way as possible in the interests of everybody who has an
interest in the matter, including myself.

     In order to avoid any possible misunderstanding we will
not - I repeat not - deal with any questions of evidence
this afternoon, or questions of fact.  We are dealing with
simple procedural matters.   I tried to make that clear in
the invitation, and I hope that was understood, but I just
want to repeat it so there can't be any doubt about it at
all.

     Secondly, this meeting is - it is difficult to know
what to call it because in Coroner's proceedings you don't
normally have opportunities for this sort of gathering, but
you could maybe, by way of analogy, treat it as if it were a
session before the Judge in chambers or an interlocutory
procedure.   The point about it is that although nothing
will be said whicti is likely to cause any problems because
we will be sticking to procedure, it should be treated as a
business meeting, as a private' gathering between myself and
tne lawyers.    Perhaps I ought to say that I did make it
clear in the letter that I would not raise any objection to
interested parties coming.    I meant that because I didn't
want anybody to feel that I was meeting with lawyers, or
anybody else for that matter, where the people who had a
direct interest were specifically excluded.    I recognise
one or two faces, but I don't recognise everybody, mainly
because I am so poor at recognition of faces, but that's my
problem.

     Would it be best if you just introduced yourselves, the
lawyers that is, and the representatives, so I know who is
here and so that the shorthand writer can take a note.    I
am taking a proper note of what is going on because I
thought it was wise that we knew precisely what was said.
          t
     MR. KING:   Sir, my name is Timothy King of Counsel.
I am instructed on behalf of a number of the deceased

                        -1   -
through their personal representatives.    I cannot today
read out a definitive list of everyone whom I represent.
That is because there was initially a preliminary list of
about forty to forty-two.   At the moment it is about twenty-
six definite sets of instructions.-   It is likely.,„tha t that,
will be added to and if it is of help, sir, within a week I
am told I can provide you, sir, with a definitive list of
those who will be represented through myself.     I am
instructed through Hr. Fraser, solicitor, who is one of six
solicitors who form the Hillsborough group of solicitors who
were known as the Steering Committee at the time of the
Taylor Inquiry, acting on behalf of the bereaved and injured
and they in turn have been instructed by a group which have
formed themselves through the families called The
ilillsborougn Family Support Group.

     However, we d o n ’t claim to represent each and every set
of personal representatives of each deceased, only those
wnich I have' indicated number now twenty-six and is likely
to go up possibly to forty to forty-two.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.  Well, when Mr. Fraser or his
instructing solicitors are in a position to let me have a
definitive list it would be helpful because then I will know
who you aren't representing.    That is what, I am really
interested in.    It is the ones who are outside your...

     HR. KING:    Sir, I ought to say there may well be
individuals here today who represent personal
representatives of, deceased who haven't given instructions
to ourselves who would want to be heard today as being
representatives.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed.  Perhaps it is only fair to say
this invitation wasn't extended to every single
representative.   It was a limited invitation to people who
I thought had most to gain from the meeting.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I am next in line.   My name is
Christopher Russell and I am a barrister.   I am instructed
by Barlow, Lyde and Gilbert, solicitors in London, to whom
you extended such an invitation, to represent the interests
of Superintendent Greenwood.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   My name is Stuart Catchpole.   I am a
barrister instructed by Messrs. Davies, Arnold, Cooper.
With me today is Mr. Doyle from that firm of solicitors and
we appear on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I do remember you from the interim
hearings, Mr. Catchpole.

     MR. HALE:   I am Vincent Hale.    I represent
Superintendent Roger Marshall.   I am a solicitor.
     HR.. MANNING:.- My name is Richard Manning.    I am a
solicitor and I represent Superintendent Murray,

     MR. ISAACS:    Paul Isaacs, sir, Counsel.   With me is
Mr. Copland o£ my instructing solicitors, Hepworth and
Chadwick.   \ie represent Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

     THE   CORONER:   Y e s . ':

     NR. GREGORY:     My name is Gregory of Keeble, Hawson.
I represent the insurers of Sheffield City Council and the
Council itself.    Mr. Hepwortn is also a solicitor from the
City Council.   lie is with me today.

     THE CORONER:   I understand you are a member of the
press, is that rignt?   Well, with the greatest of respect,
I would like you to leave.   This is not part of the
proceedings/   It is not a reportable occasion and I would
be grateful if you would leave because I think that is the
basis upon which I called this meeting.

     As I explained to you, this is not because there is
anything being said here which is so secret that nobody can
hear it, but I don't want - bearing in mind the matter is
going to be dealt with before a jury - I think it is only
right that we remember and we just deal with the procedure.

     MISS HORCLIFFE:   Sir, I am Belinda Norcliffe.   I am a
solicitor and I represent the Chief Constable of the South
Yorkshire Police.*

     THE CORONER:     Yes, I remember you too from the
previous sessions.

     MR. JACKSON:   Sir, I ara Peter Jackson.   I am a
partner in Hill, Dickenson, Davies, Campbell, and I
represent the Football Supporters* Association.    Sir, I
feel I ought to point out at this stage that we are here in
response to your invitation, for which my clients thank you.
It is unlikely, due to the funding of my clients'
organisation, we will be able to appear before you
throughout the inquiry.

     THE CORONER:   Perhaps I should explain that remark to
tne rest of the lawyers.   I had been in touch with Hill
Dickenson in the past and they very properly pointed out to
me that they weren't representing anybody in particular, but
it occurred to me when I was thinking about the preparation
for these inquests that supporters in general might well
feature to a greater or lesser extent in the evidence.    I
thought it right to draw that to the attention of Hill
Dickenson in case they wished to take a view on it.    That
is why you are here and obviously it is a matter entirely


                              - 3 -
for you to decide what*, if anything, you do.          I appreciate
your difficulty.                                              ;/

     MR. JACKSON:        Sir, ray clients do take the view that
there would be a void before you in representation if the
supporters w e r e n 't h e r e , but we are in dif f iculties . I
will speak to the solicitors for the other parties..             It may
be that if I can obtain undertakings about the extent and
scope of criticism of Liverpool Football Club supporters,
that a lot of the need for representation before you will
go.   That will obviously depend on what sort of
undertakings I can obtain.                                   ,

     THE CORONER:     Have I got all the lawyers now?   I did
write to Mrs. flcJirian - yes, there you are - because I knew
she was not represented specifically and I thought it was
rignt that you come along as well.
            t
     MRS. McBRIAN:     I am Mrs. Joan McBrian and I represent
our family in this.

     THE CORONER:       Yes,   that is all you can represent, just
yourself.

     While I am on names, I appreciate that some of you may
not want to be present tnroughout the inquests when we
resume.   Some of you will be here all the time, some of you
may change.   It would be helpful to me if once you know who
is going to be coming on a more or less regular basis, if
you could let us know because we are going to be going to
try and make name plates for you so that I can recognise you
when we sit in court.   It makes it a lot easier for me to
address you correctly by name, so if you would let me know
we will get that done.  That is an aid for me.   Of course,
you are free to change, if somebody is new or doesn't want
to be there, or something like that.

     MR. KING:   Sir, in the case of the deceased, I am here
as junior counsel.   At the time of the Inquiry leading
counsel was also instructed.   It is the intention, I know,
of those who instruct me, that on occasion they may wish to
have leading counsel here, leading myself, and possibly
leading counsel only on his own.   I assume, sir, you would
have no objection to that course?

      THE CORONER:      No objection at all.

      MR. KING:      I am obliged.

     THE CORONER:   Provided somebody has got locus standi,
in the sense that they represent an interested party, I am
quite prepared to be as reasonable and as accommodating as I
can be.   All I am asking you is that you help me by keeping
me informed.
     Can I go through one or two things which I think you
might want to know and then T will either pause from time to
time to give you a chance to chip in, or at the end if there
is anything I have not dealt with which you feel I ought to
be thinking about then I will give' you an opportunity to
draw it to my attention.

     The venue of the resumed inquests is going to be the
Council Chamber.   For those of you who were at Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry, It is exactly the same location. Whether
we will stay there the whole time will depend upon the
numbers of people who are present.

     Sir?

     MR. UOLROYD:   Good afternoon.     I am Mr. Holroyd
representing the Police Federation,   sir.   My apologies for
being late. ,

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.    Whether we translocate at
some point or not I don't know.    It will depend upon the
number of people who attend.    It is obvious, looking around
this afternoon, that we would have the dickens of a job
getting in nere assuming we have this sort of turn-out and
that was the reason why we chose that venue.

     We are doing our best to make it as convenient for
legal representatives and others as possible, but, of
course, I am limited with what is provided for rne.
                 ■ U


     I have been asked whether there will be space to store
papers and we believe there is a room.   They call it a
safe, but it is actually quite a largish room which we would
be able to make available for anybody who wanted to put
things in.   You would have to be responsible for your own
security.   I could not possibly take any responsibility for
security.   They key to the room is in the custody of the
City Council and we would make arrangements for it to be
opened and shut at convenient hours, say, between nine and
ten and five and six, or something like that in the
afternoon, so that you can have access, (a) to put things in
and (b) to get things out.  Whether you use it or not is of,
course a matter entirely for you.

     The times of the sittings:  at the moment I have it in
mind to sit from 10.00 until about 12.45 or thereabouts.
Obviously the hours have got to be flexible because of
evidence.   Then maybe from quarter to two or two o'clock
until around four.   You may feel that that is not very long
and that Lord Justice Taylor sat for a lot longer.   I know
he did, but then he did not sit with a jury.   It is not
fair, in my view, to expect ordinary people who are not used
to legal proceedings, even albeit this is just coronal


                          5 -
processings,   to expect    them to sit for very mu c h longer than
that.                                                       ‘

     If we find   that we   want to make a few adjustments to
these times, we   will do   so as we go along.  We will pause
probably in the   morning   and afternoon for a short break to
allow people to   stretch   their legs and have a cup of coffee
and so o n .

      I have to tell you that the present position is that
ttie City Council is a no smoking zone.   I anv sorry about
tnat for those of you who are smokers, but apart from the
fact that that is their standard policy, we also think the
fire service might not be too happy if we allowed it.
Therefore, for the time being you have to assume it is no
smoking.

     Is that reasonably clear with regard to venue and time?
One final thing.   It may be that you may have points of law
to put to me from time to time.   Obviously if it is
something that has to be dealt with there and then, then we
will do so and we will send the jury out.    However, if it
is something which you feel you want to put, and which would
have to be put in the absence of the jury, I would suggest
we try and do it around the four o'clock mark so that we use
the time when the jury have gone home.    That is not an
invitation that you address me on each and every day on
points of law, but it is just a convenient way because on
principle we should be able to cope with just a little bit
longer tnan the jury.   However, as I say, if something
occurs during the day that you feel has to be dealt with
then, then so be it.

     Now the next thing I want to talk about is what I call
the scope of tiie inquests.   You will recollect that we have
already dealt at considerable length with three questions:
who, when and where.    In fact we dealt with them rather
more extensively than in an average inquest which I would
normally deal with.    For various reasons I felt it was
right.

     What is left of the four things which Coroners by and
large deal with, is the question of how and that is what we
are going to be concentrating on in these resumed inquests.
For practical purposes the "how" will apply to all the
ninety-five deceased.   Technically, as you will appreciate,
I am not doing one inquest, we are doing ninety-five
separate and individual inquests, which is why we took
evidence individually for ninety-five people in April and
May.   However, because it would be a practical
impossibility to recount the generality of the evidence
ninety-five times over, we will take the evidence together
in respect of all of them.   I, in common with most of us, •
will slip into the fault of calling it the inquest.  When I

                             - 6 -
do that you will forgive me and read it as meaning the
inquests.    We will by and large be dealing with all the
evidence for everybody today.

     I am, of course, aware that there are some differences.
Just to take a simple example, there were two enclosures -
enclosure 3 and enclosure 4 — but I don't think that affects
the validity of the principle of how I want to deal with the
evidence-   If. evidence is specific to enclosure 4, then of
course we will take cognisance of that.    If evidence is
specific to something else we will take cognisance of that
as well, but we will be dealing with the evidence in respect
of everybody together.

     I have to remind you that an inquest is not a public
inquiry.   In another case which I happened to have read
recently, Mr. Justice Woolf, as he then was, described an
inquest as, "An inquiry in public, but not a public
inquiry."   I thought that was a rather neat way of putting
it.          '                         : .

     I do not expect, particularly as there has already been
a public inquiry, to repeat everything that Lord Justice
Taylor had done, but it is, I'm afraid, as I see it,
inevitable that we will be duplicating a certain amount of
the work he did.   This is because it falls within, as I
perceive it, the purview of my jurisdiction and also, of
course, because as I am sitting with a jury and as they have
to reach a verdict on the evidence, it is no use relying
upon what was said fifteen, sixteen, eighteen months ago
before somebody else.   Regrettably, or maybe not, it
depends which point of view you take, there will have to be
some replication of evidence of Lord Justice Taylor's
investigation.   Indeed, if you look at the Terms of
Reference and compare those with what the Coroner's Act
says, you will see there is a quite remarkable similarity in
places.

     I have to remind you that in contrast to a public
inquiry, witnesses in a Coroner's Court have got certain
privileges, particularly witnesses whose conduct is liable
to be called in question, and in particular they have the
right not to answer incriminating questions.   I will be
dealing with this again when I open with the jury and
explain tnis to them in detail, but I want to take this
opportunity now because it is an important point to
understand and if one doesn't grasp it then one tends, not
just in the Hillsborough Inquests but in all inquests, to
walk away disappointed.

     Therefore two things procedurally: witnesses have got
privileges which I will ensure that they are cognisant of
and if they wish to exercise their rights then they are
entitled to do so.   Secondly, a coronal inquiry has got
limited objectives and again within the best of my ability
we will try to stick to those.

     My present intention is, as far as possible, to take
the evidence we will hear viva voce.    In other words, I am
going to try and get the witnesses to come and give       ,
evidence.  We know already that that is not going to be
possible in some cases.   At least one witness whom I had
thought about, though not necessarily decided on, has died.
Clearly we cannot, take his evidence viva voce..  There may
be some others who, for medical or other reasons, are so
reluctant to come that I would think it only fair not to
call them.   However, we have a huge pool, if I can use that
expression, of witnesses and I think it will be possible to
have the bulk of the evidence viva voce.    I think that is
preferable though maybe a little bit more time consuming and
certainly more expensive, but at least people will have
heard it by word of mouth.

     Shall I pause for a moment here and ask whether; I have
made myself clear, whether you have any queries on this
aspect?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I don't know whether this is the time,
to raise submissions as to the nature of the evidence you
are going to call or the ambit of the evidence.   If I may
make myself clear, on the nature of the evidence I have a
number of submissions to make to you as to the use of the
Taylor Report itself.

     THE CORONER: “   I will come to that in amoment.   I
appreciate that you   didn't know that, because I have not
dealt with it.

     MR. KING:   As to the ambit of the evidence, it may be
tnis is not for today at all, that is to say, the starting
point of the events which you intend to investigate and, if
Ican put it this way, the  cutting off point of events.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, I am coming to that as well.
Perhaps I had better carry on for a little bit longer and
then turn to you because it may be that I may cover some of
the points which you nave in mind or, indeed, other people
have in mind.

     In fact you bring me on to what I have called "Groups".
I take the view that, if you like, the cut-off point for the
evidence is - I have selected as a marker the arrival of the
first ambulance on the pitch.   That does not mean to say we
will necessarily deal with every event up to that point, but
it is a convenient marker beyond which whatever happened has
either been dealt with in April/May time, or is outside the
scope of rny inquiry.  So if you like that is the end point.
     How the beginning is a little bit more difficult to
determine because one has to consider the events of the day
on the one hand, and to a certain extent one also has to
consider possibly the previous occurrences, because they may
have a relevance in evaluating and assessing the evidence
which is put before the jury.

     However, generally in principle the way I look at it is
we are going to start, as far as the day is concerned, from
tne outside and work our way inward.   The evidence will
become more detailed or, if you like, I will be calling more
witnesses as we get closer to the events.    To take an
example, I may just call very briefly somebody's evidence as
to traffic conditions, but I certainly wouldn't go into any
great detail.   It is really, as my colleague in east Kent
said when he was dealing with the Zeebrugge inquests, it is
like a theatre.   You have got your staging, you have got
some subsidiary actors and you have got the main plot, but
it is difficult to understand the main plot if you have not
got the staging, so you need to have a certain amount of
information which isn't necessarily vital but which makes
the whole thing more readily understandable.

     As I say, I intend to move from the outside in and as
we get nearer to the ground we will be going into more
detail.

     I anticipate calling evidence from supporters, if I can
use that term.     That will include relatives, but with
regard to relatives I am going to be very - relatives who
qualify in rny view' as witnesses and whom I consider to be
appropriate to call.    Certainly even if I felt a relative
could give useful evidence, if he/she really felt they could
not go through the trauma I would be very sympathetic to
that point of view.

     So supporters include relatives, friends.  V7hat I have
just said for relatives applies to them as well, although to
a slightly lesser degree.   Other contacts with the deceased
and "Others" - people who were there who didn't necessarily
have something to do with the deceased but who can tell us
something about what happened which I consider to be
relevant to the purpose of my inquiry.

      That is the first group.

      The second group will be local residents.

      The third group will be people like shopkeepers and so
on.

     The fourth group will be what I call "Other
Independents".   I don't meant supporters ar e n 't
independent, but I mean people who were either
professionally present or who may not even have been at the
scene*    I will give you an example, media people, for
instance.

     Then we are going 'to take evidence from club employees, ,
People who were engaged with the club.    For example,
turnstile operators, stewards and people of that nature*

      The police, of course. While I am on the subject of
the police, there are in the case of a few police officers
and, indeed, at least one other person, statements which
were taken under PACE - that is under the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act- * It is my normal practice.at the
moment if I was dealing, say, with a road traffic incident,
that if there was such a statement from, say, the driver,
that I would have that either read or played on the audio
tape.    I have decided that I am going to do that in this
case as well, so we will hear whatever is said in these
statements. < I intend at the moment to usfe the audio tape
rather than to have them:read because then we have it as it
was recorded.

     I have decided that I will not circulate the list of
witnesses who I intend to call in advance.   There are
several reasons for this.    The first one — I don't have to
give you all the reasons but I will give you a few just so
you know it is not an entirely arbitrary decision.     The
first and maybe the most important point is this:    this is
an inquiry which I conduct.    It is an inquisitorial
procedure and not adversarial.      It is totally different, in
fact, to every other legal proceeding in England anyway.
There is in fact I think - certainly the books tend to
indicate that it is quite proper not to disclose or
circulate names, and I never do.   When I say "never", that's
a big word.   There may be the odd exception when I have had
to let somebody see a statement for very special reasons.
However, in principle, I don't and I don't intend to do it
in this case.                                       '

     Secondly, we haven't got the capacity, even if I wanted
to do it, to deal with the circulation of statements- We
have got our work cut out in coping with my needs.    I am
very lucky.   I have got what I suppose for a Coroner is
quite a good sized team, but we have to remember that I am
just a Coroner, an inferior court of record, let me remind
you, and not anything else.   There are limits to what I can
muster, so I cannot do it from a practical point of view.

     The third thing is that circulation of statements, we
did do it with the summaries.  As you may remember we did
circulate the summaries because we thought that would be
helpful.   In fact to a certain extent in some cases that
bounced back on me.   People weren't entirely happy that the
evidence which was given was not word for word what had been
sent out in the summary, which was intended; really as a
guide and to give legal representatives an opportunity to
comment and come back ana e n a b l e u s to make any further
investigations.   I have learned from that and so I don't
intend to get into that situation-again.

     I. know this may come as a disappointment to some of you
    thatfis-^theifpositionJHfcKSo 1T -am no t sending but lists of.
witnesses nor.am I circulating statements in advance..

     What I will do, if: I am able, is to give you or to put
on a notice board the proposed witnesses for the next day or
two days and maybe even- three d a y s , to give you some idea of
what is coming.    I am not trying to be difficult.       I want
to make life as easy as I can for all of us, but that
includes me as well.    We will almost certainly allow the
witnesses to refresh their memory from the statements on the
day.     Do you follow what I mean by that?It is eighteen
months   ago that this event happened, approximately.-     Some
of the   witnesses may have given statements or,written down:
recollections which are eighteen pages long, or even longer.
They may not recollect in detail what they said and, indeed,
they may not recollect the events.        It is likely that we
will allow them to have a sight of their statement, although
I don't expect them to have them in the witness box.       We
would not normally do that.

     With regard to Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s Report, if I can
deal with that next.    I do not intend to admit that Report
as part of the evidence at the inquests.         The only way one
could do tftat would be to read it in toto, and I don't think
that would serve any useful purpose.

      Secondly I perceive it is going to cause more problems
than it is worth if I did that, so I don't intend to admit
that.

     Similarly, I do not intend to use the transcripts of
the evidence at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.     Of course,
I am fully aware that you will' have access to the
transcripts as indeed I have, and I would not b e a t a.Ll.
surprised if you looked through them with a view to seeing
what people have said.    I would expect you to do that, and
I don t mind that provided your questioning is relevant to
the inquests.  What I would not permit is if, for instance,
a witness were to exercise his right not to answer an
incriminating questions, I would not permit you to put to
that witness quotations from the transcripts so that in fact
he could then exercise his rights not to answer that
question, but in fact you had put what he had said.       I am
going to use commonsense.    I don't want to muzzle you.       I
don't want to prevent you asking all proper and legitimate
questions in order that at the end of the day as far as
possible you will feel you have had a fair chance, so to
speak, but equally I intend to be fair to the witnesses as
far as I am able to be .so.

       Although I don't intend to allow Lord Justice Taylor's
Repo rt to be- in troduced; as evidence, -it is, going ^to be very
difficult not; to refer to it from time to time. !Commons ease,
will dictate where we. draw the line..'. , I think it is also .
 '.ght:(toisay?!there-may^ be-the.’odd occasion where I will hav
tOi;b r e a c h %whati;I;jhave; juat#said,|that we w i l l have to us
sbme'of^the transcripts *3lbutPlZf think' i t will be a rarity
           :        -V ■
        "Documents."         By that I mean bundles of documents, or
plans or photographs or anything of that sort - exhibits if
you wish.          Bearing in mind (a) w e are dealing with         ~
inquests, (b) with a jury and (c) that we are going to have
our work cut out as it is with the number of witnesses, I
want to restrict as far as I am able to the number of
documents which are put in. as exhibits.''             There is very
little point 'in having hundreds and hundreds of pages of
documents if the jury cannot absorb them..

     I am prepared to listen to you on this point because it
is a difficult one,   but what I have in mind, and I will
pause after this to enable you to come back on what I have
said, is that if, for instance, we were to introduce the.
Green Guide, which is a document which we won't be able to
avoid referring to, we can introduce it as an exhibit.
However, I would not expect the jury to read the whole thing
from cover to cover because a lot of it we don't need for
the inquests.    If„you have a particular point on it which
you wish to make to a witness, then I would expect you to
either pick that paragraph out and read it, or I will read
it, or somebody will read it, or if we have already dealt
with it then we can just refer to it.     So that at the end
what the jury will have in mind will be, say, ten paragraphs
out   of the Green Guide.   Also-with other documents. There
may   be other documents which we may need to refer to.
Therefore, at the end of the day they will have only to
think about those bits of the exhibits which are relevant to
us and not maybe fifty or sixty pages which are there but
which are totally unnecessary for our purposes.

     Is that reasonably clear what I am trying to say?   I
think it will be easier to do than for me to     explain it.
Shall I pause here?   Hr. King,   have I dealt   with some of
the points you had in mind?

     MR. KING:   Sir, you have,   and if I might deal with one
or two.   Sir, if I deal with matters which you feel ought
to be reserved for formal legal argument, please stop me.
I am not in any way trying to trespass on times when I
shouldn't.                                        ■
                  "    ...       -   -     -• "       ■   V -             -•

              ■         .
                      ..... .        ...          ,       '
                                                           •3:'-.
                                                             v-.j
                                                                .< V..;
                                                                          t--- ■?   ;; ■
                                                                                           : /-   „■:   r -vv   ■ ...   W   .. . v : .... •   c •

                          Can I deal first with matters arising out of what have
      ,.y        been known as the mini inquests, and you have already                                                                         .v.
                                                                                                                                                     ;


            ,#'V'referred to the fact that on the individuals you have been                                                                          ■4   ...



                 into certain questions already?            I have an ever increasing
                 number- of sets of ..instructions^ as^tio- :lndividual questions:
•••              and, matters;: relating^to# those^indi vidua 1 mini inques ts-,
                 specificallygthe. factual-,matters ,laid out in ,the^&ummariea.
                 to which you have referred w h i c h 'I understood w e r e lai
                 before the jury. „ I don't.wish to- go-into .them now, th
                 a f t e r n o o n , but what I wouId wish to have liberty to do is
                 communicate with you under the. name, of each individual ;
                 deceased - hopefully it will not be as long as I am perhaps
                 indicating - but there are specific issues of fact where I
                 know those who have lost their loved ones are very anxious
                 that either factual inaccuracies or omissions, if possible,
                 could be rectified.            Sir, if they could be laid b e f o r e you
                 in written form you may take the view, and I would hope that
                 you might, ttyat in most of those cases you would, be prepared
                 for those matters to be rectified perhaps straight away at
                 the beginning of the inques ts proper in November, or, if
                 necessary, to hear a small amount of evidence relating to
                 them.                                               ■

                       Obviously until you hear the questions you cannot make
                  your mind up, but I would wish to give notice, it I. can put
                  it that way, tnat that is what I am instructed to lay before
                  you.

                       THE CORONER:   Can I tell you my view on that?    I was
                  aware you might well be raising this point.    I have already
                  made it clear that I don't intend to re-open all the ninety-
                  five cases.   Indeed, I have had correspondence from the odd
                  person where they have raised matters.   If the matters, are
                  put to me and if when I have seen them, if your instructing
                  solicitors would communicate with me, if I feel that the
                  point which you make is - I will use the word justified,
                  that is not intended to be rude at all - justified and
                  legitimate, and proper to be dealt with, then of course I .
                  will consider that sympathetically.    However, there may
                  well be matters which may be raised which I feel have either
                  been adequately dealt with, in which case I will say so, or
                  alternatively which I feel are outside the scope of the
                  inquiry, in which case I will also say so.

                       I am not turning you down.   I am just reserving the
                  position, depending upon what you actually say.

                       HR. KING:   Indeed.  Really, the purpose of my rising
                  on that matter now was to give you forward
                                                     _______ ______ __ __
                                                             notice of it and
                  to emphasise, because I know there are those here hearing
                  what I am saying, they are matters which inevitably are dear
                  to the hearts of many people -

                                THE CORONER:                              I understand that-

                                                                                      - 13 -
                                                                       :V-::
           MR. KING:    Sir, might I now address you on the cut-off
      point, as it has been called, of the scope.   As I understand
      it you have indicated, sir, you have in mind the arrival of
          first ambulance , which is probably going to be sometime
          am guessing now...                                  .   .

           ■
-V-
           THE CORONER:     Abou                           omething
      like that


      very heart felt held by those I represent, , and I would say
      it is a matter that is very dear to them, that it should be
      extended, that timing, to about four o'clock.     I explain
      why.   A number of those who I represent are anxious that
      there be an inquest into the nature of the medical attention
      which was given to those who had been in the crushing, in
      regard to the allegation which certainly they wish to make
      and wish to investigate, that the absence o f .proper medical
      care facilities and attention and technique, led to those,
      certain of them in any event, dying perhaps when they might
      not have died at all or certainly dying sooner than might
      have been the case, and specifically the diagnosis of when
      somebody had actually died.

           Sir, I know in sel ecting your cut-off point - and I can
      understand from having read some correspondence on the
      matter relating to it - that those are matters which your
      immediate feeling was y ou weren't going to go into,
      Certainly my submission is they are relevant to the "how" in
      respect of the deceased here because the time of death is
      obviously of importance and how they died involves the
      consideration of the at tehtion paid to them when perhaps
      they were still alive a nd that is a very relevant matter.

           THE CORONER:   Can I stop you there because I think we
      are getting into a legal submission.

           I have heard what you say.    I don't think it would be
      right for ine to give a ruling on that because I would be
      breaching, if you like, the procedural aspects of this
      meeting, except to say that: obviously I have thought about
      this point quite a bit and at the moment I am not persuaded
      yet that I would want to go down that road.     I have
      reasons for it, but I don t think I will deal with them.     I
      would not want to encourage you to think I will actually
      accede to that, but if you could just remind me before we
      end that you have made this point because it may be that
      what we should do is have another meeting possibly before
      the 19th, but a formal meeting of the inquests proper, so to
      speak, but without the jury, where legal points can be
      discussed in a more conventional way.

           Can we move on to your next point?


                                14 -
,v
     ';y:;•                            '^■■
                                          •
                                          ■       I
                                                                                   .... . . .
              -'i -C:    Ci;V:S HR KING:    Sir E w o u l d <welcome- that because as I say,
                        in many ways I ?.ip only really giving notice
                                                -   -    ■           -         -   -
                              m   11   /> ■ a   h   rt-M m r *   '        ,,
                              THE! CORONER;                              ' Yes,         I understand.
                                                                                                        \   - > i Vv
                                       KING:                             ually, w
                                                                 w i t h matters#whi
                                                             because you*;have
                                                    'C°P?S   ;to#pco<; .______
                                                      ssxn      asking' to be",
                        a. matte   ‘   ”                        d: that, y o u 4a r ( _ ^ Jssn5„,
                        entitle            >         uuuxa t just be heard to comment
                        on the decision not to circulate in advance the names of
                        witnesses..  I understand the logistical problem of
                        statements-   I fully understand that.    The great advantage-
                        ot those I represent of knowing in advance the names of
                        witnesses is this:  I would hope, sir, you would be willing
                        at the end of the day to hear representation as to your
                        calling witnesses who haven't been called.

                             THE CORONER:   May I interrupt you, Mr. King?    I have
                        in fact forestalled you on that because I have already
                        written “ I tnink it must be amonth ago.    I wrote to every
                        single firm of solicitors that I was aware of.     If I have
                        missed any I apologise, but I have written to every single
                        firm of solicitors that I was aware of specifically
                        requesting them to name people who they wished me to
                        consider as witnesses.    I made it clear that the final
                        decision would be mine, but I did invite them to draw my
                        attention to anybody they wanted me to think about.     You
                        may be interested to know that Ithink I have had five
                        replies.   Tnree of them said they did not have any names
                        and tne other two did put forward a few names.     There may
                        be six, but anyway, a very small number.

                             If I can just come back to your point.   That
                        opportunity has already been given and the mere fact I don 11
                        circulate names does not stop you from telling me the names
                        of people who you want me to consider.

                              MR. KING:   Sir, I appreciate that, and ever so gently,
                        I am not wishing to occupy your time, put the counter
                        argument..   In the nature of this inquiry where there have
                        been a vast number o f witnesses - when I say witnesses, we
                        know from the Inquiry investigation that a vast number of
                        statements have been taken from many, many people and before
                        the Taylor Inquiry began they were circulated and added to
                        as it went on.    I know a technique which has been adopted,
                        it may be the technique of convenience which will have to be
                        unadopted, of many of those instructing solicitors who
                        instruct myself, has been, "Let us wait and see whom the
                        Coroner intends to call to see whether we can see any
                        obvious omissions," rather than doing it the other way round
                        of sitting down and making up their own list, as if they


                                                                                        15 -
             -'-■VV-
                                                                                                          r\'




                                                     A.     -f:?
                               1
                               '
                               .■,■■■■>;.•■''■..;.   /■-T                      .   .   v-' T
                                                                                               ■:-■■■•   ...    .



                       .were the: Coroner,,, o£* the; complete whole. Obviously; i t 5
                       would b e a duplication of effort on a major scale.
                                                                   i, v   ■*                       .

;:■.                      .

       ...                   Sir,, all I could urge upon you in the nature of an
                       inques t of this34sorfcr;Kwouldflbe*the®exfcremes helpfulnesses of ?a? j
                       Listyfnotta l i s t ?with'any’ statements a t ' a l l - S i r , ' I leave
                       tha t|with,. y ou» and per haps, you.'-migh.b$ cons identity agair

                                    iCORONERr^f-1 •wilifreconsiderfwhat *yot
                       not sure I will be able to oblige you, but I will certainly
                       reconsider.
                                                 :.i
                                MR. KING:    I am obliged.    Sir, aga in , I repeat ever
                       so gently because I know I am trespassing on your
                       jurisdiction and authority to make whatever decisions you
                       w i s h , as to the use to be made of Lord Justice Taylor's
                       Report, and really in support of the submission that it ,
                       should be pub before the jury, not in its entirety — and.
                       this again might be reserved for an argument before you when
                       the other matter is reserved - but of certain'paragraphs
                       which can be identified.         They are paragraphs which go to
                       facts, not opinion, and they would curtail a lot of argument
                       as to certain events because they are there laid out very
                       clearly and succinctly.

                            Sir, if I m ight draw an analogy.   I know this is an
                       inquisition.   I t is not a civil trial, it is not a criminal
                       trial, but in th e civil litigation which is now complete a
                       very useful devi se which everybody agreed to was that it was
                       agreed that the cote facts, subject to anybody's right to
                       say, "I dispute a particular fact," would be as set out in
                       certain numbered paragraphs which were given and handed in.
                       Everyone agreed it at the end of the day to approach it in
                       that way and it proved to be a great boon as a setting, a
                       base, upon which everyone could operate from, because, of
                       course, of the d ifficulty of not wishing to be a Public
                       Inquiry.

                            Sir, I can only urge again that perhaps some
                       consideration be given to that.

                            THE CORONER:   One of the reasons why I am reluctant to
                       use the Report is because it does not necessarily follow
                       that it is accepted, or that every paragraph is accepted, by
                       every single party before me.    It would be improper to use
                       it, or if I did we would then have to argue out all the
                       disputed aspects of it insofar as they were relevant..

                            If it were, possible for the parties to reach an
                       agreement and say, "We accept the following paragraphs, XY
                       and Z," then, of course, I would not have any objection to
                       that because it would be an agreed statement and I would be
                       quite happy with that.   What I don't want to do is, to


                                                            16 -
introduce sections ,„ maybe, of, the Report,, which rightly or -y.
wrongly somebody may take objection to.

     iIR. KING:      Yes, sir.               #                          .

_     T HE CO RO NE R: That i s w h y I want to call the evidence^' ^V,"^
if^you like,, in to to ^i^arde'c&ito&tcvaancU bea^f airfetaX r -
as-1far~'as I am able.

     MR*. KING: ’ It may be that between now'- if you do fix
another pre-trial review, if T can call it that, that that
is a matter which could be a matter of communication between
tne parties.                                       ,

     THE. CORONER;      Yes   ..




      MR- KING:   Sir, if I could just clarify the transcript
evidence, you would have no objection, as I understand it,
within the rules you have- laid down, as to privilege, to a
transcript being used in cross-examination of a witness as
put ting to him, if it be the case, a previous inconsistent
statement?

     THE CORONER:       Yes,       within certain limits.

     MR. KING:       Yes, of       course.

     THE CORONER:   The difficulty is that the Public
Inquiry was done on, if you like, slightly different
premises from my powers, if you like, and also the way I
intend to run these inquests and ray main objective is to try
and make sure we do things fairly, which I am sure you would
want also.

     MR. KING:   Of course, sir.    Sir, you will be pleased
to know I have no observations on the documents because as -I
understand it we are going to feel our way through it, if I
can put it that way.   I. commend that and one can make
observations, perhaps, as it arises.

     Sir, might I just raise one piece of evidence which has
not been mentioned so far.  I understand there is a video
which is in your possession, sir, of the events..  I don't
know to what extent you were intending to use that video to
the jury.

      THE CORONER:   I am glad you have reminded me about
that.    In fact you have reminded me of two things!   It is
my intention - I will give everybody else a chance as well*
At the moment it looks as if Mr. King has got sole rights
here, but I will come back to everybody, but if I deal with
him it may deal with some of the points which, are in your
minds.                                     !;.
                    There is what is known as a compilation video, which
- ; • was used in Lord Just' Taylor s Inquiry.                                                  It is about a two
*■ *• hour tape. ' It is iny present : intention to se                                           us that, to show
           it to the jury, because it is a useful summary.                                                  .It. .
   _• . actual 1 y vividly demonstrates i£ I c a n u s e that,‘word                                                -
-v-;,^K>There-are^onetfory two^ather videos^aiso’available ’o f '1988 •
’.j'S SM l e v e n tsi^gi i n d e e d ^ L„, t h i n k . ' t h e r e > sis* -.a, b it_ -o £ .t a? v i d e o * o £ ■ a 1 9 8 1   * •*
           e v e n t , ■ w h ic h I m i g h t a l s o show them .. ‘ • H o w e v e r, I h a v e t w o
          Ic a v e a                                                 irsi o f, a                   ofendtSlintendSto®
       ’ ' show sixty-seven hourspbir hovrfever many* hours there are,.’but
           there is an awful lot of video footage.                                            It is of no
           benefit to tny jury or to my inquiry and L don't intend to do
           it.                           .         -                                      1.

              Secondly, I have no facilities for providing copies of
         this video.    Normally speaking, of course, if I take
         evidence I prepare a transcript and if you want one you can
         have one, as {indeed some of you have done.    You may say if
         you show the video that is exactly the same thing.     It is
         an exhibit and therefore I must produce copies.     I have
         none, so I cannot - in fact I will not - produce copies for
         distribution to people on request.     If that is not
         acceptable then I would rather not use the video at all.      I
         think that would be unfortunate because I think it would
         help the jury and it would help everybody, indeed, if we saw
         it.     However, I do not havethe capacity to set up a video
         duplicating organisation, so this would have to be
         understood by everybody.

               Does that raise terrible problems as far as you are
          concerned?

               MR. KING:   Sir, from my point of view I am content
          with how you have indicated.     You will be pleased to know
          for   the moment that is all I have to say.

                   THE CORONER:                 Now if I work my way down the line.

               MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, I only rise really to echo Mr.
         King on one point and that is in relation to the Taylor
         Repor t which certainly from Sheffield Wednesday's point of
         view we feel could be beneficial, both in saving time and.
         deali ng with some matters that are not disputed.   If you
         are i ntending, sir, to issue a general invitation for the.
         parti es to attempt to agree certain paragraphs which may in
         the e nd form a useful basis to be put to the jury, we would
         be ve ry willing to take part in that.

              THE CORONER:   I have got no objection to that at all.
         I had assumed that that was going to present the parties
         with some considerable difficulties but if in fact I atn
         mistaken on that, then of course if we can save time and if
         we can have something which is agreed, then I have no
         objection whatsoever.

                                                       - 18 -
.V ,


              MR. RUSSELL:
                  RUSSELL:   Sir, you. kindly outlined the categories
       . of witnesses you will be calling.    Although, you have said
         you will not be providing' a list of;those witnesses, are we
         to assume that you will be calling witnesses from those
         categories in the order that you have outlined them?     Is

                                                          -V    . - W ; ' -
                 CORONER
                    s tar       su pp orter            w i l l mo

                 RUSSELL        residents and then shopkeepers?

              THE CORONER:    No, not necessarily.     That was purely a
        grouping    What I would intend to do is to work from the
        outside in.    If, for example, I was dealing with the
        surroundings of Leppings Lane, we would call some residents,
        we would call other groups, we would call any supporters who
        had something specific to- say on that.      Then we would move
        our way through the events, so to speak*        I d c recognise
        that in many cases it is not actually possible to
        categorise.    You c a n ’t say, "We will only listen to this
        little bit and not to the rest."        If we call a supporter
        iie is going to want to tell us the story from A to Z, and
        quite rightly, because there is no way we could get him to
        come backwards and forwards across the Pennines just to suit
        the convenience of a scheme which I have designed.

             Howe ver, there are some witnesses who will only give
        very rest ricted evidence because they d o n ’t know anything
        else, but we will try and deal with those as we go.       The
        order in which I g^ve them was not specific.       It was just
        the way I happened to write it down.     In fact it is quite
        likely th at for logistical reasons we might well start with
        local peo pie in the morning and have people who are coming
        from a di stance later on in the day.    In other words, I
        will be g uided not by their category, but by the convenience
        and timin gs of where they live and so on.

             Does that help you at all?

             MR.. RUSSELL:   Thank, you for that clarification.     The
        other matters are perhaps matters I could raise at any
        subsequent meeting if there is to be a further lawyers'
        meeting at which matters of law are going to be canvassed.
        They deal with two matters my learned friend Mr. King has
        raised.    One of them relating to the matters arising from
        what he has termed the mini inquests, additional matters
        that he wishes to have put.    What concerns me, ray first,
        reaction, is whether and to what extent those matters are
        going to be circulated to the other legal representatives.
        It seems to me appropriate if he is going to supply you with
        specific questions for you to ask the witnesses, which is
        what I understand he wishes to do, whether those questions
        should be made public to other representatives so that we

                                   19 -
                                                       ■ / '-v.;
- ; > y y- -



               raight have an opportunity to comment on whether those
               questions were or =were not proper emana tingf fronr Mr.*' Kin g.
                                                                        ■


                    THE CORONER:    .
                                     N o ,, with great respect, we are getting
                                        .   .             -        ■■       •   -

               into legal argumen t,s but .I tell^ypu^no^.thetdecis<i:onx;o
               whether.the,question is proper is-actually mine.        'I kno
                                               me           emh,      sa
                             l’.e I have *always"tried'ta"hole      eve
               between everybody who- has-.an^interest>in the matter
               understand the point you have made, but I think it is a
               concern which maybe you don't have to be too worried about

                    MR. RUSSELL:    Thank, you.  Insofar as my learned
               friends night seek to dissuaded you from the course which
               you have indicated with relation to Lord Justice Taylor's
               Report, I don't kn ow whether you are going to invite each of
               us to add our two penneth: to that view on. one side or other
               of the debate,. Si r, on my part may I suggest that putting
               selective parts of the Report before the jury is perhaps a
               greater evil than putting the whole, when one is perhaps
               going to have a di spute as to which parts should be the
               parts selected and bearing in mind that the Inquiry was
               prepared, and the Report written, at a time before all the
               facts were known..

                    Til Si CORONER:       Hr. Russell, what I was trying to
               indicate was that        if there was an agreed statement as to
               what we would put        then I would be prepared to consider it.
               £f we can 1t agree       then I stick by what I have said with
               regard to the use        of the report.

                     HR. RUSSELL:   Thank you.   Finally, sir,, you have
               recently mentioned the compilation video,   Although you have
               said you will not be in a position to proviai copies, will
               you be in a position to afford facilities for legal
               representatives to view it before the inquests start?     They
               cotae to you or they all gather in a particular place and at
               a particular time which has been set aside for showing the
               video to legal representatives.

                     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, perhaps I could help.   Obviously
               Sheffield Wednesday for their part have copies of the
               compilation .video and I am instructed that we would be
               happy   as far as we are able, to assist any other person who
               doesn't have a copy in providing our own copies of our copy

                    THE CORONER:   That would be very helpful and Mr.
               Russell I am sure you will accept that very generous offer.

                     MR. RUSSELL:               I thank my learned friend for that.

                    THE CORONER:   That will assist me as well,                     Thank you
               very much indeed, Mr. Catchpole.


                                                     20 -
          i'-'V                                                   !. r ...

                                                                             .   .
                  ..   .1   t   ..
                                     ..



 ' V.                          MR. HALE:     My friend from the Football Supporters iw~v:;
                       Association very properly raised the question whether
                       undertakings might be given which might save a lot of time,
-t* ■
                       save a lot of money; and a Iso.save a. lo t of grief--*-and heart
*V'r '.                searching.        For my c l i e n t ! would be very happy to give
                       suctt, an undertaking ,ittbut*I#mavilb^iinhlbItediib^theflsaction
                       ttv a tio theirfpeo    ma\        e.“ w l wonder- it it would be
                            isible, either b y o a r g eetting togethe-c|here today, o
                       y o utrr off ice perhaps sendir
                             r otlice            sending to each person who is on your
                       list as a representative, a complete list of all the
                       representatives so that we may get in touch with each other
                       and see whether we can in fact agree on any specific matters
                       which, without impinging on your jurisdiction, might help to
                       avoid areas of contention.

                             If that could be done I know that my client would be
                        very happy. , He does not want to cause any further distress
                        to any of the relatives.

                             THE CORONER:   Can you see any objection to my
                        circulating a list to all of you of your respective names
                        and addresses and references?   I don't suppose any of you
                        would object to that, so we can do that.

                             I hear what you say.    I think the question of the...
                        Undertakings, I think, are risky in these inquests.    It is
                        not for tne to say what undertakings anybody should give, but
                        obviously I will conduct the inquests and take whatever
                        evidence I think is appropriate, whichever way it turns out,
                        so to speak.    My job is to make an inquiry into the deaths
                        of these unfortunate people.

                            MR. ISAACS:   Sir, may I ask you to clarify two points?
                       The first relates to the Taylor Report, because as I
                       understood what you said at the outset, the Taylor Report
                       was not to be used at all, save insofar as my learned
                       friends and myself and other colleagues might actually agree
                       certain facts.   That may or may not prove something that
                       can be done.   Assuming that that cannot be done, how far do
                       you believe you will allow the use of the Taylor Report at
                       all?                                       ^

                            As I say, as I understood it at the outset, it was not
                       going to be used, but then I noticed when my learned friend
                       Mr. King was addressing you briefly, the impression I
                       certainly got was that you were going to allow the
                       transcripts to be used for cross-examination purposes, which
                       was certainly not something I understood at the outset and
                       would be something which - and I leave this to another time
                       - I would make submissions against.

                            That is the first point, sir.   The second is this, and
                       it is a relatively minor matter and relates to the video ,

                                                   21 -
evidence.   Yes, the video will undoubtedly be shown if the
circumstances are right, and that is as I understand your
present position.   5 Would you clarify this:   as I understand
it you would not intend that the video be shown during the
course of therinquests'iwhilst*witnesses were giving    ,,
evidence, forr the purpose** of cross-examination? ’

, ••  T H E CORONER:  With regard to the second-point," m
principle the answer to that -is yes. ,..We would look at the
video and that would be it.     Uowevery-T have to be a little
bit careful with regard to this response because I can
conceive of a situation where a point is raised and where it
would be infinitely quicker and easier to resolve it by
looking at the video.     I would not give an undertaking that
we would not look at the video at other times:.     I would
seek, to avoid it.    The purpose of the video is to give the
jury an overview, if that is the correct word, of what
happened andr in order for them to be able to understand
better what the witnesses are saying.      It is an aid rather
than anything else, but it is not inconceivable that one
might want to look at the odd snatch of video.      Indeed I
can tell you now, in one or two statements which I have read
thevideo is referred to, or part of the video is referred
to,    and it may well be necessary to look at it because you
would not be able to understand the statement otherwise.

     MR.   ISAACS:   We are very grateful for that.

      THE CORONER:  However, the last thing I want is to
spend hours and hours re-running videos and assessing
rninutiae on it. We want to hear the people viva voce as is
conventional.

     Now the other point which you raised regarding Lord
Justice Taylor's Report and in particular the transcript, I
must confess I do find this quite a difficult problem. What
I was trying to say is this: it would be foolish of me to
assume that you don't have the transcripts and that none of
you are going to look at them because I am sure you are all
going to do that, particularly as you no doubt have guessed
some of the witnesses are inevitable.    We have got to call
them because they are key players, shall we say, in this
matter.     In that sense it is unavoidable, as I see it,
that people will use the transcripts to prepare their cross-
examination.

     What I am not very keen on doing is (a) I certainly
will not allow the transcript to be used to put things to
people so that one puts them in the position where they say
they will not answer the question.    If I have put it to
them that it is an incriminating question and they have     j
exercised their privilege not to answer, then I will not    '■
allow whoever it is to pursue them on that point by quoting
     to them from the transcript because I would consider that to
     be oppressive.

          However, it may well be that in certain other cases, .
    matters which- are not really controversial or even if they
clearer.controversial but which have been; dealt with: sensibly
    and properly, it might-be easier.-.to put to the®witness ~
 ..".something, that he said which?;h e cbuld;fthen#agree with, or ;
^ M o > th e r w ise ta;.asfctheacas~elmava,be^^feM w a .n .^ to lb e a ;£ le x ib le ; iir-^K'
. ^ t h i s andl'inay have to* modify my* stance as we-go along,... „ ,
       because- it. is only right-ifor-me^to tell you that L havev '.r,V
- •- * never' ever conducted an inquest o f this size o r complexity
       and I have to learn,, like most of us probably have to, as to
       how to do it correctly.       In that sense I have to reserve
       the right that. I too may have to modify what I do.

             Have I helped you in any way?

           MR. ISAACS:   Certainly you h a v e , sir.   One can
      understand, if I can put it this way, the use of the
      transcript to perhaps remind somebody of something they said
      which they have perhaps forgotten about.      As I understand
      it, that was the sort of example you were giving just a
      moment or two ago.

            What I think my learned friend Mr. King.was saying was
      this:   that if a witness X says XY and Z and Mr. King has a
      copy of the transcript where he actually said AB and C, that
      Mr. King should be permitted to say to that witness, "Wait a
      moment, you are saying XY and Z but eighteen months ago you
      said AB and C. What is the position here?"     That is
      something we are all used to in the normal civil process,
      but not, in my submission, something which is necessarily at
      home in an inquest such as is being conducted.

           THE CORONER:   My feeling on that point is simply this,
      that what we are trying to establish is the truth as far as
      we are able.   It will depend entirely upon what the AB and
      C and the XY and Z are.

           Can we leave this point?    We are moving on to the
      legal submission point.    It is obvious to me, and subject
      to what you may say, that we will have to have a session
      where w e deal with legal submissions and we can then try and
      deal with these matters and I will try and give you rulings,
      as far as I am able, at the time.    Is that acceptable to
      you, Mr. Isaacs?

           MR. ISAACS:   It certainly is, sir, and a very good
      idea, if I may say so.

           Sir, there is one further matter that I have been asked
      to raise and that is the question of the recall of
      witnesses.   Certainly one can understand why it would be
■W   'V--   -:   >   z*   ~ ':




                          oppressive for a witness from over the Pennines or, indeed,
                          from down south to be coming up on a number of regular
                          occasions, but, sir, that same point must also apply because
                          the giving of evidence in any way, even by a semi-
                          professional witness, is going to be traumatic, that same
                          point mus t apply, in my subraission,. to all witnesses .        11
                          would be wrong in my submission 'for, - for example /'“a'
                           articular police officer to be asked to come back and deal
                           ith.half'aa hour.of what -tobkr,:place:'oir_.that' dayi and" then
                          three days later to come back, and deal with another half an
                           our and so on.    In my "submission thatfvtfouldSbefvery
                          oppressive indeed.

                               THE CORONER:   I take your point.    I think that is a
                          very fair point and I agree.    I am not saying that no
                          witness will ever be recalled, because if you remember those
                          of you who were here at the interim inquests, we did recall
                          witnesses even in that instance because things occasionally
                          come up which we had forgotten or a point is made which on
                          reflection wd ought to have: explored.   It may be that I
                          will have to recall witnesses from time to time, but I
                          accept your point.   I think it is a very valid one and in
                          principle I agree with you.    I entirely accept that these
                          inquests are going to be pretty hard on everybody, not least
                          the witnesses.

                                 MR. ISAACS:  The only point that perhaps I ought to
                           make, one can understand why witnesses should be recalled to
                           elucidate some point that had not been raised at the time
                           when he or she gave•evidence, but that is quite different
                           from asking a witness to stop at some stage and then come
                           back.

                                THE CORONER:   No, that wasn't my intention.   What I
                           was trying to say was that if, for example, we have a local
                           resident who can only give evidence as to what happened
                           outside the ground, didn't go in, then obviously we will
                           stop at that point with him because there is nothing more he
                           can say.   However, if we have a supporter who was there and
                           then he went into the gates and so on, we will listen to all
                           of it and ditto with officers as far as they are concerned.

                                 MISS NORCLIFFE:   Sir, just the one pointv   We did
                            previously send to you or draw to your attention a number of
                            items of documentation which the Chief Constable would like
                            to be before the jury and we have previously asked for
                            permission that that be the case.   That wasn't done, sir,
                            on the basis that the jury would be expected to take them
                            away and read them from cover to cover, but that they should
                            be used to dip into as and when required.

                                 THE CORONER:    Yes,; that is right.  In fact you sent
                            me I think volume 3*    I cannot remember your volumes 1 and
                            2 at the moment so it is difficult for me to answer this,

                                                     - 24 -
 but it seems to me if we could agree, if you like, a bundle
 of papers, or three bundles, which are the ones we are
 likely to want to dip in, and that is a good word because
 that is what I want.      . I don't want the jury to have to .
 peruse thousands of pages, or hundreds e v e n , of documents,
 but if we have a convenient way of having before us* ; ;
 documents which are agreed in the sense they are relevant,
 not necessarily agreed with regard, to tthe contents, then it
 may be possible for you or whoever is asking questions to
'draw#:
      p ar ticu 1ar- a 1  1    e   n   t   f   ^       ym
 whatever . it. might„ be                          asking?

     MISS NORCLIFFE:   Sir, does that mean that actually at
this stage we have got permission to put before the jury...

     THE CORONER:    No, not quite, but you are pushing me
towards that.    I want to think about this a little bit
further because my original intention was to go the other
way and to make you produce each document, or each page, as,
and when you wanted to use it- What you are really asking
me is to allbw you to produce it in advance and then to dip.
It may be - I am inclined to think at the moment that might
be a better way but I want to think about it a little bit
further.

      Has anybody got any thoughts on that?

     MR. ISAACS:   It would be nice to know, sir, what
documents my friend is referring to and then perhaps...

     THE CORONER:   I understood we had all had copies
because that is what you said in your letter.

     MISS NORCLIFFE:    Sir, if I can explain what they were.
Volumes 1 and 2, and there were three volumes referred to
you, were in fact the South Yorkshire Police Inquiry volumes
1 and 2, submitted before the Public Inquiry.    The South
Yorkshire Police submitted something called "Background
material", and then volumes 1 and 2 which were just
documents.    They were Standing Orders, briefing notes etc.
Volume 3 that has been referred to by the Coroner is a mini
core bundle, if I can call it that, documents which the
Chief Constable considers are relevant which all parties
have had access to, either from the Public Inquiry or from
the recent, civil contribution proceedings.

     THE CORONER:   So what you are saying is there is
nothing new in those documents.   The lawyers ought to know
about them.

     MR. KING:   Sir, what would be helpful - we may know
all about them if we knew what she was talking about.   Sir,
as a very gentle suggestion again which was certainly
adopted at the Public Inquiry, we started off with everybody

                           25 -
..V. -•
              having their own separate bundles and then half way through
              core b u n d l e s w e r e produced. .

                   THE CORONER:   We d o n ’t want to do that.     Eithe     we
                                                                           - ■

          "
              start with single sheets’ or agreed. . ."

                     MR. KING: ‘’"That was my opening,•siry to coin'e-to the
              suggestion to you that if by the time we meet' again it may
              no tf bes agreeable'as--perfect,~buti,if a core- bundle r ’one 01
              two bundles perhaps, were brought together we could each
              comment! on? it|Simake< sugges±ions#about? whatt might?b«
              introduced or arguments as to what might be taken out, and
              we could just have those in core bundles.

                      THE CORONER:   Yes, Miss Norcliffe?

                   MISS NORCLIFFE:   If I could just the point that there
              has been no attempt at not letting the parties know what
              these were.   It was decided that in the first instance
              those documents would be put to you for you to look at and
              if you thereafter at this meeting said no documents
              whatsoever, then circulating bundles to every other party
              would not have been appropriate beforehand.   That was the
              reason why this particular thing has been done.

                   THE CORONER:   Can we leave this question of documents
              for the time being?   I have got to take a definitive
              decision and to a certain extent I have deferred one or two
              of those decisions until after this meeting because I wanted
              to hear what you thought as well as you to hear what I
              thought.

                   The only thing I would say with regard to documents is
              that we are going to need, obviously any documents which are
              put, there has to be enough for the main representatives.
              There have got to be at least four copies for the jury and I
              think it is only fair I should have a copy as well.   Don't
              proliferate documents because I think we worked it out we
              will need twenty copies if we were going to cover adequately
              the needs of these inquests.

                      Yes, anything else?

                   MR. JACKSON:  Just to come back on the undertakings
              point.   Perhaps my use of the word "undertakings" was
              unfortunate.   What I had in mind was precisely what I hope
              we can do, and agree certain statements within the Taylor
              Report from my clients' point of view insofar as they relate
              to the criticisms of Liverpool supporters.   We are
              certainly happy to liaise with whoever on that point.

                      My second and third points come from the standpoint
               of   ...
                                            - 26 -
     THE CORONER:    May I just say the difficulty about that
is that if I am going to call one hundred witnesses, it is
very difficult for solicitors, indeed anybody, to give
undertakings as to what they will say, and this is a
problem.    I would not be very happy about shutting
witnesses up in the middle of a sentence if what-they are,
saying is relevant to my inquiry.    I think that is a
problem when I was looking at you about, giving undertakings.
It is a very major problem for you as the solicitors for the
supporters.    It is easier for the other parties, but it is
a very major difficulty which you have got and I am not
quite sure how we can resolve it at the moment.

     MR. JACKSON:   We will obviously have to wait and see
what people are prepared to agree before we make any further
comment.

     Secondly, sir, from the viewpoint   of a client who may
be looking at these inquests from afar   and coming in.    Am I
right in thinking there will be a list   available perhaps
three days in advance of witnesses who   will be called?

     THE CORONER:   That is what I am hoping for and of
course if I am persuaded by the arguments of your colleagues
you may get an even fuller list sooner, but certainly I
would want to try and give a three day provisionally warned
list, so to speak, so that you would have some idea of who
was coming.   Not their statements, but their names and, if
you like, category - supporter, friend or whatever it might
be.

     MR. JACKSON:   My final point is a question:    whether
there will be a daily transcript available.

     THE CORONER:   I am coming to the transcripts in a
moment.

     Before I move on, we are taking a bit longer than I had
anticipated.   I am sorry about that but I think we might as
well press on and deal with major items today.   Mrs.
McBrian, yes.   You must shout because otherwise I can't
hear you.

     MRS. MCBRIAN:   I am concerned very much about the
point, the cut-off point, where you say you are going to
take no evidence after 3.15.   I think the most important
thing that day is...

     THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrian, I have got to stop
you.   I know it sounds unfair because I haven't stopped the
others, but you are moving into what I call the question of
evidence.    In fact what you are saying is you want me to
reconsider the cut-off point?
     MRS. MCBRIAN:   I would like you to do that.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, OK.   When we next meet for legal
submissions then you can argument at that point on the point
of law.   forgive me, I realise this is difficult for you,
Mrs. McBrian, because you are not a lawyer.    On the other
hand, if you represent yourself you have to be treated as if
you were one and so I have to apply exactly the same, if you
like, rules to you, even though it is harder for you.    At
the next meeting when we are arguing points of law, then by
all means if there is a legal point on which one can argue
that I am wrong about the cut-off point, then let it be
argued.    If, having listened to the argument, I am
persuaded, then of course I will hopefully say so.    If I am
not persuaded I will also say so and we will have to accept
it because that is how it is.    Have I made that clear?

     MRS. MCBRIAN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:    Was there something else, Mrs. McBrian?

     MRS. MCBRIAN:    No.

     THE CORONER:   I am not trying to be unfair to you
because I know it is very, very difficult in the context of
this meeting and anyway legal points, but I have got to try
and be fair to the others as well.

     What I was going to say was are there any other points
on the procedural aspects which you need to raise?    I am
not talking about legal points.   I want to stick to
procedure as far as I am able.   Right, I hope I have
succeeded.

     Transcripts, somebody raised it.    It is my intention
to have next day transcripts, so each day's proceedings
should be available first thing next morning.    There are
two things about it.    I would like to know, and I don't
need to know this minute, but I would like you to write to
me as soon as you possibly can and let me know whether you
anticipate wanting transcripts because we have to plan how
we are going to produce them and we need to know in round
terms how many we want.    Secondly, it is going to be a
jolly expensive exercise for you because transcripts, as you
know, you get a bill from the city, and it is expensive, but
that is how it is so you have got to think hard.    I am not
asking you to waste your money.

     If you know you are going to want a daily transcript
then obviously tell me.   If there are some of you who say
you don't want a daily transcript but there may be the odd
occasion where you may want a day's transcript, then
indicate that to me as well and we will do our best to
oblige.   However, what we will not be able to do is to have

                            - 28 -
a sort of industry where on very short notice we will be
able to cough up a transcript.   I want to be as helpful as
I can on this.   I want you to understand that we are
intending to have them available because I want them for a
start.   They will cost you money unfortunately, or
fortunately, it depends which way you look at it.     Is
that clear?

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, normally if the court is producing
a transcript there is a cost for the production and then
that is split between the numbers of persons who want an
individual copy.

      THE CORONER:   What we do...   Well, I will think about
it.   We will write to you.

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, if you are going to request the
copy, it may be that all we were involved in would be the
photocopying charge which, of course, would be much more
palatable.

     THE CORONER:   But even that is expensive, as some of
you know who have had transcripts from the interim
proceedings because it is laid down in the Coroner's Copy of
Documents Regulations 1988, which no doubt you will look up
when you get home.

     Somebody asked me in one of the letters how long these
inquests will take.  Well, your guess probably is as good as
mine, but we are planning to start on the 19th November.   We
intend to rise on about the 18th or 19th of December.    I do
not think we will have finished by then.   If it is obvious
we are going to finish with a day or we will carry on for
another day or two, but I think it is unlikely.  We will
then probably resume on the 7th of January and carry on
until we finish.    Now there are problems, of course,
because if we have illness, particularly amongst the jury,
we may have to adjourn.   It depends on the type of illness
but I can't, of course, give undertakings that no-one will
fall ill.   Hopefully not, but this is a question which is
unpredictable.   Secondly, of course, I can't say how long
you ladies and gentlemen are going to be with your cross-
examination or, indeed, your legal submissions so I am in
the dark to a certain extent as far as that is concerned.

     I am going to try, as far as I am able, to group
witnesses so that people who are saying similar things are
coming at the same time which I think will speed things up a
little bit.

      I cannot tell you how many witnesses we are going to
have either, but I would be surprised if it was less than
were called at Lord Just Taylor s Inquiry, which was 174, I
think.    It would not surprise me if it isn't more.  That
doesn't mean to say they will all be lengthy, but I expect
there will be quite a few witnesses.

     Any comments on length?   I don't suppose there is much
one can say, is there?   I am very conscious, of course,
that it is difficult for all the families, but it is also
going to be very hard for the jury, but I don't know what I
can do about it.   I have thought quite hard about how to do
it and I can't see any way round it, other than the way I am
tackling it.

     Perhaps I should just mention another thing about
timing.  On the 28th of November we cannot use the Council
Chamber because there is a Council meeting and I have had to
agree not to be there.    Similarly, it may be that on the
6th December we will not be able to use the Town Hall and
the 9th of January is another Council day when we will
definitely not be able to use the Council Chamber.    Our
intention is to start on the 7th but obviously as we get
nearer the time we will think about it a bit harder.

     I am considering, although I have not take a decision
on this yet, that on the 28th if might be worthwhile,
provided we can arrange it, to take the jury out for another
site visit for a little bit longer and let them see the
surroundings and everything else.   Perhaps Mr. Catchpole
you could check with your clients whether they would be
willing to allow us to come?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    I am certain they would be willing to
allow it at your convenience, sir.

     THE CORONER:   That would mean we weren't totally
wasting the time and it might be of benefit to the jury to
see the ground again and to refresh their memory.   I know
things have changed a bit because some of the barriers have
disappeared and so on, but that is just how it is.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Certainly my instructions are that the
ground is available at any time you require it.

     THE CORONER:    That's   very kind of you.   Thank you
very much indeed.  We will    let you know about that a little
bit nearer the time.

     I have dealt with   the dates when we can't sit.   If we
do the visit, and I am   hoping we will be able to sit on the
6th of December, it is   only really the 9th of January when
we definitely will not   be able to sit, and, of course, there
will be another day in   February if we go on that long, but I
hope not.

     I Do intend to call a    few experts right at the end.      I
have not yet formalised my    thinking on this so I can't
really tell you more than the fact I will be calling a few
experts to deal with special things, but you must remember
that even the experts, their evidence is going to be
restricted to what is relevant to an inquest.    I am sure
you all appreciate that aspects, say, of civil aspects - I
know the civil matter has been done and in that sense I am
lucky.   Very often what people want from an inquest is the
ammunition for the civil trial, but that does not seem as if
that is going to be necessary.   However, we still have to
take into account that we don't deal with civil aspects as
such.

     Listing I think I have already dealt with to a certain
extent.   It is going to be difficult.  We will do our best
to minimise inconvenience and to make things as sensible as
we can, but I am afraid that witnesses are going to have to
be prepared to be shifted around at relatively short notice
because it is so hard to predict how long any particular
person is going to be giving evidence for,but we   will learn
from experience as we go along.

     As I have already said the inquests are public so the
press will be there.   We know that from last time.  They are
not here today because I didn't consider this an appropriate
meeting for them to be here at.    They are not, hopefully,
going to report it and you should not discuss it either
because what I am very concerned about is that when the jury
comes together again it is they who reach theverdict.      It
is not I.   It is certainly not you and it is not even you
up there, it is the jury that has to make its mind up on the
facts and I want as far as possible to ensure that that
happens.

     That is about it, as far as I am concerned.   Shall we
start again with you, Mr. King, and work our way round, just
in case there is something?

     HR. KING:  I have no further comments now, sir.   I am
happy to know we are going to have a further meeting for the
legal points.

     THE CORONER:   Oh, yes, I had written it down and I had
forgotten it, the order in which you gentlemen and ladies
will be asking questions of witnesses.    As you know I start
off in an inquisition and ask whatever I want.    Strictly
speaking, it isn't a person's witness, but if somebody
represents a particular witness, he asks questions last.
Everybody else asks in whatever order I decide, but I would
prefer, I think it was done in Lord Justice Taylor's set-up,
that you agreed amongst yourselves in what order you wanted
to bat.   I am quite happy to be reasonable about that.
Not only am I quite happy to be reasonable about it, you
will probably have already noticed I tend to go round and
then I start again at the beginning because although one has
to draw the line somewhere I want everybody to feel that
they haven't been prejudiced because they have gone first
and something has occurred.   Don't feel that if something
occurs to you, within reason I am amenable to allow anything
reasonable to be asked.

        MR. KING:      I have nothing else.

        THE CORONER:      Anything else?      No.

     Now if we turn to the point on another meeting, it
sounds to me as if there are going to be various legal
submissions which have to be made.   We could do those on
the 19th, but then we lose a jury day, so to speak.    If it
is agreeable to you there is no reason why I should not
decide to commence the inquests - if we met on Friday, the
16th, and I think we will meet in the Council Chamber.
That will be a formal session so if you like the inquests
will commence on the 16th, but without the jury being
present, simply and solely for legal submissions.   We can
deal with those.   I can give you any rulings or I can think
about them over the weekend.   On Monday morning when we
start with the jury we can get straight into that.    Is that
convenient?   Mr. Isaacs?

     MR. ISAACS:     I hesitate to say it is inconvenient,
sir, but perhaps I speak on behalf of some of my learned
friends who, like myself, have commitments and whose
commitments have been arranged so that the inquests will
start on the 19th.     For my part I would much prefer to be
making such submissions as have to be made and to be
listening to the submissions that are going to be made, on
the   first morning.    I appreciate what you say, sir, about
the loss of a jury day, but in the context of inquests that
are  going to last seven to eight weeks, perhaps one day is
not  going to make that much difference.

        THE CORONER:      What does everybody else think about
that?

     MR. RUSSELL:   I would like to endorse what my learned
friend has just said.   It is very reasonable, especially
those of us who have clerks with diaries and have sought to
accommodate the start date on the 19th.

     THE CORONER:   In other words, what you are saying is
that you have booked the 19th, but if we bring it forward it
is going to make it awkward for you.   That is what you are
saying?

     MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, yes, but subject, of course, with
checking with our respective offices.
     THE CORONER:    All right.   In that case we will start
on the 19th in the morning with legal submissions.   We will
re-arrange the jury so that they come on the 20th instead of
the 19th.    Before I say that, this is a difficult question
for you.   How long do you judge the legal submissions are
going to take?    A very hard question but can you just give
me an indication?

     MR. KING:      I would have thought,   sir, we could do them
in the morning.

     MR. ISAACS:      I agree.

     THE CORONER:   OK then, we will probably get the jury
to come...   I will think about that because it depends on
what else we need to do.  We will meet then on the 19th for
legal submissions.

     HR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, there is only point.   Would it be
possible for, the list of witnesses whom you intend to call
on the first or    second day to be available on the Friday to
be sent through    to thevarious solicitors?

     THE CORONER:      Yes.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am sure you haven't forgotten you
did say you would consider the overall point of perhaps
circulating the witnesses in full.

     THE CORONER:    The witness list, yes.      That is
something which    I will think about.    If I decide todo it,
then I will.    If not, we will discuss it on the 19th and
you can have another go at me.      I have taken on board what
you have said.

     Perhaps I could say one thing about that and maybe you
could help me.   One of the factors that influences me in
the circulation of such a list is this:   from what I have
already told you it must be obvious to you that I am
considering quite a lot of people as potential witnesses.
This is, of course, because I have got to base my judgment
on what I read because I haven't heard them.    Mow it is
possible that when we get cracking that we may find...
Let's imagine that I have got fifty supporters as potential
witnesses on my list, it may be that as we get along that we
discover the evidence is coming out in such a way there is
really no need to hear fifty people.    One of the
disadvantages of my circulating a list to you is that it
means I have to delete people whose names are on a list
which you have seen.   If I don't circulate it I can do what
I like because I can make a judgment.

     Now I would not want to feel - obviously if I have put
somebody's name down the reason I have done that is because
I think he is saying something which may be of interest so I
would not delete them just for the heck of it.   However,
neither would I want to waste their time or our time in
repeating things.   Have you any views on the revision of
any circulated list downward?   Of course, I might also add
names upwards.                                  ,

     MR. KING:   Sir, that would be eminently sensible and
if I may say so one of the advantages of a list is that we
can all apply our minds the whole time it is progressing as
we look down the list as to, "Well, that group of witnesses
could in effect become agreed evidence."   That would be
entirely sensible.

     THE CORONER:   Does anybody disagree with Mr. King's
comment?   No. Well, that does make it a little bit easier
for me because I was a little bit concerned, maybe from
experience, that anything that is published becomes law and
I would not want that.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, could I just add that one of the
advantages that we certainly see of having a comprehensive
list is that there a large number of us who have actually
seen a lot of the witnesses that you may wish to call.   We
have had that benefit and it may be that we could say, as a
suggestion obviously, only to yourself that there may be
somebody else you might like to consider calling, or that as
things progress we could prune it down.

      THE CORONER:  That is right.   That is one of the
points of Mr. King.   I wanted to tackle it the other way.
I wanted you to tell me who you wanted but I can see it does
create a problem because you have got to double-guess me, so
to speak, and I can see that.   It is a valid point and I
will certainly very seriously consider the point you have
made.

     Mrs. McBrian, is it all clear to you?   Well, it may
not all be clear to you but is there anything you want to
say on these procedural aspects?

     MRS. MCBRIAN:   Does it mean that we all wait until the
19th for you to make a decision as to what time the evidence
is to be heard, and the quarter past three?

     THE CORONER:   No, I can tell you this.   We will
almost certainly start with evidence on the 20th.   However,
on the 19th we are starting so you should be there because
in the morning we will deal with legal submissions.    In the
afternoon I will deal with anything I want to say to the
jury and anything that is agreed which we can put to the
jury and then we will probably start with real evidence on
the 20th.   That may be videos, you see.   We may use the
afternoon for the videos but I have got to look at that and
do some sums and decide how best to use the time.

     MRS. MCBRIAN:   So it will be the 19th that you decide
when the evidence will be heard?

     THE CORONER:      Definitely the 19th, exactly as you have
been told.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I think you have perhaps misunderstood
the question.   I think the lady is asking:   is it the case
that it would only be on the 19th that a decision will be
made as to the ambit of the cut-off time?   In other words,
that that is when the decisions will be made?

     THE CORONER:       Yes, Ibeg your pardon, I did
misunderstand you.       Thank you, Mr. King.

     That is correct.   Obviously I have heard what you have
said and so I will probably be thinking about the matter
between now and then but I will want to listen to legal
submissions on that point on the 19th.    I will then, in the
light of what is said, and also any further thinking which  I
have done, take a view on it.     I think we will leave it
like that, so the answer is there is no decision on that
today.

     MRS. MCBRIAN:      So we would not be able toprepare   any
witnesses about this    until the hearing begins?

     THE CORONER:   That is true, but then we are talking
about inquests which will last at least five weeks and
probably eight, and maybe even longer so there is going to
be quite a bit of time to do additional work.

     If I were to change my mind on this, on the cut-off
point, if I were to   decide I wanted to alter it before that
date, then I would let you and everybody else know, but I
don't want to encourage you to think I will do that. There
are strong reasons for saying that.      It is not just
obstinacy.

     OK, ladies and gentlemen, I think that is it.     I am
most grateful to all of you being here.     I hope it has been
of use and that we have made a bit of progress.    It is
going to be a very difficult inquest, I'm afraid.    We will
just have to do the best we can.

     MR. KING:      Thank you, sir.
