 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                                                                           M etropolitan
                                                                                                 B o r o u g h o f W irral

^ C h e s h ir e             fgf / s j w \
                       liverpool                                             FJSEFTON
      County Council   C^C^l A                      C°unty, | | |            ^COUNCIL
                                    |lKNowsLEYj|                    smacns

c/o

                                                                     Telephone: 051

Your ref:                            Our ref:                                  Date:   19th June, 1989.



           Mr. G. Mackrell,
           Secretary,
           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
           Hillsborough,
           Sheffield.



           Dear Mr. Mackrell,

                                   Access to the West End Terraces, Stands,
                                   Gates and Turnstiles.

                I enclose for your information, a copy of a letter I have sent
           to Mr. J. Mervyn Jones, as I understand that he has written to you in
           this connection.



                                                       Yours sincerely,




                                                   Director of Social Services.




                       0
When calling or telephoning please ask for:
      Cheshire         Liverpool^                         Lancashire              m a?
      County Council   & X yQ ei**<il£

                                               KNOWSLEY   S   3   #     "
                                                                       StHetens


c/o
      LIVERPOOL
                                                                        Telephone: 051

Your ref:         j m j /v s c .               Our ref:                             Date:   19th June, 1989.


      Mr. J. Mervyn Jones, M.Sc.,
      Assistant Chief Constable,
      Hillsborough Inquiry Team,
      West Midlands Police Headquarters,
      P.O.Box 52, Lloyd House,
      Colmore Circus Queensway,
      Birmingham B4 6NQ.


      Dear Mr. Mervyn Jones,

                                         Access to theWest End Terraces, Stands,
                                         Gates and Turnstiles.

           Thank you for your letter of 7th June regarding the restricted access
      to parts of the Hillsborough football ground.

           In your letter you ask us to ensure that those who visit the ground
      do not touch any aspects of the terraces at the West End. In effect this
      means that there is no point whatsoever in us arranging visits to Sheffield
      Wednesday Football Club, as the reasoning behind victims of the Hillsborough
      disaster paying such visits is for them to actually relive the experience
      encountered by those who were involved in the tragedy. I recall Lord Justice
      Taylor's comments to the press when he visited the scene of the tragedy which
      were, in essence, that he needed to be in the Leppings Lane part of the
      grounds to get the feel of the terraces so that he could better understand
      what happened on the day. In that sense Lord Justice Taylor's feelings sure
      a mirror of the feelings of the victims and to deny them access to the very
      spot where they or their relatives or friends were subject to the horrors of
      the tragedy is to deny them any opportunity of overcoming their feelings of
      loss.

           I am sure you will understand that it is an essential part of the healing
      process that people are given the opportunity of visiting the scene of a
      tragedy, and in the Lockerbie disaster you will recall arrangements were made
      for relatives from the United States to be flown to the disaster area so that
      they could better understand what had happened and assist them in coping with
      their grief.

           Whilst I am sure there are good reasons why Lord Justice Taylor might
      have thought restricted access to the ground was necessary, I am equally sure
      that he would understand the necessity for selected groups with whom we sure
      involved, being afforded every consideration to help them deal with the
      tragedy. Could I, therefore, ask you to share the contents of this letter
When calling or telephoning please ask for:
with Lord Justice Taylor with a view to some arrangement being made
which will enable us to continue with the essential work of helping
the victims of Hillsborough.

     I have copied this letter to Mr. G. Mackrell, Secretary at the
Club, for his information.




                                 Yours sincerely,




                             Director of Social Services.
    .   M r ^ M a c k r e l l ' s copy
                                                        i


J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                 FURNIVAL HOUSE
A SSISTAN T CHIEF CONSTABLE                                        Furnival Gate
  HILLSBOROUGH INQU IRY T EA M                                     Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                   Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
WEST M ID LA N D S POLICE HO                                       SM ITH D O W N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 5 2 , Lloyd House                                           Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                           Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 7 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5                    Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                                      Our Ref:                JMJ/VSC
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                    Date:                   7 June 1989

             N V Kay Esq                           Also Sent To:    D Mason Esq
             Director of Social Services
                                                                    Director
             Family and Community Services
             Redvers House                                          Liverpool Social Services Dept
             Union Street
                                                                    26 Hatton Garden
             Sheffield
             S1 2JQ                                                 Liverpool
                                                                    L3 2AW

             Dear Mr Mason

             ACCESS TO THE WEST END TERRACES, STANDS, GATES AND TURNSTILES

             At the present time the areas indicated on the attached map of the west
             end of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Hillsborough Ground, are
             under the control of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, and I represent his
             interests in the preservation of the scene for the purpose of gathering
             evidence by the Health and Safety Executive.

            I understand that you have an arrangement with the Club to assist
            certain approved people who would wish to view the west end terraces to
            do so. I have no objections to you facilitating this, but I have to ask
            you, in the strongest terms, to ensure that those who visit do not touch
            any aspects of the terraces at the west end, such as the gates, the
            fences, the barriers and the like.  I understand that today people have
            been to the ground and have not observed these restrictions. I would not
            wish to deny any future access, but would ask you to carefully regulate
            and supervise visits in accordance with Lord Justice Taylor's
            requirements.

            I would be grateful if you could acknowledge this letter as soon as
            possible indicating your agreement to comply which, hopefully, will not
            add in any way to the distress suffered already by those who would wish
            to visit.

            I have copied this letter to Mr G Mackrell, Secretary at the Club for
            his information.

            Yours sincerely




<
            Assistant Chief Constable
            (Hillsborough Inquiry)


    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                 Sheffield
                                                                                        S '', ''   Police
  Sheffield Wednesday_FL C.                                                                        Room
                                                                              'First-Aid Room
                                                                                         Vl   v
                 HUIsborouQh Ground
                                                                                   Gymnashtfti                                   Ox 7 7 -8 8

                                                                                                                                      \55-72          v             C

                                                                                                                                                     • > ‘< y <p>
                                                                             UORTtt STAND

                                                                                                                                 s   ' /   ' W            '
                                                                                                                             ,V \          >o                 /
                                                                                                                                                 $

        , * co '
        '' £> H

            rT
• i >       A    ,
• > :       Q    //
*/              >1
                                                                               Player's
                                                                               Tunnvt


  Away Fans Entrance
            and Enclosures

                                                                              SO UTH S T A U O

                      | Police Control |                                                                bljb            3 7-42
                                                                                                    29-32 3 3 -3 6   park
                                                    Ofnet*i   23-2                                    Cor




                      KEY                                     D Ite c t o r s E n t r a n t *

                      Tunri*TiiEr ••^ z m
                       P-C* »-•   *»*Tce- c/'g"J,
                                  X ■ .i
